House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 130, 1982 Wednesday, 8 December 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Wages Pause

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3059

The House of Representatives, on 10 November 1982, adjourned to a date and hour to be fixed by Mr Speaker.
Mr Speaker summoned the House of Representatives to meet on Wednesday, 8 December 1982, at 1.45 p.m.

Wednesday, 8 December 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr ANTHONY (RichmondActing Prime Minister)-I inform the House that the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) left Australia on 18 November to attend discussions on agriculture and trade matters in the Middle East, Europe and the United States. The Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) is acting as Minister for Primary Industry until Mr Nixon returns.
WAGES PAUSE
Ministerial Statement
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister)-by leave-The Commonwealth Government called yesterday's special Premiers Conference to achieve concerted action by all governments in Australia to address the deteriorating employment situation. The Commonwealth put to the Premiers and the Chief Minister a set of proposals around which it hoped to achieve agreement, the central thrust of which was to put in place the widest and most effective pause possible in wages for the next twelve months throughout the Australian economy, as a means of saving jobs. Full agreement was not reached on the proposals put by the Commonwealth. That fact, however, should not obscure the great measure of agreement which was achieved, and its significance. The Conference produced an unprecedented agreement among eight governments to effect a pause in wages in the public sector and through concerted action before tribunals and by other means to achieve a similar pause in the private sector. I shall enumerate the points of agreement in a moment.
The Commonwealth was seeking agreement on a twelve months pause in wages. The Premiers of Queensland, Western Australia and Tasmania and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory will be fully supporting the Commonwealth Government in this respect. The Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia will be seeking a six months pause in wages. I do not rule out that, depending on the state of the Australian economy during the next year, the Premiers of the latter three States may well extend the action that they are taking to twelve months. That is for the

future. however. What must not be overlooked is that all eight governments have agreed on effective action to secure a pause in wages throughout the economy of at least six months duration. That is the unprecedented central aspect of the agreement reached yesterday.
The fact that the governments represented at the meeting here in Canberra yesterday reached such an historic agreement is a reflection of the seriousness of the economic situation we are now facing. I think we have all been surprised at the suddenness with which the international recession finally impacted on Australia. It may have been late in coming to Australia, but there is no doubting now that our domestic economic performance is being affected by reduced demand for our exports, rock-bottom commodity prices which not only are affecting the profitability of our resources sector but also have contributed to the drying up of new resource investment plans, and increased import competition as overseas suppliers search for market opportunities wherever they can find them. All of this, of course, is being exacerbated by the worst drought in memory. In those circumstances it will become increasingly a matter of absolute survival for our business communities to maintain and improve their competitive position.
Unfortunately, as we all know only too well, domestic wage developments have been working in the opposite direction. Over the year to the September quarter average weekly ordinary time earnings rose by about 17 per cent, and this does not take into account reductions in standard hours. Real wages rose by about 5 per cent, while productivity was virtually unchanged. With domestic demand weak, the world economy in recession and an increasingly difficult world trading environment, many Australian businesses have not been able to pass on these increases in wage costs. As a result, profits have fallen by about 13 per cent over the last year and retrenchments have multiplied. In short, excessive wage increases have worsened our economic problems, weakened our competitiveness, contributed directly to unemployment and weakened demand. They have meant an increase in the real incomes of those in employment, while their less fortunate fellows have lost their jobs.
It was against that background that all those present at the Conference yesterday approached the discussions in a constructive and co-operative

3060 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Wages Pause

spirit. Each had his own perspective on the problems, but each was seeking constructively to find a consensus on urgent and effective measures to deal with the worsening employment situation. Specifically, this is what was agreed:
The Commonwealth Government will legislate for a 12-months pause in wages and in reductions in standard working hours in its own employment. There should be no catch-up at the end of the wages pause to recoup wages which might have been forgone in the course of the pause.
The Queensland, Western Australian, Tasmanian and Northern Territory governments will effect a similar 12-months pause in wages and in reductions in standard working hours in their own employment, by legislation as necessary.
The New South Wales, Victorian and South Australian governments will effect a sixmonths pause in wages and in reductions in standard working hours in their own employment.
To achieve the widest and most effective pause in wages throughout the private sector, the Commonwealth, Queensland, Western Australian, Northern Territory and Tasmanian governments will approach the arbitral tribunals seeking a 12-months pause in award wages and in standard working hours in the private sector.
The New South Wales, Victorian and South Australian governments are expected to intervene alongside the other five governments by supporting a six-months pause. The Com-
monwealth Government will be seeking the support of the peak councils for a 12-months pause in wages. The Government will be meeting the Confederation of Australian Industry later today and has sought an urgent meeting with the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
The wages pause is to take effect as soon as possible, with exceptions restricted to the processing of applications for those few groups not yet in receipt of a wage increase in the most recent community wage round.
Legislation to give effect to the wages pause will be introduced as soon as possible.
Resumption of wage increases after the end of the pause would depend on restoration of capacity to pay, which would be determined by appropriate Commonwealth and State tribunals.
All governments will urge a pause in overaward payments.
Professional incomes funded from the Commonwealth Budget will be included in the

pause by legislation where necessary. The States are expected to take similar action, where professional incomes are funded from their Budgets.
All governments will seek commitments from professional bodies for a pause in professional fees.
All governments will urge maximum restraint in other non-wage incomes.
Subject to all legislation to effect the wages pause and achieve the necessary savings being passed, the savings to the Commonwealth Budget achieved through the wages pause, expected to be some $300m, would be expended on employment-related projects of the Commonwealth's nomination throughout Australia, projects of high labour content and high Australian content, capable of being implemented quickly. Special consideration will be given to projects in areas of high unemployment within States. The Commonwealth will be consulting with all the States and the Northern Territory to identify such projects.
To the extent that State governments participate in the wages pause there would be some savings to their Budgets which they might use in similar activities. Alternatively, they would be relieved of the need to increase taxes or charges or to reduce services.
Semi-government and local authorities are to use their savings from a wages pause in additional employment-related activities or, as appropriate, to defer increases in charges or reduce borrowings.
The Commonwealth Government will be taking a range of other measures to help Australian businesses to weather the present economic difficulties, and to maintain their employment. These measures include a Buy Australian campaign, reintroduction of preference for Australian goods in Government purchasing, together with increased availability of finance through the Commonwealth Development Bank and the Australian Industry Development Corporation and acceleration of payments to businesses under various existing assistance schemes. We are also acting to ensure that Australian businesses have effective recourse to anti-dumping action against unfairly priced imports.
The Government has also considered the proposals being advanced to divert some of the funds spent on unemployment benefits to enable the unemployed to work on projects of value to local communities. Apart from questions of cost and effectiveness, such proposals may simply replace

Wages Pause

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3061

jobs. They therefore require careful consideration. Because of the seriousness of the unemploy-
ment problem, the Commonwealth has indicated to the Premiers that it will introduce a community projects program for a trial period of 12 months. Letters will be sent to State governments shortly, outlining specific guidelines for the trial and inviting their nomination of projects.
The Commonwealth would provide grants through the States for local bodies to undertake specific additional projects using part time labour recruited from the longer term unemployed. These grants would cover employment at casual award rates for a period necessary to earn an equivalent of benefit plus $35 a week. Each project could run for up to 12 months and employ up to 50 people. As a guide the Commonwealth would be willing to provide funds equal to the benefit rates involved plus an amount of $2m to cover the $35 a week supplement. This would enable trial projects involving about 1,000 people.
The Minister for Social Security, Senator Chaney, will elaborate on this initiative.
The measures I have just outlined constitute a vigorous response to the serious employment problems facing the Australian community. They are not a total cure and we still have a difficult job ahead of us. But the unprecedented nature of the agreement struck among the eight governments represented at yesterday's meeting shows how seriously the problems are viewed by governments. The mood among ordinary Australians throughout the community is equally realistic. There is a strong sense throughout the country that those who have jobs should now make some sacrifice to help their fellows who do not have jobs or whose jobs are at risk. It is now up to all of us to join in this consensus and give our strongest support to making the program work.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-by leave-The Opposition welcomes a statement on this topic from the Government. One must confess that last night it seemed that nothing but confusion prevailed in all quarters involved in discussions on this matter. Even within the Cabinet there seemed to be conflict and confusion as to exactly what the Government was intending with its proposed wages freeze. One was not helped a great deal this morning by the newspaper coverage of the conclusions from the Premiers Conference of yesterday. Therefore, we welcome some sort of statement on this matter from the Government. I must say, however, that many issues are raised in the statement which need much further fleshing out before we will be clear on exactly what is involved. In those circumstances the Opposition

does not find itself in a position in which it can respond in a definitive way to this proposal. Accordingly, it prefers to reserve its response in detail until the debate which will follow the introduction of the legislation which relates to this matter.
However, one can say some things immediately
about this proposal. I believe that the first thing I should say on behalf of the Opposition is that we reaffirm our objection in principle to the proposition that a wages freeze is a solution to the economic problems of this country. There are a number of reasons for this. Firstly, it is unfair. If one considers the proposal that the Government has presented to the Parliament-indeed, to the nation-one notices that there is exclusive concentration on the wages sector of the economy but absolutely no attention at all given to the prices sector. I do not believe that introducing a prices freeze concurrently would work either. It did not work in 1977 when the Government tried it. It would not work now. But we acknowledge that moderation on both prices and incomes is essential. However, there is a different way to approach this matter and I will come to that in a few
minutes.
I refer to the rampant unfairness of a proposal which concentrates exclusively on wages and ignores prices. I also draw attention to that part of the statement of the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) where he refers to non-wage income. His proposal is to urge restraint. The point about the non-wage income sector of the economy is that this is where all the rip-offs have been going on, where all the tax-free speculative gains have been plundered and where all the tax avoidance and evasion has been taking place. Therein lies the genesis of much of the resentment in the community today by ordinary decent Australian households. They see a small, influential, privileged and very wealthy sector of the community getting more influential, more privileged and more wealthy by evading its responsibilities and they see little done. Wage earners are excluded from this; their families and households are denied this sort of opportunity. One would presume that they would not want it; they would want a more morally obliged society, fulfilling its commitments. But they see the unfairness of these double standards. Today the Acting Prime Minister in the Parliament has rubbed salt into the wounds, proposing fierce draconian restraints on the living standards of ordinary Australian households by legislative action but urging restraint on a section of the economy which has been a haven to some people who have been quite outrageous in their moral irresponsibility and in avoiding their commitments to this society.

3062 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Wages Pause

In relation to professional incomes the Acting Prime Minister said that the Government will seek commitments from those people who, very largely, are able to set their fees. It is nonsense to project market force theory on the fixing of prices for goods and services into the professional arena, especially in relation to medical services. These people are able to adjust their rates according to the volume of the market they have. If their mar-
ket goes down because there are more doctors their prices go up, and it completely confutes the principles of market force economics. All the Government proposes here-this is in line with all the co-operation that is extended from the States--is to seek commitments. I do not think many people in the community believe that there will be wholesale or even large scale commitment to restraint in that area.
What about speculative gains? There is absolutely no attention to this matter. They remain tax free, denying people the benefits that should be coming back through proper revenue processes being fed into the system to provide better services and, most of all, more job opportunities in the community. It is little wonder that out there in the community there is a cynicism about the whole process of government because these double standards prevail. An influential and privileged few are able to rip off uninhibitedly, while for the vast mass of ordinary Australian households there is nothing but prohibition, embargo and obstruction. Let me cite some of the figures. If the Government is concerned about the movement in wages, as the Opposition is-I will come to that in a minute; there is no denying it-it must realise that wages have two functions to fulfil in the economy. One provides a living standard for families and the other a price input for employers, manufacturers and the suppliers of goods and services. We have to weigh up these two influences provided by wages in the economy. The Opposition is concerned at movements in wages in recent times. I repeat that I will come to that.
At the moment I want to stick to the unfairness of what the Government is doing. Certainly, wages and salaries increased by more than 16 per cent in the 12 months to the September quarter this year, but non-wage income increased by well over 17 per cent. If the Government is worried about wage movement why is it not worried about non-wage movement? Why is it not doing something effective there? Rather vaguely the Government refers to taking steps to control incomes of professional people where those incomes are provided for in some unspecified way through Budget mechanisms. That is one of the reasons we want

to see the legislation. What does it portray in practice? Will it mean that members of the medical profession in this country, who this year will get more than $1,OOOm in medical benefits from Australian taxpayers, will, by some magical process, have salary or income restraints imposed on them? If so, what are the specifics of this measure? What steps do the States undertake to ensure that that is done, because my understanding is that the Federal Government cannot effectively do so under the Constitution. Can anyone here contemplate, even for the novelty value, for
more than a minute that the Premier of Queensland would move in that direction? That is just one example.
Chemists will receive more than $520m this year through pharmaceutical benefits. What sorts of controls is the Government proposing there? I am not recommending any there or anywhere else
at this point. I am merely raising questions to illustrate how totally deficient and unsatisfactory this statement is in terms of allowing a more considered debate to proceed at this point in relation to the wages freeze proposal. What about income from commissions and from money lending? With
interest rates high, many people at present are making quite hefty incomes through money lending as individual entrepreneurs, apart from organisations. What about self-employed contractors and sub-contractors entering this area to get into the black economy, in many cases? What this will do, in fact, is guarantee an explosion in the black economy. The Government will have no control over that. Already $15,000m a year of income li-
able to tax remains tax free because it is in the black economy.
It is also unfair because it is regressive. This I find the most disquieting aspect of the proposal. There is, through its effect, an invisible tax to be applied to income earners. It is regressive in its impact. Let me illustrate that. What will happen over the 12-month period that the Government is proposing is that, because inflation will go up effectively by about 10 per cent, real wages in their purchasing power will come down by about 10 per cent. In money terms that has the same effect as an increase in income tax-a rather fierce fiscal measure designed to contract the economy. When one takes that sort of income and spending power out of the economy, one contracts consumer activity, reduces economic activity and aggravates the recession that we have. There will be more unemployment. That is the effect. It is an invisible tax.
Let us look at the regressiveness, the unfairness, of this proposal. Someone who is on 75 per cent of average weekly earnings-that is, $240 or $250 a

Wages Pause

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3063

week, a very modest amount of income-will, in fact, through this measure if it is fully effective, experience an increase in his or her income taxthis sort of conceptual form of invisible income tax that I am putting forward-of 52 per cent. But someone on three times average weekly earnings--that is, nearly $1,000 a week--will face an increase of only 24 per cent.
I illustrate the unfairness of this proposal with these examples. The fettler out on the Nullarbor Plain working for the Australian National Rail-
ways is expected proportionately to make a greater sacrifice through this system, to pay for whatever exercise the Government is keen to embark on, than the chief design engineer or someone of that ilk who has all of the pleasantries of working in an air conditioned office and having much more stimulating, uplifting and creative work in the same organisation. It means that the nurse working in the Tasmanian hospital on a similarly low income will have to make a greater sacrifice for what the Government has in mind than the head of the Department of Health responsible for the administration of the health services. The postman doing the rounds in the suburbs, in all of the inclement weather that he experiences, will make a greater proportional sacrifice than the people who are running Australia Post. In Telecom Australia, the linesman will
have to make a greater sacrifice than the chief executives in the organisation. That is grossly unfair. It is a blatant abuse of the innocence of the Australian community.
I point to those examples and ask honourable members in this Parliament, who have all the privileges that parliamentarians have and the very generous salaries that parliamentarians have, to stop for a second to consider the situation of not just ordinary workers but the families they support on that sort of modest income. I ask honourable members to contemplate all of the liabilities that they have, the cost of which will continue to grow as their incomes shrink in real terms. I find that situation outrageous in its discrimination. It is a clear reflection of class prejudice on the part of the Government. I ask again: What does the Government expect to achieve in terms of an impact on inflation when it freezes public sector wage increases, for example, for a Fourth Division clerk in the Department of Social Security? His wage increases do not feed in any apparent way into the consumer price index. We have no quantification of the level to which inflation will be reduced as a consequence of these proposals.
I state now that I am absolutely convinced that the Government has not thought its way through this proposal properly. That is why there was still

conflict between Ministers, to the embarrassment of Premiers at the Premiers Conference, as to what the Government was trying to achieve. I say that the plan will not work. The Government is fortunate that the public is prepared to give it a try.
I mention the poll in this morning's Bulletin. To the extent that they are a reliable reflection, I do not recommend them all. I must say that some of the polls have been very good lately---in the Bulletin. Let me make this point. If one looks at that poll in relation to the Government's proposal, one finds that 52 per cent of the public is prepared to approve a l2-month freeze. In a rather superficial way, the poll shows in a perplexing way that the public however overwhelmingly does not believe-that is, 57 per cent-that it will have any effect in reducing unemployment. A much greater proportion does not believe that it will reduce inflation than believe it will. I think there is only one way to interpret that finding, that is, that the Australian public has put the Government on notice. The public is prepared to give the proposal a try because it is desperate as a result of the mess the economy is in. But the public is making it pretty clear to the Government that it has doubts as to whether the proposal will work, and the Government had better make sure that it does.
Let us look at what the Sydney Morning Herald had to say about this proposal, in case honourable members are uncharitable enough to think that it is merely a political point of view that is being put here. What I am putting forward is a carefully, technically assessed view of the deficiencies of this proposal. Today's Sydney Morning Herald states:
If any further proof was needed that the wage freeze is more about politics than economics--more about appearance than reality-now we have it . . . What started as gimmickry has now become farce.
The newspaper goes on to point out the very serious deficiencies in this proposal. I remind honourable members that it is similar to the proposal which was tried in 1977 and jettisoned. It is, as we see it, in all its elements a stunt. Because of the economic conditions of the moment the rate of increase in wages is going down. It has been going down for several quarters. The proposal is an empty gesture for the east coast States. Neither New South Wales and Victoria nor Queensland would be contemplating any noticeable wage adjustment settlements in the course of the next six months. It is all over for New South Wales and Victoria in that respect. On Monday Queensland made sure that it did not get caught in the trap. An Industrial Court decision there provided for a

3064 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Wages Pause

5.9 per cent increase in State awards. The Premier of that State declared this morning that, although he has committed himself to a 12-month freeze, at the end of six months he will review his position. Whatever way we look at the proposition, it seems to be on somewhat shaky foundations. In that sense we find ourselves unable to explore confidently and assert thereafter what our position is in relation to the proposition until we see the legislation before the House.
The Premiers, in their various ways, do not seem to reflect the enthusiasm of the Government. The Premier of Victoria described the proposal as a dog's breakfast. It was something entered into because of the stand and deliver tactics of the Government. No other options were provided. The Premier of New South Wales likened it to trying to treat a cancer patient with aspirin. The Premier of South Australia went away and said that he had agreed to nothing as far as he was concerned.
Another deficiency in this arrangement is that, although it is aimed at freezing award rates, it does nothing effectively about over-award rates. Therein lies another cause of concern for us. Although the Government says that it will urge restraint in that area, this will mean very simply that where those industrial organisations which represent people in particular industries have clout they will be able to extract wage increases while others will miss out. The inevitable consequence of that will be a redistribution and reallocation of the proportions of wages within the total wage sector between groups which draw on that sector. It will mean that those less well off will find over time a diversion of real spending power from them to the more powerful groups within the economy. As one deeply committed to equity in our system, acknowledging nonetheless the case for differentials on the basis of skill, nature of work and so on, I find this a very unattractive proposition.
Let us look at the elements of what the Government finally says it is trying to pull together in all this. It reckons it will create 10,000 jobs in the course of a year. In that year unemployment will be between 550,000 and 600,000 at its peak. To what extent will the Government assert now, with conviction if it has so much commitment to this policy, that unemployment will be reduced by these proposals? Ten thousand is a piddling number in terms of the level of unemployment and the collapse in the economy which is currently under way. The amount the Government is talking of allocating to the States through the processes which will be related to this policy is $300m. It says the total savings on the wages bill

of State and Federal instrumentalities, semi-government authorities and so on, will be $700m. Let us focus on that $700m. There will be lost revenue because that will not be provided in wages. That $700m represents a loss of $250m to the Commonwealth Government in tax revenue. The Government will provide $300m for jobs. There will be a net addition to the economy of only $50m as a consequence of this proposal. That, I believe, exposes the hollowness, in economic terms, of what the Government is proposing to do. When one contrasts the sorts of jobs which would have been in existence, sustained by spending from a public sector wage package before this proposal, against the jobs which will be destroyed by this change-the jobs which will be created-my hunch is that there will be very little net effect. If there is any net effect it will be marginal. I suspect that there will be none at all.
I challenge the Government to provide us with the calculations to establish beyond any doubt that there are substantial benefits for the community, so substantial that in terms of the jobs they generate in addition to those existing at the moment they will help to overcome unemployment and generate economic growth so that the policy itself in quantifiable terms will bring down inflation and overall the economy will be in a better condition and avoid the contraction which would otherwise take place with this sort of policy.
Finally, I have mentioned that we acknowledge that there is a case for wage moderation. It would be useless to deny it. The case for wage moderation is unassailable. We have been saying that regularly. In 1982-83 profits in national accounts terms fell to 12 per cent of national product. According to the Department of the Treasury in a more normal situation they should be 17 per cent. Wages had gone up to 67.6 per cent as against a more normal situation of 63 per cent. There are several things to be said about that. Some of that contraction of profits, of course, can be accounted for due to the contractionary state of the economy, but not all of it. Not all the movement in wages can be explained in that sense either. It is quite clear that in the last two years there has been a quite marked real increase in wages allowing for productivity as well as the cost of living. It would be foolish to try to deny that this has had a destabilising effect on the economy. It would stand in the way of sensible and more successful economic management.
I ought to put on the record parenthetically, before I move on, that many enterprises in this country are enjoying extraordinary levels of profitability. In the debate that will follow I will be

Wages Pause

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 3065

enumerating scores of them. These rates of profitability must almost be records. In that sense we see again the glaring unfairness of the policies of the Government. In that sense there should be in place policies in relation to wage moderation which are also related to prices, profits, non-wage incomes and people who are living off speculative gains tax free. These policies should refer to the social wage and a range of related matters. They certainly should refer to reform in the income tax system. They should preside over or monitor movements in these various sectors of the economy so that they are held in restraint within guidelines which have been agreed upon through a system of consensual collaboration. No prices and incomes policy will work in any other way. These are matters to which we want to relate in more detail in the debate on the legislation when it comes to the Parliament next week.
The final point I want to make on this matter is simply this: Wages freezes and prices freezes have not worked elsewhere. They failed in this country in 1977. They are in their nature more a stunt than anything else. They will not be a resolution of the major economic problems confronting this country. The worst aspect of them is that the community will be encouraged to expect much more than will be achieved if indeed anything is to be achieved. When they fail to achieve those grand goals which have been outlined the community will be very seriously disaffected, disabused and angry because of it. More than that, these sorts of things make no provision for moderating the movements in those various sectors of the economy I mentioned a few minutes ago in the event of economic recovery. In the last seven years, on each occasion when government policies have generated additional economic growth, this country has seen with a lagged effect an upsurge in wage demand.
Assuming that the Government were to be successful with this sort of policy in some sort of way-I have made clear my views on that-there would be a period at the end of it when there would be an explosion in demand for wages. So the whole policy would be self-defeating. It would mean that real economic recovery of the sort that we must work for to bring down unemployment and get the economy moving again would be unachievable as the present Government's approach now stands. In those circumstances we argue-we will be arguing in more detail next week when the debate takes place in Parliament-that the more appropriate measure in this country at the present time is a prices and incomes policy embodying a comprehensive series of proposals which is seen to

be fair, which has consensual support in the community and which will successfully regulate and moderate the various forces at work in the economy.
CONCESSIONAL AND FREE PHARMACEUTICALS
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House--~
(I) commends the Minister for Health for his response to criticisms regarding the complex format of the proposed new form for concessional and free pharmaceuticals;
(2) expresses concern at the requirement for patients to complete the form and sign the statutory declaration in the presence of the pharmacist and other customers. and
(3) calls on the Government to withdraw this form in its entirety.
PERSONAL IDENTITY CARDS
Notice of Motion
Mr BRADFIELD (Barton)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That-
(I) a system of personal identity cards be introduced to recipients of government benefits, and to other permanent Australian residents, requesting issue of such a card, and
(2) a special departmental section be established, under the umbrella of one of the present departments not engaged in the payment of benefits, for the purpose of establishing eligibility for the issue of such identification.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION
Mr Maher proceeding to give notice of a motion-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's notice of motion is out of order.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION
Mr Milton proceeding to give notice of a motion-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's notice of motion is out of order.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
BUDGET DEFICIT
Mr WILLIS-I refer the Treasurer to his reported admission yesterday that the Budget deficit this year is likely to be about $4000m, or some $2300m more than estimated at Budget time. Will the Treasurer inform the House what components of the Budget are responsible for the

3066 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Questions without Notice

deficit blowout to this all-time record high level? Can the Tresurer assure the House that this latest revision to the deficit forecast will be his final figure, or does he envisage the possibility that the deficit will blowout even further than he has so far admittecl? Finally, what increase in the deficit would occur as the result of an effective freeze on wages? Has that increase been taken into account in the $4 billion deficit estimate?
Mr HOWARD~ I did say at the Premiers Conference yesterday that the deficit figure for this financial year could approach $4,000m. I am able to inform the honourable gentleman that the current estimate from the Treasury and the Department of Finance of the Budget deficit for this financial year is about $3,750m. That is made up of an estimated increase in outlays of $1,343m over the Budget estimate and lower receipts to the tune of about $708m. I can oblige the honourable gentleman by giving him the main elements. Unemployment benefits are estimated at this stage to add $603m to the Budget forecast. That represents an increase in forecast unemployment beneficiaries from 395,000 to 525,000. As I have explained earlier, that is significantly due to there being a larger component of beneficiaries. Drought assistance is estimated at this stage to be $356m. Natural disaster relief is estimated at $52m extra, and that represents a further response to approaches from the States as a result of the drought. It is also estimated at this stage that there will be an additional $93m to cover public debt charges because it is necessary to finance through the sale of additional government securities, which is the non-inflationary way of financing the deficit. It is therefore necessary to sell more government bonds. They are the major elements of the outlays side of the Budget.
It is anticipated that gross pay-as-you-earn collections will be about $323m less than estimated at the time of the Budget. We have already revised downwards from 12 per cent to II t per cent the average weekly earnings estimate contained in the Budget. If the pause is fully effective it is my advice from Treasury that there will be a further reduction to about lOt per cent in the AWE outcome for 1982-83. We have already chalked up, through increases in the pipeline, about 8 per cent or 9 per cent of the AWE forecast contained in the Budget.
Employment is now anticipated to decline by about one per cent rather than the constant estimate made at the time of the Budget. As to per-" sonal tax collections in the provisional area, largely due to the drought, we anticipate a larger number of farmers than expected will self assess and this will result in a further $123m decrease. It

is anticipated that collections under the recoupment legislation will be in the order of $1 OOm this year although that figure is subject to more than the usual margin of difficulty. Because of the atypical nature of the legislation that figure may prove to be on the pessimistic side. Because of the generally lower level of economic activity than we forecast at the time of the Budget there are effects in the indirect tax area. Because of reduced consumer purchases sales tax is expected to be down by $84m, excise duties down by about $1 70m and customs duty on imports down by about $100m. On the other side it is anticipated that collections from the crude oil levy will be about $240m greater than the collections forecast at the time of the Budget.
I say to the honourable gentleman that if $4,000m were the outcome, that would represent about 2.5 per cent of gross domestic product. Therefore the honourable gentleman is not correct in describing the figure as an all-time high. In 1975-76 the deficit represented 4.9 per cent of gross domestic product. I want to say to the House that I draw no comfort from that particular comparison. As far as I and the Government are concerned the fact that our fiscal position is now weaker than anticipated at the time of the Budget, because of the prolonged effect of the drought and because of a much weaker economy due almost entirely to the effect of the overseas recession, it will be necessary for us to place a much greater weight on monetary policy and it will be necessary to sell more government securities in order to finance that deficit. As a consequence monetary policy will need to carry a much greater weight than previously expected. That underlines the real value, in economic terms, of the pause that was obtained yesterday.
Dr Klugman-The Treasurer seemed to forget the loss in revenue due to any successful wages freeze.
Mr HOWARD~ I will supplement my answer. I indicated to the honourable gentleman that if the pause were totally effective in 1982-83 the best estimate at present of the effect of that on AWE would be to take it down to about lOt per cent, which would have the effect of another $200m to $300m in revenue receipts.
Mr Scott~Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I ask the Treasurer to table the document from which he was reading.
Mr SPEAKER~I ask the Treasurer whether he was quoting from a document.
Mr HOWARD-I was reading from it. The document has some other valuable points that I

Questions without Notice

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3067

did not use. There is no problem at all in tabling the document.
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS CONFERENCE
Mr CHAPMAN-I ask the Treasurer whether he is aware of comments made yesterday by the United States Treasury Secretary, Mr Regan, calling for an international conference to be convened similar to the 1944 Bretton Woods conference. What would be the Government's attitude to such a conference?
Mr Young-If it is a trip overseas they will go. They will all go. They will all go and claim expenses.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. I indicate to the honourable member for Port Adelaide that we all welcome him back and welcome his return to health. I also indicate to him that he has already interjected 10 times today and that he is coming back into a foreign environment if he continues that.
Mr HOWARDMy attention has been drawn to remarks attributed to the American Treasury Secretary Mr Regan reportedly calling for a new international economic conference similar to the one held at Bretton Woods towards the end of World War II. I have had some inquiries made about the comments and it would appear that the reports are a little overblown against the comments that were actually made by Mr Regan. He indicated that he would want to talk to the finance Ministers of the major industrial countries about this issue. He criticised some of what he described as the ad hoc financing practices that had gone on in recent months, although he also said in responding to a question that he did not believe that the world was yet ready for a new conference of that kind.
I say to the honourable gentleman that, of course, if any conferences of that kind were convened, naturally Australia would be interested in participating and contributing. I take the opportunity of saying that those who imagine that the world's economic problems-certainly the world's monetary management problems-can be solved by large international economic conferences and that in some way those large economic conferences are an alternative to sound domestic economic policies will in the end be proved wrong. Ultimately the strength, in an international monetary sense, of the world economy can be achieved only through the total effect of strong domestic economies. That would generally be our approach at those meetings.

PROPOSED WAGES FREEZE
Mrs CHILD-My question to the Acting Prime Minister relates to a statement he made yesterday to the Premiers that a wages pause would 'assist to slow the rate of inflation; it would stem the loss of jobs'. I ask the Acting Prime Minister what he estimates the rate of inflation will be in a year's time if the proposed wages pause is implemented. What does he estimate that the rate of unemployment will be in a year's time under the same circumstances? Will he guarantee that with a wages pause unemployment will be no higher in December next year than it is now?
Mr ANTHONy-it is not possible to make those sorts of forecasts. What I can say quite categorically is that, if there is not a wage pause, certainly the inflation rate and unemployment will be worse.
TUG BOAT OPERATORS: NATIONAL STRIKE
Mr CADMAN-Is the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations aware of the national strike of tug boat operators who have prevented the entry of oil tankers to Australian ports? Will the Minister hold discussions with the Minister for Defence to explore the use of naval personnel as a precaution against the continuation of the stoppage? Will the Minister ascertain the likelihood of stand-downs created by the unavailability of fuel oils to the transport and manufacturing industries?
Mr MACPHEE-This stoppage arises out of a defiant action by the union concerned in not accepting a decision of the Full Bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission which refused to ratify a reduced working hours agreement. I understand that the Full Bench has called the matter on again before it for, I think, 17 December, but there may be moves to expedite that hearing. In the interests of the economy, about which we are all so concerned, I urge the unions concerned to stop their industrial action immediately and to abide by the decision of the Full Bench when it reconvenes. We in this House abide by your decisions, Mr Speaker, sometimes under protest. That is the nature, as you know only so well, of the arbitral system. In the interests of the national economy, I strongly urge the unions to cease their industrial action and to abide by the decision of the Commission.
JOB CREATION
Mr HAWKEI address a question to the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations. In the light of yesterday's announcement that the Federal Government will divert some $300m to

3068 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Questions without Notice

job creation schemes, will the Minister spell out exactly what the Government's new attitude is to specific job creation schemes? What are the detailed criteria to be used for, first, selecting the specific projects and, secondly, selecting the people to benefit from these schemes? How many jobs and over what period does the Government expect to be created by this proposal? What administrative arrangements are to be put in hand for selecting projects and overseeing their operation?
Mr MACPHEE-It was, of course, part of our proposal that we would work with the States in selecting projects but, unfortunately, because three State Premiers were not able to reach agreement with us on the proposition, we decided that the Acting Prime Minister would write to the Premiers asking them to nominate the programs with which they were most concerned and that we would apply the savings from the Commonwealth public sector pause in a way which was fair and equitable throughout Australia. We will examine carefully the submissions of the States as well as a number of propositions we are working up ourselves. On the basis of the most effective placement of funds for lifting levels of skill and for assisting persons in areas of particular unemployment, on the basis of the advice of the States and on the basis of our own judgments and guidelines, we will decide upon the allocation of funds and the decision will.be announced as soon as possible.
Mr Young-Will you write to local government?
Mr MACPHEE-Certainly one envisages that local government will be involved in the process. Great care and attention, as well as speed, will be given to the project. Having attended a meeting of the Ministers for Labour last week, I am confident that they and other Ministers in the State governments will give their attention to it quickly. I am sure that the Premiers will be replying very quickly to the Acting Prime Minister's letter.
PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFIT PRESCRIPTIONS
Mr LLOYD-The Minister for Health will be aware of the strong opposition of chemists to the new statutory declaration requirement for concessional pharmaceutical benefit prescriptions. Is it necessary to have this requirement for every prescription? Why is the responsibility for this declaration being placed on the chemist rather than on the prescribing doctor?
Mr CARLTON-I advised the House in answer to a question a few weeks ago that with

the introduction of the new three-tier pharmaceutical benefits scheme I was taking the opportunity to tighten up a very loose administrative system in line with my general concern about protecting the taxpayers' dollar. That scheme gives additional benefit to over one million Australians on low incomes or in receipt of sickness benefits and to elderly people who have pensions but who do not have pensioner health benefit cards. Instead of the prescriber-that is, the doctor-writing a number on the prescription form, it will be necessary for the person claiming the benefit to write the number from his or her pension card, or whichever card it is, on the back of the prescription form. It is not a requirement of the chemist. The chemist does not take the legal responsibility for this although, of course, if the form is not properly completed the benefit is not payable from taxpayers' funds. It does not have to happen with all prescriptions, of course. It happens only with those prescriptions where there is a special benefit of $4 to a pensioner with a PHB card or $2 to a holder of a health care card, a sickness beneficiary, or as I said earlier, a pensioner without a PHB card.
The actual form to be introduced on I January is to my mind rather too complicated. I have agreed with the chemists that it looks too complicated. I am trying to find a better form consistent with advice from the Attorney-General's Department that the declaration is legally binding on the claimant. I think that is an important requirement. I have written to every registered pharmacist in Australia explaining what I am doing and explaining my concern about the complicated nature of the form. I have asked my Department, in conjunction with form design experts-I am picking out ones to whom officers of the Department can talk-together with representatives of the Attorney-General's Department, to work out a much simpler form and to have the proposals with me this week so that I can go back to the Pharmacy Guild of Australia with those proposals.
I want to make two things quite clear. One is that there is no going back on the requirement for the declaration by the recipient. That is something that I cannot go back on. I am under very strong pressure from this House to tighten up on the systems in a number of areas of government benefits-in the medical area and elsewhere. I agree with the general consensus of this House that these systems are too loose. Bit by bit I am going to tighten them up. It is just unfortunate that the chemists have to be involved in the first bit of that tightening up. I am asking the chemists to bear with me on this. I am not going back on

Questions without Notice

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3069

that requirement. Secondly, I am very concerned indeed about attempts by certain people to frighten pensioners over this whole matter. A statement put out by Senator Grimes attempted to do this and some pharmacists-not the guildare trying to frighten pensioners on this matter.
Mrs Darling-That is not right.
Mr CARLTON-I hope that the honourable member for Lilley will understand my objectives in this matter. Contrary to statements she has made in public, I have no intention whatever of trying to make things difficult for pensioners.
Mrs Darling-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-I will call the honourable lady at an appropriate time.
Mr CARLTON-I want to make it quite clear that I think that the pressures that have been put on me in this House, by honourable members from both sides, to tighten up these various systems are ones to which I must respond. I believe that I have this responsibility to the taxpayer; I believe that the systems in the whole health care area need tightening up; I believe that some of the professionals in the area have developed over the years a somewhat lax view about the taxpayers' dollar. That is something about which I have to be concerned. At the same time. I am concerned about the pensioners, but I will not go back on the requirement that the person who gets the benefit must make it clear that he or she is claiming that benefit. That, of course, is a legally enforceable matter if there is fraud.
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the House that I notice in the Speaker's Gallery today two longserving former members-Mr Lucock and the Honourable William Charles Wentworth.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
DEATH OF ISRAELI AMBASSADOR
Mr SPEAKER-I wish to draw the attention of the House to a piece of sad information that has just come to my notice. I inform the House that one of the Ambassadors frequently seen in the diplomatic gallery, the Israeli Ambassador, died in the early hours of this morning on his way to hospital after a heart attack. I am sure the House would wish me to express to his relatives our sympathy. I will relay to the Head of State of Israel the expression of sympathy of this House.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
FILM INDUSTRY TAX INCENTIVES
Mr BARRY JONES-I direct my question to the Treasurer. Has the working party on tax incentives for the film industry reported to the Treasurer? If so, what action does the Treasurer intend to take to change the use of section 51 (1) film financing schemes which involve leveraging and tax avoidance or deferral and on the revision of the Government's section 10BA film tax incentive scheme so that the requirement to complete films within a l2-month period is removed? Finally, will the Treasurer give an undertaking to make an announcement of the Government's response before the end of 1982?
Mr HOWARD-I inform the honourable gentleman that the working party has not reported, although I expect it will report within the next two weeks. I will not give an undertaking that I will make an announcement before the end of 1982 until I have seen that report, but I will undertake to the honourable gentleman that as soon as practicable I will indicate the Government's position. There are conflicting points of view, depending on to whom one talks.
Mr Barry Jones-Talk to the film producers.
Mr HOWARD-Some film producers are in favour of section 51 and others are not. It is a very difficult, controversial subject and we are dealing with a fairly articulate lobby group. We have to be very careful when we make further changes that they are the right changes and that they are changes that will last.
TASMANIAN SHIPPING DISPUTE
Mr BURR-Is the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations aware that once again Tasmania was isolated by a shipping strike which last week tied up six Australian National Line ships due to a demarcation dispute on a ship that had nothing to do with Tasmania? Did the Federal secretaries of both unions involved release an agreed opinion after the recent Crawford report on the Revitalisation of Australian Shipping that work should continue and vessels should continue to trade pending the determination of any matter or dispute? Does the stoppage of last week and the continued tie-up of the River Boyne prove that the decisions from the report are not worth the paper on which they are written?
Mr MACPHEE-My colleague the Minister for Transport and Construction is extremely concerned-I and the rest of the Government share his concern-about the apparent breach of

3070 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Questions without Notice

faith by the unions concerned. The Australian National Line in fact took action in the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to have the main classification in dispute in the demarcation removed from the coverage of the Merchant Service Guild of Australia-the seagoing shipwrights classification. That has resulted, I am informed, in a lifting of those bans and in the River Boyne actually sailing back to Gladstone, I hope to return to its normal bauxite carrying duties. The President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions has called a meeting on the demarcation dispute for Friday of this week. The Government believes, as does the ACTU, that is the best way in which the matter ought to be resolved. If it is not resolved by the ACTU on Friday the Minister for Transport and Construction and I will have a further discussion and give further advice to ANL regarding the proceedings on which it has embarked and other options open to it. Again I should say that it is absolutely crazy that at a time when our economy is in such dire straits people who are well paid and who are in secure employment should undertake such selfish and irresponsible conduct of the kind complained of in this case and in the tugboat industry.
TELEPHONE CHARGES
Mr CHARLES-I refer my question to the Minister for Communications. Recommendation 46 of the Davidson Committee of Inquiry into Telecommunications Services in Australia states that Telecom Australia's pricing policy should: Firstly, reflect costs to a substantial degree; secondly, minimise price discrimination; and, thirdly, adopt timed local calls. Recommendation 47 states that cross-subsidisation should be reduced. In view of the increased charges that these recommendations would cause, such as rises for local telephone calls, coupled with the consequent impact on the inflation rate, will the Minister assure the House that these recommendations will not be adopted?
Mr N. A. BROWN-The Davidson inquiry was, of course, a very significant investigation into a whole range of matters concerned with the telecommunications field. Since receipt of the report the Government has, by means of a number of announcements and, in addition, advertisements, called for public comment on the report. I have asked people to read the report first before they launch into print and express their views. I take this opportunity both to repeat that and to compliment the honourable member for apparently having done so, at least in relation to the recommendations. But I urge that there should be

widespread debate on the issues raised and recommendations made in the Davidson report. The time during which comments have been called for has not yet expired. When they are received and when we have given full and proper consideration to the report the Government will consider its attitude on those and other matters and an announcement will be made.
MR MICHAEL FRIEDRICH
Mr COLEMAN-Did the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs recently advise the House that he had referred the application by the Friedrich family for refugee status to the Committee on the Determination of Refugee Status~ the DORS Committee? Has that Committee yet come to a determination and, if so, what is its determination?
Mr HODGES-Since Michael Friedrich arrived in Australia some months ago he has made several attempts to change his status from visitor to resident. When he arrived as a visitor he signed, along with all other visitors, an undertaking that he would not seek to settle in this country-that is, he would not seek to change his status from visitor to resident, he would not work and also he would not undertake study. As I have said, since his arrival he has made several attempts to change his status. Subsequently, he applied for refugee status. In the normal course of events his application was referred to the Committee on the Determination of Refugee Status, to which the honourable member for Wt:ntworth has referred. For the benefit of honourable members. I advise the House that that Committee draws representatives from my Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Attorney-General's Department. Also, of course, it has as an advisory member from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. He is a non-voting advisory member. I wish to advise the House that the DORS Committee has considered and rejected Mr Friedrich's application for refugee status. The Committee is a recommendatory body and I have accepted that recommendation. I am not aware of the up to date position in relation to Mr Friedrich's case. However, I understand that he may have initiated some action through the courts. Therefore, it would be inappropriate for me to comment further.
PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFIT PRESCRIPTIONS
Mr ROBERT BROWN-My question, which is directed to the Minister for Health, relates to

Questions without Notice

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3071

the declaration which pharmaceutical beneficiaries will be required to complete on the back of a prescription form. I preface the question by reference to the fact that that declaration will involve either the beneficiary or the agent of the beneficiary making two responses to four separate questions and also making declarations concerning the period of the validity of the concessional arrangement which relates to them. They will also be required to make declarations concerning the actual number of the concession form. On the bottom of that declaration it is stated quite specificially that incorrect or misleading statements can cause the person making that declaration to be subjected to a $1,000 fine and/or six months in prison. It is also apparent that only children under the age of 12 years could not act as an agent for the beneficiary in the making of that declaration. In the light of that I ask the Minister for Health whether pensioners and disadvantaged people have any cause to be concerned about the possible application of those penalties. Is it anticipated that any children between the ages of, say, 12 and 18 years who may act as an agent for a beneficiary and complete the form but make mistakes in its completion are likely to be subject to a fine of $1 ,000 and / or six months in prison?
Mr CARLTON-I, too, would be very concerned if some of the dire outcomes of mistakes of the kind mentioned by the honourable member for Hunter were to eventuate. I will certainly
check out with advisers from the Attorney General's Department in what respect this declaration might differ from declarations made in all forms of government benefit, of which the honourable member would be aware there are many. As far as I know, there is no specific legal provision distinguishing this declaration from declarations for a whole range of other benefits but I will certainly have that aspect checked out and will advise the honourable member. The form, as I said to the House, is, I believe, too complicated. I think it can be made easier to read within the time available for producing it under the normal procedures. I would not normally design these forms myself--
Dr Blewett-~ They were designed before the Bill was pa:;sed.
Mr CARLTON--They would normally be designed by the professional advisers who would also advise the honourable member for Bonython were he in my position. I assure the honourable member for Hunter and the House that I am looking at this matter personally, right down to the design of the lines and the typography in the form. I am double checking the advice from the Attorney-General's Department because, unlike

honourable members opposite, I do not believe that an extension of government intervention is always a good thing, but I do believe that, where the Government does intervene on behalf of beneficiaries, there is a need to protect the taxpayers' dollar. All I can say is that as I examine a number of these procedures, many of which go back to the period in which honourable members opposite were in government, I find some very loose systems that I believe ought to be tightened up. I believe that everybody in this House would want me to do that on behalf of the taxpayer.
MRS BARBARA MACKAY
Mr HICKS--My question is directed to the Acting Attorney-General. Is there any means by which financial assistance can be given to Mrs Barbara Mackay for the purpose of representation at the inquest into the death of her late husband? If there is, will the Government give sympathetic consideration to providing some assistance to her?
Mr N. A. BROWN-~Mrs Mackay, as J understand, applied to the New South Wales authority for legal aid to assist her in the inquest which is to be held into the disappearance of her husband. I am not aware of the circumstances that led to the result. In fact, I am at a loss to understand why the New South Wales Government was not able to find some way of giving assistance to her. The Federal Government has examined the facts and circumstances surrounding this matter and has given serious consideration to a request from Mrs Mackay that some assistance should be given to her for the purpose of those inquest proceedings. The Government has decided that it is appropriate in all the circumstances to make an ex gratia payment to enable her to have proper representation before the inquest. We believe that this decision is right. We believe it is certainly a humane gesture and that, considering all the circumstances, it is a very significant contribution by the Federal Government to ascertaining the facts surrounding the disappearance of Mr Mackay. The precise details are to be examined and finalised at a later stage.
SALES TAX
Mr CAMPBELL-I ask the Treasurer: Is it a fact that, while advocating a wage freeze, the Government has engaged in yet another example of its subterfuge and taxation by stealth in that it has altered without notice or consultation the base upon which sales tax is assessed? Is it a fact that this action, for example, wilt force up the price of a television set by $45 and a video recorder by $60? Is it a fact that the Government

3072 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Questions without Notice

was considering three years' retrospectivity in this matter? Can the Minister tell the House how much extra tax he expects to raise in this way? Will he explain to the people of Australia where the justice is in freezing wages and simultaneously raising taxes?
Mr HOWARD-I do not ask this facetiously, but I wonder whether the honourable gentleman would be kind enough to repeat the earlier part of his question. I was unable to hear it properly.
Mr SPEAKER-Before the honourable gentleman repeats his question I indicate that I almost called him to order at the commencement of the question. I think he should eliminate from his question the pejorative remarks and just go straight to his question.
Mr CAMPBELL-With respect, Mr Speaker, I must object. I am sure that that is the part of the question which the Treasurer would like to hear.
Mr SPEAKER-That is a clever response, but I ask the honourable gentleman to comply with my request.
Mr CAMPBELLI find myself in a dilemma.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman should proceed.
Mr CAMPBELL--Is it a fact that, while advocating a wage freeze, the Government has engaged in yet another example of its subterfuge and taxation by stealth in that it has altered without notice or consultation the basis upon which sales tax is assessed? Is it a fact that this action, for example, will force up the price of a television set by $45 and a video recorder by $60? Is it a fact that the Government was considering three years' retrospectivity in this matter? Can the Minister tell the House how much extra tax he expects to raise by stealth? Will he explain to the people of Australia where the justice is in raising taxes and simultaneously freezing wages?
Mr HOWARD-I thank the honourable gentleman for his courtesy in repeating the question. I must confess that I am not completely certain as to what the honourable gentleman is referring to. He may be referring to a dispute which, I understand, existed between the Australian Taxation Office and importers of computer software. If he is, I can understand the reference to three years. I can assure the honourable member that there is no--
Mr Campbell-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I feel very sure that the Treasurer knows that I am referring to the abolition of the service fee from the calculation of sales tax about which his Department has been having a lot of discussion.

Mr HOWARD-If the honourable gentleman had mentioned service contracts-of course he did not-I would have known what the honourable gentleman was referring to. I am very grateful that I have finally got the question out of the honourable gentleman. It is a fact that the Taxation Office has been engaged over the past few months in ensuring-I am sure that this policy will meet with the approval of the Opposition, which is very strong on effective action against sales tax avoidance arrangements-that sales tax is not avoided by the unfair use of service contract arrangements whereby part of the real price of goods is in fact appropriated to a service arrangement that does not carry the sales tax. If the honourable gentleman is referring to that, I say to the honourable gentleman and to the House that the Government has not been involved in any way in taxation by stealth. What the Government and the taxation officers have been involved in on that matter is protecting the revenue-something that the Opposition has been very hot and strong about over the past few months.
FILM INDUSTRY TAX INCENTIVES
Mr HOWARD-I take the opportunity of adding to an answer that I gave to the honourable member for Lalor when he asked me a question about the film industry. I indicated to him that a certain report had not been received. I have checked with my office. The truth is that I have received a report on that matter from the industry working party. The report which I am waiting for and which I expect to receive in the next couple of weeks is a report from the Taxation Office which comments, in essence, on the first-mentioned report. The rest of my answer stands.
SALES TAX
Mr DONALD CAMERON-My question is supplementary to that asked by the honourable member for Kalgoorlie. In view of the Treasurer's reply, would the Treasurer endorse this determination by the Commissioner of Taxation if he were aware of the fact that a retreaded second hand case will now cost more because of the imposition of this tax than, for instance, a brand new cartyre?
Mr HOWARD-Without being aware of the facts on which the honourable member for Fadden based that question I would not be game to give an answer. The Australian Taxation Office has no objection and I hope that nobody in this House has any objection to bona fide service arrangements whereby sales tax is not payable in respect of that proportion of the overall price which is properly attributable to services and not to the

Questions without Notice

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3073

goods which carry the sales tax. Obviously, in making allowance for that the Commissioner of Taxation has to make judgments about whether arrangements are bona fide in the interests of protecting the revenue. I assure the honourable member for Fadden, the honourable member for Kalgoorlie and anybody else who might be interested in this matter that I will have a discussion with the Taxation Office about it. I will draw their concerns to the attention of the Commissioner of Taxation. I will also draw to his attention the concern of all honourable members to see that sales tax which is due and payable is, in fact, paid.
PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFIT PRESCRIPTIONS
Dr BLEWETT-I ask the Minister for Health: What evidence has he of fraud and malpractice in the pharmaceutical benefit area to justify the imposition of new bureaucratic provisions on the aged and the disadvantaged? Will he also explain to the House why it is not possible for the doctor who writes the prescription and is also aware of the status of the beneficiary concerned to provide the protection that the Minister so desires?
Mr CARLTON-In this case I am not waiting for another Public Accounts Committee inquiry to tell me the extent of the fraud in this arell. I am merely looking at the actual systems themselves. When I find that nobody is held responsible for a claim there is a prima facie case that people are able to indulge in fraud. That is one of the loose parts of the system I intend to tighten up. Let me explain to the House, as I explained the other day, that at present the doctor, the prescriber, is asked-he is not required to do so-to write the pension number on the prescription form. There is no legal or constitutional power on the part of the Commonwealth to require a doctor to write down that number. But we can require the person who is the beneficiary, that is the person who receives the $2 or $4 benefit, to sign the form. As I said earlier, I am trying to make that requirement as simple as I can.
We have to understand that pensioners in the ordinary course of events give proof of entitlement day in and day out for all sorts of things. They do not always have to sign a form. Sometimes it is a matter of showing a pension card when getting on a bus, or for having cheaper entry to a picture theatre, or when getting a perm in a private hairdresser's establishment or in other areas. There are various ways and means in which pensioners indicate entitlement for a benefit. I think people are exaggerating in advance of the event what difficulties might be encountered in

this matter. Not all pensioners are in a state of great infirmity. Many health care beneficiaries and various other people-in fact three million Australians-come under these kinds of provisions. All I am asking is that they sign something to show that they are entitled to an additional benefit of $2 or $4 every time they receive it. The total cost of pharmaceutical benefits is about $470m, about half of which is made up of concessional benefits. I do not have to sit around and wait for a Public Accounts Committee inquiry into fraud in pharmaceutical benefits before I take steps to tighten up the system.
DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND RESOURCES
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Department of Trade and Resources annual report for 1981-82.
SNOWY MOUNTAINS HYDRO-ELECTRIC AUTHORITY Mr ANTHONY-(Richmond-Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 32 of the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Power Act 1949, I present the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Power Authority annual report for 1981-82.
SNOWY MOUNTAINS COUNCIL .Mr ANTHONY-(Richmond-Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources)-For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Snowy Mountains Council for 1981-82.
NATIONAL ENERGY RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT AND
DEMONSTRATION COUNCIL Mr ANTHONY-(Richmond-Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 9 of the Coal Research Act 1977, I present the National Energy Research Development and Demonstration Council annual report for 1981-82.
ADVANCE TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information of honourable members. I present a statement on issues from the Advance to the Minister for Finance for October 1982.
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY AGREEMENTS ACT
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 10 of the International Monetary Agreements Act 1947, I present the annual report on the operation of the Act for 1981-82.

3074 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

General

TAXATION STATISTICS 1980-81
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-I present the following paper: Taxation Statistics 1980-81 dated 8 September 1982-the supplement to the sixtieth report of the Commissioner of Taxation which was presented to Parliament on 29 October 1981.
Ordered that the report be printed.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE VETERANS' RESIDENCES TRUST
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Defence) - Pursuant to section lOA of the Royal Australian Air Force Veterans Residences Act 1953, I present the annual report of the Air Force Veterans' Residences Trust for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIA-NEW ZEALAND FOUNDATION
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs) - For the information of honourable members. I present the Australia-New Zealand Foundation annual report for 1981-82 together with a statement relating to the report.

the fifth report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations entitled 'The Australian Loan and Inter-government Relations'.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY SCHOOLS AUTHORITY
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- For the information of honourable members. I present an interim annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority.
AUSTRALIAN MARITIME COUNCIL
Mr FIFE (Farrer--Minister for Aviation)- Pursuant to section 39 of the Maritime College Act 1978, I present the annual report for 1981 of the Australian Maritime Council.
EDUCATION
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- For the information of honourable members. I present a report 'Learning and EarningA Study of Education and Employment Opportunities for Young People'.

UNITED NATIONS COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS
Mr STREET (CorangamiteMinister for Foreign Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the Australian delegation to the thirty-eighth session of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, Geneva, February-March 1982.
DEPARTMENT OF AVIATION
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) For the information of honourable members present the Department of Aviation annual report for 1981-82. The report covers those matters on which I am required to report to Parliament pursuant to section 29 of the Air Navigation Act 1920.
INDEPENDENT AIR FARES COMMITTEE
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- Pursuant to section 32 of the Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981, I present the Independent Air Fares Committee annual report for 1981-82.
ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR INTER-GOVERNMENT RELATIONS
Mr FIFE (Farrer--Minister for Aviation)- Pursuant to section 7 of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Act 1976, I present

STATES GRANTS (SCHOOLS ASSISTANCE) ACT
Mr FIFE (Farrer----Minister for Aviation)- Pursuant to section 62 of the States Grants (School Assistance) Act 1980, I present a report on financial assistance granted to each State during the 1981 calendar year.
INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS (LOANS GUARANTEE) ACT
Mr FIFE (Farrer Minister for Aviation)-- Pursuant to section 8 of the Independent Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1969, I present a statement of payments made under the Act in 1981-82.
CHILD MIGRANT EDUCATION
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- Pursuant to section 12 of the Immigration (Education) Act 1971, I present a report on child migrant education for 1981-82.
COMMONWEALTH SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)- Pursuant to section 57 of the Science and Industry Research Act 1949, I present the annual report of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation for 1981-82.

General

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3075

ANGLO-AUSTRALIAN TELESCOPE BOARD
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Pursuant to section 19 (2) of the Anglo-Australian Telescope Agreement Act 1970, I present the Anglo-Australian Telescope Board annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN RESEARCH GRANTS SCHEME
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report of grants approved for 1983 under the Australian Research Grants Scheme.
DEFENCE SERVICE HMS CORPORA TION
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-- Pursuant to section 50B of the Defence Service Homes Act 1918, I present the Defence Service Homes Corporation annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN WAR GRAVES Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Pursuant to section 13 of the War Graves Act 1980, I present the office of the Australian War Graves annual report 1981-82.
PHOSPHATE MINING COMPANY OF CHRISTMAS ISLAND LIMITED
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) - For the information of honourable members. I present the Phosphate Mining Company of Christmas Island Ltd annual report for 1981-82.

DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS
Mr N. A. 'BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Department of Communications annual report for 1981-82.
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) -Pursuant to section 58 of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975, I present the Administrative Review Council annual report for 1981-82.
NATIONAL COMPANIES AND SECURITIES COMMISSION
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley Minister for Communications)--Pursuant to section 52 of the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979, I present the National Companies and Securities Commission annual report for 1981-82.
FEDERAL POLICE DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley -Minister for Communications)-Pursuant to section 86 of the Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981, I present the Federal Police Disciplinary Tribunal report for the period 1 May 1982 to 30 June 1982.
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley Minister for Communications)- -Pursuant to paragraph 9 (1) (A) and sub-section 16 (1) of the Human Rights Commission Act 1981, 1 present the report of the Human Rights Commission on the proposed Australian Capital Territory Mental Health Ordinance.

AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING TRIBUNAL
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) -- Pursuant to section 28 of the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, I present the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal annual report for 1981-82.

CORPORATE AFFAIRS COMMISSION
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-- Minister for Communications)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Australian Capital Territory Corporate Affairs Commission annual report for 1981-82.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CONSTRUCTION AUTHORITY

AUSSAT PTY LIMITED
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-- Minister for Communications)--For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of Aussat Pty Ltd for 1982.

Mr HODGMAN (DenisonMinister for the
Capital Territory)--Pursuant to section 38 of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act
1979, I present the Parliament House Construction Authority annual report for 1981-82.

3076 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

General

NATIONAL CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Pursuant to section 24 (3) of the National Capital Development Act 1957, I present the annual report of the National Capital Development Commission for 1981-82.

ALLIGATOR RIVERS REGION
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 35 of the Environment Protection (Alligator Rivers Region) Act 1978, I present the annual report of the Supervising Scientist for the Alligator Rivers Region for 1981-82.

AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY BUILDING STANDARDS COMMITTEE
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Australian Capital Territory Building Standards Committee annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY BUILDING REVIEW COMMITTEE
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Australian Capital Territory Building Review Committee annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY SURVEYORS BOARD
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Australian Capital Territory Surveyors Board annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY BUSHFIRE COUNCIL
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Australian Capital Territory Bushfire Council annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 36 of the Australian War Memorial Act 1980, I present the Australian War Memorial annual report for 1980-81.
NATIONAL PARKS AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 52 of the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975, I present the National Parks and Wildlife Service annual report for 1981-82.

NORFOLK ISLAND
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Norfolk Island annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN FILM AND TELEVISION SCHOOL
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 42 of the Australian Film and Television School Act 1973, I present the Australian Film and Television School annual report for 1981-82.
HOUSING LOANS INSURANCE CORPORATION
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-Pursuant to section 39 of the Housing Loans Insurance Act 1965, I present the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation annual report for 1981-82, together with a text of a statement relating to the report by the Minister for Social Security.
COMMISSIONER FOR EMPLOYEES COMPENSATION
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-Pursuant to section 122 of the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1971, I present the annual report of the Commissioner for Employees Compensation for 1981-82.
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Department of Social Security annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF ABORIGINAL STUDIES
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report of the review of the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies conducted by Professor R. J. Walsh.
ABORIGINAL LAND COMMISSIONER
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-For the information of honourable

Personal Explanations

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3077

members. I present a report by the Aboriginal Land Commissioner on the Kayjey, Warlpiri and Warlmanpa land claim.
ABORIGINAL LAND COMMISSIONER
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report of the Aboriginal Land Commissioner on the Roper Bar land claim.
DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF HEALTH
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health)-For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Director-General of Health for 1981-82.
MEDICAL RESEARCH PROJECTS
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health)-Pursuant to section 9 of the Medical Research Endowment Act 1937, I present a report on medical research projects, 1981.
CAPITAL TERRITORY HEALTH COMMISSION
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health)--For the information of honourable members. I present the Capital Territory Health Commission annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
Mr HODGES (Petrie-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-Pursuant to section 49 of the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs Act 1979, I present the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs annual report for 1981-82.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable lady claim to have been misrepresented?
Mrs DARLINGYes, I do.
Mr SPEAKER-She may proceed.
Mrs DARLING-Thank you, Mr Speaker. Firstly, I was disappointed that the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton) was so reactionary in misrepresenting the work that I have been doing in the electorate. In particular, he said that I was scaring pensioners in trying to achieve a change in a very complex form which the Minister now admits was too complex. I would like to say on behalf of pensioners that I find it rather offensive that, when pensioners come to me as they have in the past-

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable lady is making a personal explanation to correct a misrepresentation about herself. She is not able to claim my indulgence to make a statement on behalf of pensioners.
Mrs DARLING-Although I feel that that is part of what I am doing, I will have to bow to your wisdom, Mr Speaker. However, I do wish to say that the misrepresentation was compounded by other statements as the whole question was discussed further today. I will briefly run through the facts. I have not used any scare tactics. In fact, the President of the Pharmaceutical Society of Queensland, Mr Bob Ellicott, brought to me the format and explained his concern at the fact that pensioners coming into his shop would be humiliated by filling in and signing the form in the presence of people who were in the shop and that pharmacists would be required, if not legally, practically, to be with those customers and to supervise the form as they are filling it in. That is of concern to me.
Beyond that, I would like to <:stablish the credibility of the Minister in ordpr to establish the credibility of his attack on me. In response to the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) the Minister has shown great concern at the complexity of the form. He now says that he will look into changing the form. I have a letter in my possession and a telex from the Pharmacy Guild (Queensland Branch) which shows that for months before this form came in information and advice was given to the Minister suggesting that the form was too complex but he insisted on going ahead with it.
After the chemists' representative came to see me, I held a meeting with consumer groups, the pensioners league and the Pharmaceutical Society and put the form before them to get feedback and information from them as to whether something should be changed. That feedback came from the three different groups. They requested me to launch a campaign to have this form withdrawn. I in no way scared any pensioners. I have gone around to groups. I showed them the form. They wish it to be simplified-and, in fact, withdrawn. I feel that it was a complete misrepresentation on behalf of the Minister and reflects his traumatic experience in trying to put forward a form over a number of months which people within the profession, as well as pensioners and consumers, do not wish to have.
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health)--I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the Minister claim to have been misrepresented?

3078 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Entry for Nuclear Powered Warships

Mr CARLTON-- Yes, I do. I do not want to enter into an argument with the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) but I do want to correct some misrepresentations of my attitude in this matter. In relation to the area in which the honourable member claims to have been misrepresented, I was relying on a report in the Brisbane Sunday Mail of 21 November 1982 which purports to be based on a statement made by the Queensland Opposition Leader, Mr Wright, and a Federal Australian Labor Party member, Mrs Elaine Darling. I will not go through it all but I am prepared to table the report. Just to give an idea of the flavour of it, Mrs Darling is quoted as saying:
It is getting to the stage where pensioners can be thrown in jail for six months if they happen to make a mistake in their declaration.
That is alarmist. I share with the honourable member a concern about not wishing to make pensioners' lives more difficult but issuing statements of an inflammatory kind like this I think is going a bit far. Mr Speaker, I table the document.
Mrs DarlingMr Speaker, I wish to make a brief personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I will not allow the matter to go any further.
CONDITIONS OF ENTRY FOR NUCLEAR POWERED WARSHIPS
Ministerial Statement
Mr SINCLAIR (New England--Minister for Defence)--by leaveThe House will be aware that nuclear powered warships of the United States Navy regularly visit Australian ports. Since the Government decided in 1976 to allow such visits about 50 port calis have been made by a variety of United States Navy nuclear powered surface ships and submarines to Western Australia, Victoria, Tasmania, Queensland and the Northern Territory. These port visits-like visits made by conventionally powered United States Navy warships-are valued by both the Australian and United States governments and are an important practical expression of naval co-operation in peacetime between close allies. This year's ANZUS Council communique recorded that the Council members:
confirmed the high priority each partner placed upon a regular and comprehensive programme of naval visits to each other's ports, as well as to friendly ports in the Asia/Pacific region generally. They recognized the importance of access by United States naval ships to the ports of its Treaty partners as a critical factor in its efforts to maintain strategic deterrence and in order to carry out its responsibilities under the terms of the Treaty.
In this regard, I would draw to the attention of the House the fact that the United States Navy now

operates about 135 nuclear powered warships, and that more than 40 per cent of the major combatant units of the United States Navy are nuclear powered. All the nuclear powered warships visits that have taken place in the last six years have been arranged in accordance with the conditions of entry laid down by the Australian Government in 1976. These conditions of entry were incorporated in the document titled 'Environmental Considerations of Visits of Nuclear Powered Warships to Australia' which was tabled in this place by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on 4 June 1976. I now wish to inform the House that the Government has decided, following a review of the conditions of entry carried out by the Department of Defence in co-operation with other departments and the Australian Atomic Energy Commission, that a number of changes should be made to those conditions.
Unlike the conditions of entry laid down in 1976, the new conditions of entry are intended to apply to warships having reactors larger than 100 megawatts as well as to warships with reactors smaller than 100 megawatts. This change follows further assessment of information available on these vessels and the selection of berths such that any health hazards associated with the visits will be no greater than those accepted currently for warships with smaller reactors. The new conditions of entry will therefore enable visits to approved berths in Australia by the Nimitz class of aircraft carriers, subject only to appropriate arrangements being made to remove the vessel to a remote location in the unlikely event of an accident involving the nuclear propulsion plant. The other change of substance to the general conditions of entry concerns emergency towing arrangements. The 1976 conditions of entry stipulated that a tug must be available for emergency towing duties whenever a nuclear powered warship visited an Australian port. United States nuclear powered surface ships, however, have two or more reactors and could move under their own power even in the unlikely event of damage to one of those reactors. Except when visits are made by nuclear powered submarines, which have only one reactor, the requirement to remove a warship to a safe location may therefore be met by the warship itself rather than by separate towing vessels.
The new conditions of entry will apply to visits by nuclear powered warships of the United States Navy and-should visits be requested by it-to nuclear powered warships of the Royal Navy. They are as follows:
A. visits will be for purposes such as crew rest and recreation and not for fuel handling or

Entry for Nuclear Powered Warships

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3079

repair to reactor plant necessitating breach of reactor containment;
B. visits will be subject to satisfactory arrangements concerning liability and indemnity and to provision of adequate assurances relating to the operation and safety of the warships while they are in Australian waters;
C. movement of vessels must take place during daylight hours under conditions where visibility is not less than three quarters of a mile;
D. navigational controls on other shipping will be applied during the time that nuclear powered ships are entering or leaving ports;
E. there must be a capability to remove the vessel either under its owr. power or under
tow, to a designated safe anchorage or to a designated distance to sea, within the time frame specified for the particular berth or anchorage and in any case within 24 hours, if an accident should occur; and F. an operating safety organisation, competent to carry out a suitable radiation monitoring program and able to initiate actions and provide services necessary to safeguard the public in the event of a release of radioactivity following an accident, must exist for
the port being visited.
I would emphasise to the House that the new conditions of entry are completeiy consistent with the very high standards of safety that have always been applied during visits by nuclear powered warships. It might be noted that, among the detailed precautions that are taken, these warships may use only those berths which have been individually assessed and cleared by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission as suitable for such use. Moreover, competent Australian personnel monitor carefully radiation levels in the vicinity of these warships throughout each visit, and a separate environmental monitoring program is conducted in co-operation with State authorities in each of the ports that are visited.
The results of these monitoring programs are published annually by the Department of Home Affairs and Environment. No emissions of radioactivity have been detected by these programs from any of the nuclear powered warships that have visited Australia. Application of the new conditions of entry for nuclear powered warships will facilitate future visits to Australia by our United States ally's warships and at the same time will ensure that all the necessary precautions are taken to protect fully the interests of the Australian public in these visits. I commend them to the House. I present the following paper:

Conditions of Entry for Nuclear Powered Warships---
Ministerial Statement. gDecember 1982.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (3.36)-The Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) has brought in a new set of conditions under which nuclear powered vessels may enter Australian ports. He has not sought in any way to advise the House why it was necessary to change the existing arrangements, nor has he indicated who will pay the costs and whether the State governments, which in the main are responsible for State emergency services and other activities, have been consulted about these new arrangements. He has also not indicated why it was necessary to take out the detailed requirements for the various organisations involved in monitoring the safety of areas to which visits by nuclear powered vessels take place. From a reading of the 1976 agreement it is fairly obvious that a number of the requirements set down then, including those for public safety and the evacuation of members of the public in the event of a nuclear accident, have been totally neglected over the intervening six years. The safety zone requirements, if they have been implemented, have been the best kept secret from the population of those areas, probably a better kept secret than some of our defence plans.
The Minister indicated that, because of multiple reactors, tug stand-bys will no longer be required for surface ships. I draw the Minister's attention to the fact that the existence of multiple real:tors does not guarantee that one of those reactors can be used in circumstances of disability. The reactors of all nuclear warships share coolant systems, and when the problem is a radiation leak in the coolant system, neither reactor can be used. Therefore, the requirement for tug stand-by exists just as much for a multiple reactor warship as it does for a single reactor warship. The fact is that multiple reactors can be rendered inactive, even though neither of the reactors is out of operation, by disabilities in the coolant system shared by the reactors. The new statement removes specific references to the acceptance of liabilities and to the United States Statement of Assurances. This has been totally dropped from the guidelines and has been replaced by a rather broad and sweeping general statement which mayor may not mean something. The statement gives no detail.
There are a number of other matters of concern. I mentioned previously the safety of local communities and the bodies which exist for the monitoring of nuclear visits. The new statement sets out no criteria, no conditions and no minimum requirements for such an operation. They

3080 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Inquiry into Drug Trafficking

were clearly spelt out in the previous statement, including safety requirements for the public. They have been removed. We now have faith, hope and trust. Given the example of the last six years when the provisions of the previous statement were totally ignored, we can fairly safely assume that those safety requirements which are not specifically spelt out but which are left to trust will be ignored by the Government. The Government is interested only in facilitating visits and is not interested in the security or safety of the Australian community, otherwise it would not have felt the need to remove those specific requirements which had not been a hindrance in the past and which should not be a hindrance now.
There are a number of other matters of concern. I mentioned previously that the reimbursement of monitoring costs is not mentioned. If the Minister cares to look at the Notice Paper, he will find on it a question from my colleague the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) relating to a dispute existing with the Western Australian Government about large sums of money in respect of monitoring facilities which have never been paid. The new statement seems to me to be an indication that the Government wishes to have minimum specified requirements and is prepared to take risks with other people's lives. That is not acceptable to the Opposition.
Debate (on motion by Mr Falconer) adjourned.
ROYAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO DRUG TRAFFICKING
INTERIM REPORT No.2-PASSPORTS
Ministerial Statement
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-by leave-On 27 May this year, Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle (Minister for Finance) tabled in the Senate interim report No. 2-Passports-of the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking. The Government has considered the report and I should like to outline to the House the Government's response to the report and the recommendations contained in it. The Government welcomes the report because we accept that false passports and false identities are tools of trade for drug traffickers and other international criminals; we share the concern expressed by a number of people including the Williams Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs and the Stewart Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking about passport abuse; we acknowledge that the Government has a responsibility to do what it can to deter international criminal activities; and we

are determined to take all possible steps to eliminate criminal activities, including passport abuse.
The Government's concern at these problems is evident from its action in appointing the Williams and Stewart royal commissions and the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. The Government's attitude is also evident from the changes which have been introduced into the passport issue and control system by the Government and my Department since 1976. In that period my Department has taken the following initiatives: In 1976 passport records previously held in State offices were centralised-this allowed a ready check of current passport holders. In 1978 records previously held on card indexes were placed on computer. Since 1978 a number of improvements have been made to the computerbased information system. In 1979 significant amendments were made to the 1938 Passports Act. These amendments tightened procedures for the issue of passports, detailed the circumstances under which a passport could be either denied or withdrawn, and increased substantially the penalties for passport abuse. These were the first major changes to the Passports Act since the Department of External Affairs introduced the first Passports Act into Parliament in 1920. Since 1980 all passport-issuing offices in Australia have had on-line access to the central computer to prevent the issue of a second passport to a person of the same name and date of birth, and it allows an immediate check against those who are on various alert lists supplied to the Department of Foreign Affairs by authorities such as law enforcement agencies. In 1981 the lamination of the personal particulars page of passports was introduced to prevent the alteration of photograph or information about the holder. Earlier this year my Department gave approval for further improvements to be made to the passport in order to enhance its security. In January this year I announced the introduction of a system of checks against the identity of applicants. It should be noted that the improvements which I have just outlined were the first major changes made to the passport system in over 40 years.
The Stewart Royal Commission report on passports raised a number of factors relating to the passport issue. In considering the Stewart report, the recommendations of the Williams Royal Commission were also given further attention. A number of other factors which would improve passport security were taken into account at the same time. In the five months since the report was tabled it has been the subject of intense study. My

Inquiry into Drug Trafficking

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3081

Department established a working party to examine the recommendations and their implications. A series of interdepartmental committees were established to discuss the various recommendations and other suggestions for improving the passport system. A survey was taken of the travel industry to assess the effect of the recommendations on that industry. Discussions were held with travel industry representatives. Discussions were also held by officers of my Department with State and Territory authorities. Passport applications submitted in 1981-82 were surveyed in order to obtain basic information on which the Government could then consider the recommendations.
The main thrust of the Stewart Royal Commission report on passports relates to the problems of checking the identity of applicants. This is not a problem which is unique to the passports system. Those who watched the television program which set out to underline the weaknesses in the passport issue system will have noted that the program underlined the ease with which television staff obtained false birth certificates, driver's licences, gun licences, building society accounts, cheque accounts from banks and Bankcard credit facilities and enrolled on the electoral roll.
Establishing identity is vital in a number of important areas other than passports which are also of concern to Commonwealth and State governments and the private sector. Citizenship, checking illegal immigrants and banking are a few. It is also the key to receipt of a number of financial benefits from the Government. In Australia and those countries with similar political and judicial backgrounds such as the United Kingdom, the United States of America, Canada and New Zealand, there is absolutely no infallible method of establishing identity through a single identification system. The most effective method of establishing identity would, of course, be the establishment of a national identity system based on fingerprinting. The Government has considered this but is not prepared to institute such a system in relation to passports because of the implications that this would have on our traditional way of life. There would also be major administrative difficulties and additional costs. In the context of the passport issue and control system there is a limit to the inconvenience government can impose on honest Australians to stop fraudulent practices by a few-over half a million Australians obtain passports each year.
As I have indicated, this problem is shared by other like countries and it is not practicable to introduce the system applied in some European countries which have a number of features which

distinguish them from Australia. They are not migrant receiving countries, few are federal and they have a tradition of registering their citizens and monitoring the changes of address, marital status and so on throughout their lives. The Government, therefore, has examined alternative ways of tightening identity checks in respect of passport issue and control. The Government will retain the present multi-level checks on identity which will be further improved as a result of the Government's consideration of this report.
A number of recommendations in the report were already part of the passport issue system and others have since been implemented. The Government's response to each of the recommendations is outlined in the schedule which I now table. The more significant of the 40 recommendations in the report are those which are addressed to the need to require applicants to appear personally before a passport officer who is adequately trained and responsible to check identities. The report proposes the provision of more passport offices and the appointment of commissioners for passports to deal with applicants residing more than 100 kilometres from a passport office. While the Government accepts the need for personal interviews and agrees that this will require an appropriate infrastructure to cope with personal interviews, it does not propose to implement these changes in the form recommended by the report, for reasons which I will now explain.
The survey of passport applications which I mentioned earlier shows that there is insufficient work load to justify the establishment of regional offices on the scale proposed by the report. The Government also feels that there are a number of problems of control, security and servicing with the appointment of commissioners for passports and has some doubts that it would contribute to overcoming the problem of identifying applicants. The Government has therefore decided that, rather than establish regional offices and appoint commissioners for passports, official post offices will be used as agencies for passport offices. Senior postal clerks of about the same classification as interviewing staff in passport offices will, after thorough training, be authorised to accept applications for intending travellers, check the documentation against application details, certify the photographs and forward the passport application to passport offices for processing, at which stage further checks will be carried out before a passport is issued by the passport office. I emphasise that passports will not be issued by post offices. It is intended that passports, when issued,

3082 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Inquiry into Drug Trafficking

will be sent by certified mail to applicants' residential addresses or be available for collection at passport offices by the applicant. Further details of these arrangements will be announced in the near future but it should be noted that full implementation of these arrangements will be phased in over an 18-month period.
The Government will maintain the present security requirements for a certificate regarding applicant, but following recommendations from the Williams Royal Commission and after consultation with State and Territory authorities, the categories of persons eligible to provide the certificates regarding applicants' identity will be restricted even further. In future the categories will be limited to the following: Members of ParliamentFederal and State; aldermen and councillors of municipal and shire councils; town clerks and secretaries; medical practitioners and dentists; judges, magistrates, clerks of petty sessions and clerks of court; school teachers of five years service; postmasters; police officers of the rank of sergeant and above and officers in charge of stations; officers of the armed services; ministers of religion designated as marriage celebrants; and Federal and State public servants of at least 10 years' permanent service. It will be some six months before this change is fully implemented. The security checks in our offices, which I announced in January of this year, will continue to be carried out by passport offices when the passport application is being processed.
A series of recommendations in the Royal Commission's report is designed to give passport officers access to adequate documentation and information to check identities and to improve the reliability of information held in passport offices. Passport offices already have access to electoral roll information and further examination is being made on the possibility of access to other information which could verify the identity of applicants. It is not possible or practicable to go to the extent envisaged in the report. Much of the information is held by the States and there would be a need for the States to computerise and integrate such information and make it available to the Commonwealth. Even if it were possible to do this, it is most doubtful that for passport purposes alone such effort would be warranted. Nevertheless, a number of the security measures designed to improve the range and integrity of information available will be discussed further with State and Territory authorities.
A number of other recommendations canvassed issues which raise important fundamental principles and issues. These include restricting the entitlement of certain individuals to passports and

restricting eligibility for a passport on conviction or suspicion of offences. These recommendations are to be referred to the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) for consideration by the appropriate State and Territory authorities. The Government acknowledges that there has been inadequate consultation and co-ordination on passport related matters. A consultative committee to consider all aspects of passport security will be established. Its membership will comprise representatives of appropriate Commonwealth authorities. My Department will also maintain liaison with the State and Territory authorities and will discuss various aspects of passport security with those authorities on a regular basis.
In common law it is, of course, quite easy for people to change their names and the Royal Commission's report has pointed to the effect that this can have on controlling the number of passports held by one person. After discussions with State and Territory authorities and further consideration, I have decided that in future all passport applicants will be required to provide a full birth certificate showing the name of the person at birth and the full names of the mother and father. This information will then be recorded on the passport computer file and checks made to ensure that, whatever names a person may have acquired, a record will be made of the passport issue against the name at birth. The requirement for a full birth certificate will be implemented with the introdudion in May next year of the new application forms.
It is proposed to introduce passport printers into passport offices in the next financial year. These printers will not only improve the quality and production techniques in the passport offices but also enhance the security in the passport offices themselves and lead the way to introduction of machine readable script in passports. This latter move is designed to speed the handling of passengers through points of entry in Australia. In January this year I announced that the Government had decided to consider the establishment of an independent consultancy review to examine the security aspects of the passport issue and control system. This was deferred pending receipt of the Stewart Royal Commission's report. The Government has decided to give further consideration to the establishment of this review when the new measures, which I have outlined, have been in operation for a period.
Most of the changes which I have outlined will be implemented within the next six months but others require significant administrative preparation and will need to be phased in over a longer

Inquiry into Drug Trafficking

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3083

period. The decision to use Post Offices as lodgment centres, for example, will be phased in over an 18-month period to enable the new system to be explained to the public, administrative procedures to be established, training of postal clerks to be completed and the travel industry to adjust. The action which I have outlined reflects a general acceptance of the thrust of the recommendations of the Stewart Royal Commission report on passports, though some of the detail for the implementation of those recommendations differs from what was proposed by the Royal Commission for reasons already given.
As I indicated earlier in this statement, the Government welcomes the Stewart Royal Commission's report on passports and the contribution it has made to tightening the passport issue and control system. This, however, is not the end of the matter. There is not, nor can there be, a perfect infallible system. The Government, through my Department, will keep the passport issue and control procedures under constant review and further changes will no doubt be made in the future. The efforts to deter and prevent criminal elements in our society from undermining the basis of this society must be constant and unremitting. We are determined to do what we can in what is regrettably an unending battle. Therefore, though there may be some inconvenience to those many thousands of honest Australians who apply each year for passports, I am confident that they will understand the reasons why these measures are necessary. I present the following paper:
Drug trafficking- -Royal Commission-Interim report No. 2-- Passports Government response to recommendations, dated 8 December 1982.

and visa control, particularly relating to people coming to this country on a short term basis. It is recognised, of course, that the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs is the appropriate department to deal with the matter on the basis of the reunion of long term migrants and their families. But the whole nub of what the Minister said, and indeed of what the Royal Commissioner said, is the difficulty of establishing identity. I note that many problems are associated with identity because identity can certainly be manufactured.
The Stewart Royal Commission stated a number of matters to which I should like to advert in order to show the nature of the problem. Page one of the interim report deals with a person named Clark who was well known for criminal activity-in fact murder and heroin charges. The inquiry clearly indicated that there was an abuse of the passport system. Clark obtained a number of passports; he was not entitled to any. He had at least five, none of which was in the name of Clark. If we look at the problem we will see that the abuse was enormous. At the time of his arrest Clark had passports issued in the names of Kriss, Newton, Gorrie, Sinclaire and Perkins. Clark was a New Zealand citizen anyway. This shows that it is very easy for the criminal mind to find ways of getting around what were deemed to be adequate identification procedures. Page 41 of the report of the Royal Commission-I hope it has been noted-states:
The Department of Foreign Affairs has stated it wishes to ensure that no false passports are issued but pleads that its resources are insufficient to implement the Williams Commission recommendations. This Commission has grave doubt as to whether the Department really appreciates how serious the present position is.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)-by leave-The Opposition welcomes the statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) in relation to the problems associated with passport abuse. I note that the Minister referred to the recommendations of interim report No.2 of the Stewart Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking. I also note that the Minister did not refer to recommendation No. 38 which dealt with the proposal that the issue of passports be transferred from the Department of Foreign Affairs to the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. I do not want to dwell on that matter, but I am of the opinion that the Department of Foreign Affairs is anxious to preserve the capacity and the authority to issue passports, and there is some evidence to suggest that that should be so. There is no doubt there has been a lot of laxity and abuse. The Department of Foreign Affairs has a role to play in respect of passport

The report goes on to describe a person who was found with a great deal of heroin, was charged and remanded and eventually did not appear. When the police carried out investigations they discovered that that person had been issued with a passport in another name altogether-in fact in the name of a Kevin William Harris who died at the age of 13 months. That shows the sort of arrangement that can enter the criminal mind. This person, who got away with that passport in the name of an infant, went through the exercise of producing a certificate of identity. The certificate of identity, as explained by the Royal Commissioner, was given by Mr William Victor Cook, J. P. A justice of the peace would be entitled to do that. When Mr Wilfred Vincent Cook was interviewed he said that he had never heard of William Victor Cook. In other words, the identification of the justice of the peace was also forged. It was not hard for the criminal mind to do that because all

3084 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Inquiry into Drug Trafficking

he had to do was look up the telephone directory and notice that Mr Cook had 'J.P.' after his name.

We now come to the value of birth certificates. Those of us who have been involved from time to time in litigation and evidence know that a birth certificate is prima facie evidence of birth, but the certificate could be a complete forgery. If we look through the report of the Royal Commission we will also note that the official birth certificate paper has in fact been stolen. The criminal has access to everything, so if he can get the official imprimatur of State documents he will readily type in a lot of particulars. He will readily produce all sorts of evidence. That is perhaps a matter we cannot always prevent.

I shall now comment in relation to all the difficulties. I note that the Minister is now saying that he wants a full birth certificate to be produced, a matter with which I fully agree. We come now to the question of identity and the natural revulsion by people in a democracy-and this is what the Royal Commissioner said-having to have some identification; this can infringe the right to privacy. He asked quite fairly to get a balance between criminal activity and the fact that one gets a benefit from one's country, and a passport is a benefit. So we must have a balance. Whilst one can maintain privacy, one cannot do that to the extent that one allows criminal conduct to flourish, as has happened.

I am not at all critical of what the Minister has said. In fact, I say that it is a worthwhile contri-
b'-1:ti.on. I n?te that .there will be various propoSitIOns which I thmk are helpful in that the people who can give identity will be restricted to a number of people of a certain class. That immediately leads me to say that there is an additional difficulty if one looks at the fact that these people's identities can also be forged-through a forged signature, for example-and, therefore, we need to have some proof of their identity. That sounds as though we could go on ad infinitum but I do not think we need to, as will be seen if honourable members listen to what I say a little later. I welcome the fact that judges, postmasters, police officers and everybody else of an appropriate title will be able to give identity. But one has to be careful that the criminal mind does not work also to forge that identity.

The issue is that the Minister says that a 'full birth certificate' can be produced; and that is
right. But one has to be able to establish the identity of the person holding that birth certificate and I think this is the problem.

~~M.r Barry

Jones-It

does

not

mean

it

is

yours '

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Exactly. Those who have been involved in earning an honest living in law have had to go through the exercise from time to time of convincing people that we can actually get this sort of evidence. The evidence would be something like this: A person would have to produce a full birth certificate. Attached to it would be an affidavit or a declaration by a member of the family or somebody close to the person concerned saying: 'Yes, you are the person referred to in the certificate' and that they have known the person for so many years. That person would have to sign the declaration. That would be one method. That does not get over the other fact that that person might also be a party to a forgery.
For example, the Commonwealth Bank does thi~ in respect of what are called probate applicatIOns. I remember them well. If one wants to withdraw the proceeds from an account of a deceased person, for the bank's purposes one has to have a full death certificate identified by a declaration before a justice of the peace or somebody the person may wish to nominate-usually a justice of the peace-saying that the person mentioned on the death certificate is one and the same as the person holding the bank account. The declaration would state that the person making the declaration knew the deceased person for a number of years and that that was the person who held the account. So, somebody would be qualified to identify that person.
One also would need to have somebody in the category identified by the Minister-he is now saying that a school teacher or a person of that nature is quite entitled to do this--identifying the person who was providing the original identification. So, one would need to have a double check. The bank went further and said in its terms that it wanted the signature of that identifying person identified by another bank.
The Minister may wish to look at precedent. Perhaps the Department can see plenty of precedents. Whilst it might be a little difficult, it is not too hard, acknowledging that the full birth certificate does not necessarily give the protection form forgery sought, to have identification by somebody who knew the person mentioned in the
wbiirltlhlocoekrtiaftichaetea.dsTthoneecsriimn icneaml eetlreimeseant;dwmeakkneouw~
certificates of birth. From the source, criminals work out when the person who is dead was born. Clark did that in what is called the McGuire case.
Mr Barry Jones-It is like what happened in the film Day of the Jackal where that was done.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-That is right. It is called the jackal theory. In making a constructive

Inquiry into Drug Trafficking

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3085

observation, I say that there is a precedent for this method and it ought to be encouraged. I think that quite fairly the Minister has stumbled on something quite good in suggesting that post offices ought to be where these applications can be lodged. Considering the post office and the person who is lodging the application, I think it follows that the postman usually knows who lives in what house and how long they have lived there, because the mail goes there. If the application is not being made at that post office, at least one ought to be able to find out from the adjoining post office or wherever the application is lodged that there is some method of establishing that whoever is making the application is known to the postman. It would be a matter of a quick telephone call. I think we might have unconsciously stumbled on something well worthwhile.
Mr Street-Consciously.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-The Minister is saying, quite fairly, that he did it deliberately. I gave him top IQ marks for that. The point I am making is that this question of identity can always be subverted by the criminal method of forgery and multiplication of the forgery by a number of different signatures of people, none of whom exists. To check the position, one has to go to some person whom one can identify.
I raise one final matter. I understand that a number of passports are lost when people are overseas. I understand also-this is not said in criticism-that, naturally, when an Australian has lost his passport he immediately goes to our embassy and asks for another one. He may need to get the passport as a matter of urgency. That system has a weakness. The passport has to be issued again on the basis of some form of identification. The identify of the person is checked by confirming that, in fact, a passport was issued. That practice does not really establish the identity. I think that in future the Minister might have to look at the need, when there is a claim that a passport has been lost, to put the person who has lost it to the difficulty of waiting to allow the embassy to contact Australia immediately in order to get a photostat of all the evidence that was furnished at the time when the original passport was granted so that the embassy may issue a new passport. At present the embassy is not able to do that when a matter of urgency is involved.
Also, a passport which is reissued overseas on the basis of the original passport having been lost is issued for a five-year period whereas the lost passport might have had only about three or four months to run. In other words, the reissue overseas is granting a brand new passport for a further

period without there being an opportunity to check the identity in detail. I think that ought to be a matter of some comment at some stage in relation to whether what I have suggested can be done.
Generally speaking, I think that what the Minister is about is what we all want to see-an ability to prevent crime. Obviously passports have been abused and will continue to be abused because we cannot readily stop all the criminal tendencies. However, looking at the simplicity of the methods that have been used in the past to gain passports illegally, I think certainly it can be seen that better systems have been prevailing for some time. I am concerned about the declaration aspect and the need for identification of the birth certificate by somebody who can be readily found. In turn, the identity of the person giving the identification also has to be established. I suggest that some of these people whom the Minister is now suggesting as appropriate should also exercise the function in relation to people obtaining a passport. Generally speaking, the Opposition welcomes the efforts being made by the Government.
SOUTH WEST TASMANIA
Ministerial Statement
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-by leave-I wish to inform the House of the Government's intentions regarding South West Tasmania. The Government reaffirms its wish that the Western Tasmania Wilderness National Parks be inscribed on the World Heritage List along with the other nomination of Lord Howe Island. If these nominations are accepted by the World Heritage Committee, these areas will join Kakadu National Park, the Great Barrier Reef and the Willandra Lakes Region on the World Heritage List.
Honourable members will be aware that the World Heritage Committee is meeting in Paris commencing 13 December. Professor Ralph Slatyer, the former Australian Ambassador to the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation and the outgoing Chairman of the World Heritage Committee, will lead the Australian delegation. Professor Slatyer will be assisted by Dr D. F. McMichael, Secretary, Department of Home Affairs and Environment, Mr Max Bourke, Director of the Australian Heritage Commission and Mr Ernst Willheim of the Attorney-General's Department. Additionally, the Government in response to the request by the Premier of Tasmania, Mr Gray, has issued an invitation for the Tasmanian Government to be

3086 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

South West Tasmania

represented in the delegation subject to the conditions which normally apply to State representatives on Australian Government delegations. For the information of honourable members, it is the practice at meetings of the World Heritage Committee for the nominating country to respond only to questions put by the Committee. Notwithstanding this limitation on participation in the discussions on the nomination, I hope the invitation to Tasmania will be accepted.
The Government has provided to the Bureau of the World Heritage Committee the additional information sought on the nomination of the Western Tasmania Wilderness National Parks for inscription on the World Heritage List. I gave Professor Slatyer this morning, just before his departure for Paris. the Government's response which he will deliver to the Bureau prior to the meeting of the World Heritage Committee. In responding to the request the Government noted that the Bureau has recommended the inscription on the World Heritage List of the Western Tasmania Wilderness National Parks. I should like to confirm to the House the Government's firm belief in the international importance of this area and its outstanding biological and cultural qualities which have been recognised by its inclusion on the Register of the National Estate. I make special reference to the archaeological sites, the huon pine habitat, the temperate rainforest and the other unique features of this area.
The Commonwealth Government has cooperated with the Tasmanian Government over a number of years in documenting the natural resources of the area as a basis for future planning management. The Commonwealth looks to continuip.g this co-operative approach. Towards this end lne Government stands by its commitment to provide financial and other assistance in the establishment and management of a national park of world significance which includes a substantial wilderness component. Nonetheless, the Government has to face facts. The Premier of Tasmania has stated firmly, ap.d with the backing of legislation, that the proposed dam is to proceed. Accordingly, the Government has indicated to the World Heritage Committee that the Tasmanian Government is constructing a hydro-electric power scheme in the nominated area and that the Commonwealth has been and is discussing the scheme with the Tasmanian Government with a view to minimising the damage that the dam might cause.
The Government does not intend to intervene in the construction of t.he dam. The Government, in its discussion with the Tasmanian Government, will make it clear that it will back its concern for

these features with money, manpower and technical resources. I am pleased to inform the House that the Tasmanian Government has agreed that the Commonwealth will be consulted in the development of the management plan for the area. The mechanism for consultation is to be the subject of discussions with the Tasmanian Government. Whilst Fraser Cave and other caves of archaeological significance will be flooded by the dam, let me assure the House that every endeavour will be made to preserve this important part of our heritage.
The House will understand that the position taken by the Government will be welcomed by parts of the community and opposed by others. The expressions of concern have been clear and widespread. Nevertheless, the Government has to strike a balance between competing intentions. Confrontation between the Commonwealth and the States and between individuals in the community is not the road to prosperity, development or conservation of our heritage. The Government believes, on balance, that its decision is the right one and seeks from the community support in its continuing discussions with the Tasmanian Government.
Finally, I join the Premier of Tasmania in exhorting those that oppose the construction of the dam not to interfere physically with construction works. I abhor violence, as I am sure do all in this House. Nothing can be gained from violent confrontation. I present the following paper:
South West Tasmania ~~ Ministerial statement, 8 December 1982.
Motion (by Mr Hodgman) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (4.19)-Today is a sad day for the environmental heritage of Australia. The Government has just announced that the nomination of South West Tasmania, which includes the Gordon-Franklin river system, for the World Heritage List under the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation Convention for the Protection of the World's Cultural and Natural Heritage will proceed. However, it announced simultaneously that it will not intervene to prevent the construction of the Gordon-Franklin dam. The nomination has been made by both the Federal Government and a State government of Tasmania. If the nomination is accepted and if the Federal Government fails to intercede and live up to its moral and international obligations, this country will not be fit to be a responsible signatory to that convention. That is the fact of the matteL Quite frankly, the

South West Tasmania

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3087

Government has placed this country in the position of being no longer fit to be a party to that convention.
There has been speculation for a long time as to whether this Government would act in this way. In its usual cowardly fashion it postponed the decision until after the Flinders by-election last Saturday. There are many people in Australia, particularly on the mainland, who are not in favour of the construction of this dam. Between 15,000 and 20,000 people marched in Melbourne several weeks ago in protest about the construction of the dam. Forty-one per cent of those who voted last Saturday saw fit to write 'no dams' on their ballot papers. All of those people have been conned by the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) and this Government.
Before I proceed with my reply to the Minister's statement, perhaps I should put on record that I hope and trust that those somewhat naive people in the environment lobby and conservation movement of Australia will no longer allow themselves to be conned by this Government, which allowed them to believe that perhaps some action would be taken. Certainly its candidate for Flinders gave credence to that belief. I trust that all of those confused people who believed its candidate for Flinders and who believed that this Minister might have some clout with the Government are now disabused for all time of the belief that this Government is a government which cares about the environment. It is not. As we move to an election, whenever it is, all of those people in Australia who are concerned about the environment will know the Minister for the environmental fraud that he has perpetrated and he will cop the electoral backlash of it. The people who are concerned for the environment in Australia may have been conned in relation to the Flinders by-election but they will not be conned twice. The Federal Government has capitulated to the pig-headed intransigence of the Tasmanian Government about constructing this dam, which is now to be constructed by the Government of Tasmania and the Hydro Electric Commission with the compliance of the Federal Government. Other people's money will be used in its ~onstruc tion; that is, money which the State certamly does not have will be used to construct a dam it does not need to produce power for industries which it does not have and which will not materialise.
This area is part of the National Estate. This Government has nominated it for the National Estate. It is a national issue. I have addressed many political gatherings in my time but I have never addressed meetings all round Australia of

the size that this issue has drawn. The Federal Government has now joined forces with the Tasmanian Premier and those in Tasmania who say that this is a State issue and not a national issue. Does the Government say that about the Kakadu National Park, Ayers Rock or the Great Barrier Reef? Can we now assume that if the BjelkePetersen Government in Queensland decides to take the Commonwealth Government on and says that it is going to drill for oil along the coast of Queensland, inside the area covered by the Coastal Waters (State Powers) Act, the Commonwealth Government will not intervene? Obviously, that is what the Government is saying. The area of South West Tasmania should be on the World Heritage List right up there with the Kakadu National Park and the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. The honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) who sits in the second row has marched with me at the head of demonstrations. You know that what I am saying is true. Yet vou sit here behind the foolish honourable member for Denison (Mr Hodgman) and behind the cowardly Minister for Home Affairs and Environment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! I invite the honourable member to address the House through the Chair.
Mr WESTThis dam will destroy a significant part of the area. I heard the Tasman!an Premier say that the Franklin River was nothmg but a dirty, brown, leech-ridden gutter. The Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) is supposed t.o have said this morning th1t it is an area that IS only marginal to the importance of the South West. That simply is demonstrably not true. The Gordon-below-Franklin dam to be established a few miles below the confluence of the two rivers will destroy 35 kilometres of each river. That is only the start of it because the HEC will back up. The Government argues that it will still proceed with the listing, that it will assist the Tasmanian Government to preserve some of the main features and will provide money, manpower and technical resources. What nonsense that is. Today we have the Minister saying:
I should like to confirm to the House the Government's firm belief in the international importance of this area and its outstanding biological and cultural qualities w~ich have been recognised by its inclusion on the Register of the NatIonal Estate.
The Minister is agreeing with everything J am saying. The Minister just before he finished his speech went on to say:
I am aware that whilst Fraser Cave and other caves of archeological significance will be flooded by the dam. let me assure the House- ---

3088 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

South West Tasmania

That is, it will be under about 60 metres of water--
That every endeavour will be made to preserve this important part of our heritage.
Mr MeVeighYou are a dill. You don't know what you are talking about.
Mr WEST -If I am a dill, you are a cowardly fool.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!
Mr WEST-I have not tried to con the Australian people.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I remind the honourable gentlemen at the centre table that we are discussing a question before the House. It is not the time for an exchange of compliments!
Mr WEST-We have the Minister saying that he understands the archaeological significance of the area that is going to be flooded but he assures us all that every endeavour will be made to preserve the cave. I refer honourable members to the conclusion of the report of the Senate Select Committee on South West Tasmania that was brought down in the Senate some weeks ago. It states:
11.15 The Committee heard evidence from Australian archaeologists and received copies of letters forwarded to the Prime Minister from eminent international archaeologists on the significance of the archaeological discoveries in an area near the Franklin River which would be inundated by the proposed Gordon-below-Franklin scheme.
11.16 The Committee accepts the views of these experts that the archaeological discoveries near the Franklin River are of such international importance that they should not be inundated.
The reason the Committee said that is that these archaeologists told the Committee that Fraser Cave shows evidence of being the southernmost point on this planet ever reached by prehistoric man. The Aborigines were there in Fraser Cave 20,000 years ago-that is about 15,000 years before Cheops built the Great Pyramid. Fraser Cave is one of the great archaeological sites on this planet. Yet this mean-minded, mean-spirited Government, without any idea of what this site might mean to the world cultural and natural heritage, is willing to go along with a petty, parochial government like the Government of Tasmania that says to the Minister and the Government: 'You're only the Commonwealth. Keep your nose out of our affairs. We know better than you. We know that we need this dam for an economic purpose'.
Let me give the lie then, having established the environmental case, to the economic case. There is no economic case whatsoever for the dam. It will cost up to $1 billion to produce 178 megawatts of power. That is what it will be because the

Pieman River Scheme has already blown out to almost $800m. It started off in the early 1970s at $120m; now it is $800m. The HEC already consumes 30 per cent of the State's general purpose capital funds, 60 per cent of its total loan funds, 94 per cent of major semi-governmental borrowing and 95 per cent of the infrastructure borrowing program that has now been terminated. Now it has to borrow on national and international markets at ruling interest rates.
The recession is hitting Tasmania. We know that. But Tasmania is going to create power for industries that it does not have because hydro industrialisation has demonstrably failed. Tasmania has not attracted a new industry of any power consuming consequences for 10 years. Comalco Aluminium (Bell Bay) Pty Ltd, Electrolytic Zinc of Australasia Ltd, Australian Paper Manufacturers Ltd and Tasmanian Electro Metallurgical Co. Pty Ltd have joined all those companies around Australia which are laying off labour. The Department of National Development and Energy has said that it will not need any new power in Tasmania until 2000 AD. Between August 1981 and August 1982 there was a 5.5 per cent fall in power consumption in Tasmania. The Senate Select Committee report said that the HEC had not convinced that Committee that it needed to start a major project like that now of such enormous cost and for which there is no demonstrable need for the power. The Committee recommended a moratorium of at least three years. The Committee knew that Tasmania could then go to either a scheme on the King River or the Arthur River to produce a combined 140 megawatts of power or, alternatively, a thermal power station.
Mr Hodgman-You couldn't find it with a compass.
Mr WEST-The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment laughs and giggles now at his half witted colleague and at the environmental and the economic case against the dam. My understanding was that he was supposed to support the case for a moratorium on this dam construction but he was defeated. He did not have the clout in the Cabinet. So, it is no good his laughing now. It is no good laughing at the Opposition which is willing to accept its international responsibilities, a position which I have always supported. I want to conclude by setting the record straight so that we all know where we are. Should I say once again that the environmental lobby and the Tasmanian Wilderness Society allowed the Society to be conned by this Government in the electorate of Flinders. There are only two parties in Australia, the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats, which are opposed to this

South West Tasmania

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3089

atrocious proposal. Yet the Society allowed itself to be conned by the Liberal candidate in the hope that this Government might yet still act. But this Government has not acted. It is exposed for all time. The platform of the Australian Labor Party as decided in Canberra in July is to:
(a) Oppose the construction of a hydroelectric power scheme on the Gordon or Franklin Rivers;
(b) Provide assistance to the Tasmanian government to enable it to diversify the means of electricity production; and
(c) Assist the Tasmanian government to expand Tasmania's tourist industry in order to provide additional employment opportunities.

What we then have to say to ourselves is that if that is the policy--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Motion (by Mr Groom) proposed:
That the debate be now adjourned.

Mr West-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. You must excuse me.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair cannot excuse the honourable member to allow him to
breach the Standing Orders. If there is a point of order. I will hear the honourable member.

Mr West-This is an important matter. I did not realise that the clock was on. As I was speaking in reply to the Minister I was not aware that there was a limit to the time. I had in which to speak.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order. The Chair appreciates the honourable member's predicament but it is a predicament of his own making.

Mr West-Many of my colleagues wish to speak on this important matter. The people of Australia ought to know that this Government is not concerned about the environment.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The
honourable member will resume his seat. There is no point of order.

Mr Cohen-I move that so much of the Stand-
ing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is a question presently before the House.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

47

Majority

14

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baurne. M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman, A. G.
Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton,J.J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B.
Dean. A. G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.
Fife. W.e.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom, R. J. Hall, Steele
Harris. G. McD. Hicks,N.J.
Hodges, J. e.
Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull, D. F. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B.
Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R.
MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R.
Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury. M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, e. W.
Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D.
Wilson, I. B. e.

NOES
Armitage. J. L Beazley, K. C. Blewett. N. Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free. R. V. Fry,K.L Hawke, R. J. L
Holding, A. e.
Howe, B. L.
Humphreys. B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J.
Innes, U. E. Jacobi. R.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R.J. Kent, L Kerin, J. C. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les
Maher, M.J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes,G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis,LG. West,S.J. Willis,R.
Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Dobie,J.D.M. Nixon, P. J.

Dawkins, J. S. Keating, P. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1982-83. Appropriation Bill (No.2) 1982-83. Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill 1982-83, Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Bill 1982. Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-- Vendors) Bill 1982. Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promoters) Bill 1982. Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982, Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.6) 1982.

3090 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Government Budget Strategy

States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill 1982. Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Bill 1982. Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Bill 1982. Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Bill 1982. Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Bill 1982. Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Bill 1982. Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Bill 1982. Bounty (Berry Fruits) Bill 1982.
ASSENT TO BILLS
Assent to the following Bills reported.
Customs Tariff Bill 1982. Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill 1982. Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1982. Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1982-83. Appropriation Bill (No.2) 1982-83. Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill 1982-83.
GOVERNMENT'S BUDGET STRATEGY
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The collapse of the Government's Budget strategy.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (4,45)-Seven weeks ago, on 20 October, the Opposition brought before this House a matter of public importance alleging that the Government had falsified the Budget by understating certain expenditure and overstating taxation receipts, and so coming up with an artificially low deficit which the Government wanted for the purposes of a possible early election. When we put that to the Treasurer (Mr Howard), he vehemently denied those charges, He said that the figures had been presented in good faith, that they were the best estimates available and that the increased deficit, which he had admitted to at that time, was only small beer compared with the total level of government outlays; and so really what was all this carryon about.
What do we see now, just seven weeks from that time? We see that the Treasurer has now admitted that the deficit is likely to be about $4,000m which is some $2,300m more than the original Budget estimate of about $1.7 billion, which figure, of course, is an extraordinary increase over the original Budget deficit estimate. In

Question Time today the Treasurer said that his actual estimate was around $3,750m. But he seemed to suggest that there was likely to be a further extension of that estimate at least to the area of $4,000m. I think I can use that figure, particularly as that is the figure he also gave to the Premiers. What we have had, therefore, is an increase in the Budget deficit of 140 per cent in the course of the few months that have passed since the deficit was mentioned in this House. This is a quite stupendous blowout which will take the deficit to the highest level in money terms than it has ever been in our history. It may even go higher than the $4,000m.
At the same time as the Budget's financial parameters are going haywire the economy is clearly going downhill at an alarming rate. The economic situation now is far worse than was estimated by the Government in its Budget forecast. So on both fronts-on the financial front in regard to the Budget's financial estimates and on the economic front-the Budget is literally falling apart. The Budget strategy that was proclaimed in August is now totally irrelevant. Who could have any faith in a Budget which has a deficit blowing out at a rate of $135m a week, which is the rate at which this deficit is now blowing out. That is a quite extraordinary rate of blowout. This deficit is now blowing out at a rate of something like $19m a day. That figure of $4,000m is not the bottom line. The Treasurer, when asked by me in Question Time today to give a guarantee that it would not be any higher than that, did not do so. Clearly, it is quite possible that when Parliament resumes in the new year the Treasurer will say that the figure is now something well in excess of $4,000m. Certainly it will be if the economy continues to slide at its present rate.
Why is this enormous blowout occurring? In our view there are two basic reasons. It has resulted partly from the Government's deception in relation to the Budget--its deliberate falsification of the Budget which it dollied up for electoral purposes. I will quickly allude to several elements of that falsification. Firstly, there were the unemployment benefit payments. The Government estimated its level of unemployment benefit payments in the Budget on a basis of an average 395,000 registered unemployed. In fact, the actual numbers on the unemployment benefit at the time of the Budget were already 10,000 above the figure for the month of July, the first month of that financial year. So it is quite clear that the unemployment benefit figure was patently false. Of course it is now admitted to be so by the fact that the Treasurer is admitting an increase of some $600m or 38 per cent on the Budget

Government Budget Strategy

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3091

estimate-an extraordinary increase in that amount. He now says that the number of unemployment benefit recipients is estimated to be something like 525,000-130,000 more than he estimated in the Budget only a little over three months ago. Interestingly, that figure is also 193,000 more than the figure for the last financial year. So it is quite clear that this figure was patently and totally false and must have been known by the Government to be false when it brought down this Budget.
Similarly, in respect of employment, the Government's estimate of no decline in the total number of wage and salary earners was nonsense. In the last financial year when we had a 2.3 per cent growth of non-farm product we had no growth in employment. This year, with a Budget forecast of no growth in gross non-farm product-that is, no growth in the production of non-farm goods and services-the Government has estimated that there will be the same employment position as last year; that is, just no growth. Clearly, if we have approximately 2t per cent growth in one year of goods and services associated with no growth in employment and then we have a year of no growth in output we will have a much worse employment situation. The Government knew that. But it still put forward its Budget forecast in regard to tax receipts on the basis of no change in the employment figure. Of course it was nonsense! It has now admitted that it will be down by at least one per cent. I confidently forecast that it will fall by considerably more than one per cent.
The Government estimated that $255m would be gained from recoupment tax. Knowing that it had great trouble and would face pressure from opponents of the legislation within its own ranks both inside and outside this Parliament it believed that it may well have to make concessions. It eventually made those concessions. As a result, instead of getting $255m it will get $1 OOm, which is $155m less than it said it would get in the course of this financial year mainly because of its backdowns in respect of the legislation.
Then there was the drought. Two weeks after the Budget was brought down in this House the Government announced a package in respect of the drought which would add $356m to Budget outlays. It cannot possibly argue that, at the time of the Budget, it did not know that there was a drought going on in this country and that it had been going on in a very severe form for months if not years. It was quite clear that the Government must have had in mind a drought package. It kept it out of the Budget figures by delaying the announcement of that drought relief until two weeks

after the Budget. That means that the outlays will be some $350m above the estimated level in the Budget for that reason alone. Indeed, there have been suggestions recently that that amount of $350m will be considerably higher. But in the figures given to us today by the Treasurer we see that he is sticking to his $356m figure. Even at that level it is a significant addition to outlays which should have been in the Budget figures and it should not just be put there as part of that whole process of falsification of that deficit.
This spectacular blowout of the deficit which is occurring is partly a reflection of the falsity of the original Budget estimates. Indeed, there are many other areas to which I could point but because of time restrictions and other reasons I will not go into them. However, this blowout of the deficit is also partly a reflection of the collapse of the Australian economy and the consequent increase in expenditure on unemployment benefit and the loss of tax revenue which that collapse entails. The estimates given by the Treasurer at Question Time today are a clear indication of this. Pay-asyou-earn tax is down $323m on the Budget estimates because of the reduced employment and some reduction in wage growth. Indirect tax is down $355m because of the recessed economy. People spend less on goods and services and so pay less in the way of indirect taxes. Unemployment benefits are up not just because of the original falsifications but also because of the much worse state of the Australian economy and the much greater levels of unemployment.
All this reflects falling employment, falling sales, falling production and growing unemployment which marks this economy at present. In every key respect the Budget estimates about the state of the Australian economy in 1982-83 are now exposed as utterly unrealistic. In every case the position is worse than the Budget estimates would have had us believe.
I will just quickly run through some of those key economic forecasts in the Budget. Let us see how out of touch they are with the current state of the economy as we know it. The Budget estimate was for a further decline in home building. In fact in the September quarter we saw that the growth of home building approvals fell spectacularly--it was 34 per cent less in the 12 months to September 1982 than in the 12 months to September 1981. That represents some further decline. It was estimated that the growth in real private consumption expenditure would slow to around 1t per cent in 1982-83. We now have declining retail sales in real terms. After one adjusts for inflation retail sales declined in the September quarter. The latest figures for motor vehicle registrations also

3092 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Government Budget Strategy

show a decline in real terms in the September quarter. So the key areas of personal consumption are falling, not just declining, in their rate of growth.
It was forecast that real private business fixed investment would show some decline. In fact, we find in the September quarter it was 5 per cent lower than it was a year before. The Treasury, in its 'Round-up of Economic Statistics', stated:
In view of the continuing deterioration in the tone of the economy since the July / August survey period it now appears that the fall in real business fixed capital expenditure will be greater than suggested at Budget time.
The fall in the expenditure sure is greater. We were told that the consumer price index would rise by 10.75 per cent. The latest figure is 12.3 per cent in the 12 months to September. That figure is double the level of our trading partners, which is around 6.6 per cent. It was said that there would be some decline in rural farm production. In fact, we find that the net value of rural production during this year, as estimated by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, will be about half that of last year and the lowest level since the mid-1950s. Nothing explicit was mentioned in the Budget on factory production but there was mention of nonfarm product showing no fall. In fact, we find that in the year to September factory production has fallen by 10 per cent to below the level in 1976-77. The recent massive lay-offs in manufacturing show that output is falling even further.
We were told that there is unlikely to be any growth in employment. As I have already mentioned, there has already been a decline in employment. The Government has now, through the Treasurer, agreed it will be at least a one per cent decline. It was said that there will be a marked increase in recorded unemployment. There certainly has been a marked increase in recorded unemployment. The figure which we now have for the number of unemployed benefit recipients is 193,000 more than the figure we had last year, which is a spectacularly enormous increase.
Seasonally adjusted employment figures have grown by 113,500 during the four months from July to October. Quite clearly, there has been an enormous increase in unemployment. We are looking at a figure of about 700,000 unemployed people in the months of January and February. If the increase in unemployment is only the same in actual numbers between October and February this year as it was last year, there will be 653,000 unemployed people in February. Of course, it is going to be more than that with all the lay-offs. So we are looking at least at something of the order of 700,000 unemployed people, which will represent over 10 per cent unemployment by

February. That is the unemployment situation which was described in the Budget as a 'marked increase' in unemployment. It is an horrendous increase in unemployment. Quite clearly, it is far worse than the Budget would have had us believe.
The Budget estimate forecasts were for nonfarm products to remain broadly unchanged in 1982-83 and with some decline in overall gross domestic products. The current situation is that in the September quarter gross non-farm product has already fallen by 0.3 per cent and GPD by 0.6 per cent. Given what has happened in the rest of the economy since that time, the fall has become greater since. So there will be a much worse situation in respect of national accounts than was indicated in the Budget. On the other hand, the balance of payments situation has not deteriorated. We have been affected by the international recession but, in fact, in the September quarter a major addition to growth came from exports. So the Government's suggestion that we have been suddenly damaged by the international recession does not fit with what was happening to the Australian economy because, in the September quarter, the exports kept things going.
The fact is, therefore, that the Budget strategy has completely and utterly collapsed. Its forecasts in regard to financial parameters and the state of the economy are totally at odds with what is happening in the economy. The Budget should, therefore, be scrapped and a new Budget brought before this Parliament which addresses the real state of the nation and which seeks to treat the real cause of our economic problems at present, which is the collapse of demand resulting partly from the drought and poor export markets but, much more importantly, from contractionary budgetary and monetary policies. The Government's tearing off with a wages freeze as the answer to our problems ignores the basic fact that our economic problems are primarily caused by this collapse of demand. It is budgetary and monetary policy which addresses that question. The budgetary and monetary strategy has to be changed to ensure there is an increase in demand in order that we can get some economic growth back in this country. The Treasurer should now bring forward a new Budget which has those elements in it to give the economy a chance to recover and not continue in a vast depression, which is its current state.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (5.0)-1 am indebted to the honourable member

Government Budget Strategy

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3093

for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) for his concluding remarks. He gave the House some idea of the alternative Budget strategy which he believes should be adopted. In those concluding remarks, he said that domestic demand in Australia was collapsing because of a contractionary Budget strategy. I can only conclude from that statement that the honourable member for Gellibrand would be arguing for a substantially higher Budget deficit than the one towards which we are now heading. He argues that existing strategy is far too contractionary and that we have to do something about that strategy in order to pump up demand in the Australian economy.
The honourable gentleman's speech was remarkable for one other feature. He made only one reference to the international influences on the Australian economy. If I may say so with respect, that was a slightly incorrect reference. It is true that our export performance in the September quarter has been better than we thought, but overwhelmingly the reason why our balance of payments was stronger in the September quarter has been the heavy purchasing of securities in Australia by overseas investment institutions, particularly from Japan; in fact, it has been the flow of capital into those investments in Australia more than a more buoyant export performance that has achieved that result. I would have hoped that the honourable member's definition or analysis would be more correct than I believe in fact it was. Apart from that reference he made no other reference to the international circumstances which are now affecting the Australian economy. I will come to that matter in just a moment.
It is necessary-if we are to understand our present dilemmas and find a way out of themthat we first understand why we are in the situation which is now facing the Australian economy. Before I do that, let me go back to the introductory remarks of the honourable member for Gellibrand and simply say, as I have said to him on earlier occasions, that I reject utterly, completely and without any qualification his claim that there was any deliberate falsification of figures by the Government in this Budget.
Mr Young-There had to be.
Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for Port Adelaide and any other honourable member can interject until he or she is blue in the face. But that will not alter the completely unambiguous and unequivocal nature of the dellial that I give on behalf of the Government on that matter. The fact remains that the Australian economy has worsened very markedly since the Budget was brought down. It is true that the estimates of

growth and activity on which the Budget was put together have turned out to be much more conservative in terms of the extent to which they estimated the worsening of the Australian economy.
It is also worth reflecting that at the time when the Budget was brought down some economic commentators in Australia said that the Treasury forecasts contained in the Budget were, in fact far too pessimistic. But what has happened is that economic activity has slowed down to a much greater extent than was then calculated. The drought has worsened. The international recession has continued and has not abated as some thought it might earlier on this year. Wage increases have continued to eat into our profitability. How remarkable it is that the alternative Treasurer in this country can make a speech for a quarter of an hour about our economic circumstances at present, when we are facing the highest unemployment in this country for forty years, and say absolutely nothing about the disastrous slump in the profitability of Australian companies which has happened over the last few months, and say absolutely nothing about the underlying reality that, over the last 18 months, profitability of Australian industry has been shot to pieces. As a consequence, the capacity of Australian industry to employ people has been crippled by the wage increases that have gone on over that period.
It is no accident that for almost 20 years we had a profit share of the national cake in this country of about 17 per cent or 18 per cent a year. While that remained, the unemployment level in this country was so low that it was the envy of the industrialised world. It is no accident that when the profit share-that is, the wherewithal for people to be employed-started to dissipate the unemployment level in this country begin to rise.
It is no accident that there was a small improvement in the unemployment situation in 1980 when there was some recovery in the profitability of Australian business to about 15 per cent for a short period. But, affected as it was by the onset of wage demands beyond the capacity of the economy to afford, that profit share has now fallen back to the lowest level it has been at since 1974. The fall in that profit share has produced, of course, the high unemployment which is our common concern at present.
The honourable member for Gellibrand made a speech about economic policy and, remarkably, said nothing about those circumstances. It is truly remarkable that the honourable member for Gellibrand can make a speech and not even mention them. Even his Labor colleagues at a State

3094 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Government Budget Strategy

level are not quite as myopic as that. Even they are prepared to acknowledge-~perhaps not to the extent that we and other people around the country have argued--that there is a link between profitability and employment, there is a link between the capacity of firms to make a living and therefore employ people. It is truly remarkable that the honourable member for Gellibrand can make a speech of the kind that he has made today and say absolutely nothing about those realities.
Let me return to the question of the Budget deficit. It does not please me in the slightest that the Budget deficit is now, according to the latest estimate, about $3,700m to $3,800m. I used the expression yesterday in this chamber at the Premiers Conference 'approaching $4,000m'. I have already indicated to the House the principal elements on the expenditure and revenue sides
which have made up the additions. There is, of course, the increase in unemployment benefit. I have given to the House before and I shall repeat the reasons for that significantly higher estimate. The calculations that were made at the time of the Budget and presented to the Government at the time of the Budget were based upon assumptions as to the ratio of unemployment benefit recipients to the total number of unemployed, which had reflected the experience of a period of some 18 months or two years.
What has happened since then and what has rendered those estimates deficient since the time of the Budget has been that there have been two eventualities. Firstly, there has been a sharper rise in the total number of unemployed people over and above what was estimated at the time of the Budget. Secondly, within that rise there has been an even sharper rise in the ratio of the number of people drawing benefits to the total number of people out of work. That has reflected the higher incidence of main breadwinners in families being thrown out of work. The experiences at centres such as Newcastle and Wollongong in New South Wales and Geelong and Whyalla in other parts of Australia provide some very unhappy examples. That is the explanation as to why the unemployment benefit figure has had to be revised. It is not some kind of three-card trick by the Government. To suggest that is not only to impugn the political members of the Government, which is part and parcel of the parliamentary process, whether it has foundation or not, but also to implicate apolitical Public Service advisers as though they were part of some giant overall conspiracy to confuse the country. That accounts for some $603m.
We also have drought assistance of $356m, natural disaster relief of $52m and, because of the projected increase in the deficit, the provision of a

further $93m to service the additional borrowings that will be necessary to finance that higher deficit. There has also been a revision downwards in the estimated collections of revenue. Because of a higher level of unemployment and because of slower growth there has been a revision downwards in the projected collections of pay-as-youearn tax of some $323m. We also expect to collect, largely but not entirely because of the drought-there has been a heavy fall in many professional and non-salary incomes earned by people other than farmers-about $123m less in the provisional tax area.
I have already mentioned the revision downwards in the recoupment tax area. That is a very difficult figure to estimate with any precision. The revised estimate may well turn out to be on the conservative side. I do not know and the commissioner of Taxation has, quite properly, warned me that it is a very difficult figure to estimate. There will be, because of slower economic activity and reduced consumer spending. a shortfall in sales tax collections because fewer things are being bought. Some $84m has been allowed for that. Excise duty is down $170m, which is accounted for in part at least by a fall in the purchases of traditional excise items in the alcohol
and tobacco areas. Customs duty collections will be down by $100m. On the other side, there will be some increases in the collection of the crude oil
levy.
I think it also ought to be said that the Government is extremely unhappy about and derives no pleasure at all from the fact that we will have a higher deficit this year. The honourable member for Gellibrand said that it is the biggest deficit in history. Of course it is the higher deficit in money terms but we all know that that is a fairly inadequate and phoney basis of comparison. The real size and dimension of a deficit is its proportion of gross domestic product. Of course, in money terms a deficit now will be immensely bigger than what it was 10 years ago. It is 2.5 percent of GDP. In 1975-76 the deficit was 4.9 per cent of GDP. It approaches 5 per cent in the United States, 5+ per cent in Japan and 6t per cent in Canada.
The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), who has been in the news lately, said just after the Budget was brought down that it was inadequate and that he wanted one that was the average for the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. If the honourable member for Wills had his way we would have a deficit of $6,000m. Let not the honourable member for Gellibrand come into this House and say that what we are doing is inadequate. His colleague the honourable member for Wills wants

Government Budget Strategy

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3095

the deficit to be $6,000m. I would be interested to know whether the honourable member for Gellibrand reckons that that would be a responsible figure, or whether it would be one that we ought to walk away from.
Whilst I draw no comfort at all from those sorts of comparisonsI do not want to be in that league-these factors ought to be born in mind. It also ought to be remembered that it has been the common experience of every industrialised country that in a time of recession one's revenues fall and one's outlays increase simply because there is less activity, less tax is collected and there are larger social security payments that have to be met on the expenditure side of the Budget. What is happening to the Australian economy at present is duplicating what is happening in other areas of the world economy. I do not pretend that the Australian economy is not going through ~ery difficult circumstances at the moment. That is self evident. I believe that, in concert with the State governments, we made a significant stride forward yesterday. It is regrettable that the only group at a political level in Australia that appears to want nothing at ali to do with what happened yesterday is the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party. Even its colleagues at the State level who are in government know darned well that what was done yesterday will make a valuable contribution to improving the situation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (5.15)-This debate is about the enormous blowout that has occurred to the deficit-a deficit which the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is now speaking of as likely to be in the order of $4 billion by the end of this financial year. I do not think that the argument of the Opposition was so much that it is all that frightening to have a deficit which is 2t per cent of gross domestic product-I certainly did not hear the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) suggest that. I think the criticism that the Opposition has of the Government in respect of the deficit is that it is a deficit that was not forecast in the Budget Papers. Certainly it is a deficit arrived at almost by accident. It is a deficit which may perhaps have been arrived at as a part of a kind of political accident because the Budget this year, insofar as it was devised-it would appear to be mostly patched together-was devised in a heavily political context, as every Budget of any Fraser Government has been.
This year the political context was that of the election. The Government put together a Budget which was going to produce a number of goodies

to be delivered in the period before Christmas and within which time an election could be held. Frankly, the Government, the Treasurer and presumably senior levels of the Treasury were after a while perhaps not too concerned about much else. That is what they were dealing with. I think John Stone indicated some views he had about that. The Budget got under way but very quickly fell apart. What the Treasurer is trying to suggest to us is that it is a matter of no moment for a Budget, within three or four months, literally to fall apart. The economy, which was in a very serious situation earlier this year, since the Budget has been brought down is moving to a state of near collapse. The Treasurer would argue that it is a matter of no moment that the Budget that was devised had nothing to do with the central reality of Australian society today, which is that we are in a depression, with mass unemployment.
It would seem to me that it would need an extraordinarily successful Treasurer to persuade the Parliament or the country that he knew what he was about when he devised the Budget in August this year-a year in which we are likely to see unemployment reach at least 700,000 people. There we are talking about official figures, not about the hidden unemployed on top of that. How can he say that he anticipated nothing of the dramatic nature of these consequences? That would be quite extraordinary. I think it is not extraordinary when we look at conservative governments and conservative treasurers. In this country Treasury, governments, and Treasurers have never been concerned about economic planning. They have never been seriously concerned about seeking to manage the economy, in perhaps the way that many governments within the European context might have been. They have always been much more susceptible to political interest. What this Budget was about was political interest, namely, the neck of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). Now the country is having to live with the consequences.
I think it is well to reinforce just how bad the situation is. I would have thought governments were about not simply addressing the statistics but addressing problems facing people within this country. What the statistics of the last 12 months and in prospect indicate is massive suffering for Australian people. The honourable member for Gellibrand referred to what had happened in relation to the housing industry, where home building approvals fell 34 per cent between September 1981 and September 1982 by a third. A fall of that scale and magnitude means that across Australia thousands of people who require housing are not getting it. If we put that fact alongside the fact

3096 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Government Budget Strategy

that no government has ever been meaner than the Fraser Government in relation to public housing we have what adds up to a housing crisis within this country. That impacts upon thousands and thousands of families right across the country.
If one looks at real private consumption expenditure growth in this country it is estimated that that could slow to around I t per cent in 1982-83. That is what the Budget suggested. The value of retail sales, seasonally adjusted for the September quarter, was only 0.8 per cent higher than for the June quarter. Since the consumer price index rose 3.5 per cent in the September quarter the real value of retail sales fell substantially. Again that is just a figure. What it amounts to is a dramatic decline in demand. Because goods and services are not selling through those retail outlets it means that the factories which produce these goods are in a situation of dramatic decline. The Treasurer may not have much feeling for this. However, I am sure honourable members have visited factories and seen people being put off and heard people saying that their factories are being used by the big retailers as warehouses and that, having been through periods of uncertainty, they are now faced with a situation of not knowing whether they will ever work again in those factories. That is not statistics. That is a result of terrible planning. It indicates the Government is not concerned about the level of demand.
The Opposition has been saying that it is crucial to keep up demand. When the Opposition says that it is not coming up with some kind of new idea because fundamental to economic policy throughout the postwar period has been the view that if we are concerned about employment levels of aggregate demand have to be maintained. If the Budget this year had been designed to do thatthat was why we had a $4 billion deficit in prospect-perhaps one might be a bit sympathetic. There was nothing in the Budget strategy to suggest that what the Government was on about was boosting demand so that people would be placed back into employment. The crisis that this country faces is a crisis for people.
The Treasurer suggests that the Opposition is not interested in profits but is interested only in employment, something quite distinct from profit. If we look at what is happening to investment in this country we can recognise quite clearly that business is not investing and that this is resulting in the lack of new jobs. There has been a dramatic deterioration in investment. I do not think anyone would suggest that there is no relationship at all between profits and investment. Nor can we simply sustain the argument that we should somehow arrange a dramatic wage cut throughout the

Australian economy. Indeed, that is what the Government is about. It is not about a pause or a freeze in wages but it is about a real wage cut. I very much doubt that as a result of that real wage cut there will be increased profits because there will also be a dramatic further decline in demand. That is what all the businesses tell me they are concerned about-not the wages paid. They are concerned about the lack of demand in the market place. Even assuming that paradoxically, as a result of reducing demand, somehow there will be some increase in profits, who is to say that that profit will be invested in a way that will get people back to work? That is nothing more than the rhetoric of the Government.
The Government is not in this exercise of so called wage freeze or wage cut, as I would call it. It has no strategy designed to create employment. The Government simply is hoping that cutting back people's wages and theoretically increasing profits will somehow increase employment. If the Government really had been seriously concerned about employment it would have met the Premiers' request for increased loan funds to boost capital works and to develop a capital works program that was genuinely designed to lead to a reconstruction of the Australian economy. However, that would involve a plan, not an ad hoc gimmick devised in a few days for the purpose of seeking to win a by-election. That is a gimmick which will explode very quickly and about which I would imagine in the next few months we will hear very little more.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (5.25)-1 enter this debate to show that the Australian Labor Party has demonstrated once again its ignorance of the economic situation and its inability to control or handle it. We can listen all day to the problems but it is the answers to those problems that we are seeking from this House and this Government. The Flinders by-election last weekend was a fair reflection of the fact that the people of Australia realise that the Labor Party has no economic policy. One of the decisions it has made since then is to increase the staff of its spokesman on Treasury matters to help him explain his policies. I think that in itself is an indictment.
It is very important for us to realise that a Budget strategy is based on the best advice at the time of its presentation, with reasonable forecasts. If the Opposition were put in the same situation as the Government it would have to look at the reasons for the Budget blowout. I suggest to the

Government Budget Strategy

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3097

Opposition and to the House that no aspect of that blowout in the Budget was at the discretion of this Government or of the Treasurer (Mr Howard). All the matters which have contributed to it--the drought, unemployment, international competition and the international economic situation-have worsened since the Budget. I would like to pick up a few comments from the Opposition. By its own admission its Budget strategy at the time of the presentation of the Government's Budget involved a deficit of some $4 billion. Other estimates have put its deficit at $5 billion or $6 billion based on the situation at that time. I ask the Opposition what its strategy would be. The answer can be seen from the response to the Budget by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) when he implied that the Labor Party would spend its way out of the problem; in other words, it would print more money and have no concern for the inflationary impact of that.
Another thing that worries me is that the Opposition now says that it is not all that frightened by a large Budget deficit. This is where I feel it is very important to draw a distinction between Labor politics and our politics. It is very important that the deficit should be strictly controlled because if it expands beyond reasonable limits all we are doing is spending in our generation what future generations will have to pay back. That is a very critical point. I would hate to see any members opposite involved in company management and trying to run a business at a profit because they would be trying to spend their way out and would not be looking for reasonable options. I mentioned the drought. We should not forget the real and deep implications of that for the people of Australia. It is with some reluctance that I draw your attention, Mr Deputy Speaker, to the fact that all members of the Opposition, except one, have retired from the chamber without staying to listen to the real facts and figures.
Mr Howard-Isn't it their matter of public importance?
Mr BRAITHWAITE-It is their matter of public importance. With the exception of one member, they are not here to participate. The drought has had a large impact on the blowing out of the Budget. The figures presented suggest that over $300m has been spent in drought relief alone, with $50m being spent on natural disaster relief associated with it. The flow-on effect is a lower consumer demand from that sector for motor vehicles and housing, which show us how great and difficult the situation is.
I also want to talk about international competitiveness. Without doubt the people of Australia

have realised at long last that we have priced ourselves out of international competition. I am very closely associated with many great industries in Queensland, including the mining, sugar, beef and dairying industries. They are all facing serious international competition in a market in which they cannot adjust their prices.
Mr Adermann-And tobacco.
Mr BRAITHWAITE-And the tobacco industry. It must be realised that we can put our economy on a proper footing only by being competitive in an international market in which we must trade to survive. No government has done more in regard to international competition than this one. At the recent General Agreement on Tariff and Trade conference the Commonwealth of Australia pressed the point that we cannot trade in the open market if heavily subsidised European Economic Community products are to compete with us. This affects our main exports, particularly our grain and sugar and many of our other primary products. An inability to trade against fair competition will have of course an effect on the blowing out of the Budget figures.
Another aspect of the change in Budget philosophy is the unemployment situation. I have said for many years that there is only one problem with Australians: We are living at a standard that the country cannot afford. At long last, with the impact and the influence of the drought, this is being realised and appreciated. The figures for the last quarter are very revealing. They point out the result of the drought by showing that gross farm product in the quarter to September fell by 5.1 per cent. I suggest that the worst of the impact of the drought was not shown in those figures; that is yet to come. Over 12 months the figure declined by one per cent. Another revealing factor in the quarter's figures was that gross non-farm product increased by 0.1 per cent. That is really no growth at all. The reason for that 0.1 per cent growth was that wages, salaries and allowances, which go to make up that figure, increased by 16.9 per cent while company profits-the surplus cash flow from companies-declined by 13.6 per cent.
In Australia we have an economic pie. Over the last 12 months that pie has undoubtedly shrunk, and the situation cannot be tolerated in which one sector of the community feels it can get in real terms the same sized slice of that pie as previously without consideration for the rest of the community. That situation has meant that business cannot cope with declining profits and cannot employ. Basically, labour is pricing itself out of the market. That is why I applaud the positive attempt being made to bring about a wages pause.

3098 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Petitions

But a wages pause in itself is not an answer to all the problems that I see at the moment. It is significant that that wages pause in one form or another has been accepted by all State governments and, I understand, by the employer associations. It remains for the unions to declare their situation through the Australian Council of Trade Unions in further talks this week. But a pause has been accepted, whether it be for six months or 12 months. That pause will enable the people of Australia to come to grips with what we are trying to say. If we need an economic philosophy at this moment, it is that each Australian should take a little less and give a little more. If that philosophy were expounded throughout Australia there would be some hope for us to correct our internal situation in spite of world economic conditions and world competition.
The pause is just a start for something I would like to have looked at further and developed. If after the pause the base on which we pay wages and salaries is not corrected we will not have achieved anything. Recently I had the opportunity to go to America to see the industrial situation there. As an honourable member said earlier today, the Americans are confounded by the situation in Australia whereby people are paid more to go on holiday than to be kept in employment. In addition to that we grant our workers four weeks' paid leave in comparison with the maximum of two weeks which is granted in America. In Australia a 17t per cent holiday loading is payable and penalty rates apply after an eight-hour working day. That is one of the other problems. Australian workers do not need first to work 40 hours whereas overseas the overtime penalty rate applies only after a person has worked his 40 hours. Certainly if industry responds to the challenge that has been set to it now, employment numbers will come up as a result of the savings by the Commonwealth and the States in their Public Service wage bills. There will also be the opportunity for business, if we allow it to be more profitable, to employ in a like fashion.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Vietnam Veterans
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

(I) that US. Australian and allied forces used huge amounts of toxic chemicals for military purposes. such as Agents Orange. Blue and White. in Vietnam during the war there;
(2) many of these chemicals were, and are. known to be highly dangerous to human health;
(3) Australia's Vietnam Veterans and their families are suffering many severe problems which may be due to their exposure to these chemicals: and
(4) the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia has been seeking a Royal Commission for well over two years to ensure an independent investigation of these matters.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Parliament of Australia will:
(a) express its support for the Royal Commission; and
(b) urge the Federal Government to establish the Royal Commission immediately.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Cass, Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Dr Everingham, Mr Free, Mr Holding, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Maher, Mr Mildren, Mr Morrison, Mr Mountford and Mr Wallis.
Petitions received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of citizens of the Commonwealth submits:
That off-shore oil exploration within the Great Barrier Reef Region constitutes a serious threat to the richest and most varied living system on earth.
Your petitioners request that your Honourable House will:
I. Prohibit oil exploration within the Great Barrier Reef Region,
2. Declare the entire Great Barrier Reef Region a marine park under the Federal Government's Great Barrier Marine Park Act 1975,
3. Provide the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority with the staff and resources for effective management of the Region.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Baume, Mr Fife, Mr Howard, Mr MacKellar and Mr Ian Robinson.
Petitions received.
Proposed Student Loans Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the introduction of a comprehensive student loans scheme will:
I. Restrict Access to EducationPeople from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from studying by the prospect of incurring large debts. These people. if they enrol, will be forced to amass loan debts. Richer students do not face this handicap.
2. Undermine the Tertiary Education Assistance SchemeTEAS should cover the basic living costs of students. Currently the scheme only assists 38 per cent of full-time students and the maximum level of TEAS is a mere $49.67. Government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced.

Petitions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3099

3. Disadvantage Women---Women students would be disadvantaged by a loans scheme as they have a lesser ability to repay loan debts, because on average women earn less and have a higher unemployment rate.
4. Disadvantage Mature-Age Students-Usually mature age students forgo income to study and already have large financial commitments. They could not return to study if it meant incurring substantial debts.
5. Distort Educational ChoicesMounting loan debts would force students into studying shorter courses or not continuing with post-graduate study.
6. Result in Massive Attrition Rates-Students will attempt to undertake extensive part-time work or overload courses to minimise their loans, increased failure rates will result forcing students to 'drop-out' rather than continuing study and increase their debts.
7. Cause Administrative and Financial DifficultiesOverseas experience shows high default rates will occur on student loans. Government money will be channelled away from TEAS to paying off banks. The Government will also bear the administrative burden of pursuing defaulters.
Therefore, the proposed student loans scheme will have disastrous effects on tertiary education, which we believe benefits the whole community, not just the individual student.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The House of Representatives will reject the introduction of a student loans scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever humbly pray.
by Mr Baume, Mr Dawkins, Mr Keating and Mr Spender.
Petitions received.
Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain undersigned citizens respectfully showeth:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal services as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian postal service truly meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any proposal that Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward be diminished will destroy the concept of the national postal service.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the powers of the postal commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell and Mr Tuckey.
Petitions received.
Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
I. that Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. that the Australian postal service meets the needs of all Australians.

3. that any reduction in Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward will destroy the concept of the national postal service and result in increased rates for mail carried outside the capital cities; a reduction in mail delivery and collection frequencies in non-profitable areas; the closure of post offices.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Telecommmunications Services
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows that implementation of the recommendations of the Davidson committee report into telecommunications services in Australia will leave Telecom with responsibilities for unprofitable services only, that this, together with the proposal to time charge local telephone calls and increase telephone rentals. will mean a drastic increase in charges for the ordinary telephone consumer, particularly:
(a) the frail aged and the disabled for whom the phone is often the only means of communication
(b) the lonely who utilise emergency relief organisations such as Lifeline and talk-back radio programs; and
(c) people in rural areas and outer suburbs.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government rejects the report.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Telecommunications Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully shows that implementation of the recommendations of the Davidson Committee Report into telecommunications services in Australia will leave Telecom with responsibilities for unprofitable services only and that this, together with the proposal to time charge local telephone calls and increase telephone rentals, will mean a drastic increase in charges for the ordinary telephone consumer, particularly:
(a) the frail aged and the disabled for whom the phone is often the only means of communication;
(b) the lonely who utilise emergency relief organisations such as Lifeline and talk-back radio programs; and
(c) people in rural areas and outer suburbs.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject the report.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Telecommunications Services
To the Rt. Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The

3100 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Petitions

humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the implementation of the recommendations of the Davidson Committee Report into Telecommunications Services in Australia, regarding an increase in telephone rental and in particular the proposal to time charge local telephone calls will greatly disadvantage and victimise the public in general and especially those dependent on outside contact by phone, viz.; the often house bound frail aged and disabled; the lonely seeking help; the very many living on their own; people in rural areas.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray that the Federal Government rejects the report.
by Mr Jull.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorates of Cook, Bowman and Short land respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:--
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service though centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie, Mr Jull and Mr Morris.
Petitions received,
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Macarthur respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the
serVIce,

4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service though centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery statT,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone suhscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrBaume.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Kalgoorlie respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:--
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and '-'1 embers of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Kingston respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,

Petitions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3101

3.. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the serVice,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Chapman.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Mallee respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:-
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3.. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the serVice,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Hughes respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:-

I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3.. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the serVice,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Warringah respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKellar.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Calare respectfully showeth:

3102 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Petitions

That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:--
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of O'Connor respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph services at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whiist downgrading the service.
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Tuckey.
Petition received.

Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Cunningham respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
l. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph services at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
S. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the net work and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrWest.
Petition received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the taxes of all Australians will be used to finance a dam that would flood the Lower Gordon and Franklin Rivers in South-West Tasmania. Your petitioners declare that the intrinsic values of this area, and the provision of funds from the taxes of all Australians, for the destruction of this area of the National Estate and of world heritage value, does make this a national issue. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government take all possible steps, including financial and legal steps and fulfil its responsibilities under the Australian Heritage Act to prevent the destruction of this area of the National Estate, and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Dr Edwards, Mr Howard and Mr Barry Jones.
Petitions received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That record high interest rates are:
(a) Destroying the prospects of most young families seeking to purchase a home.

Petitions

8 December 1982 REPRESENT ATIVES 3103

(b) Destroying the chances of national economic recovery.
(c) Contributing to the record number of business bankruptcies.
(d) Contributing to the highest unemployment since the great Depression.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia immediately reverse its policy of high interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Baume and Mr Les Johnson.
Petitions received.
National Estate Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the lack of effective Federal environmental protection legislation and urge that suitable legislation be enacted immediately.
Your petitioners are concerned that National Estate areas such as South West Tasmania, the Great Barrier Reef and the Western Australian Jarrah Forests cannot be fully protected until adequate legislation exists and is enforced. Your humble petitioners therefore call upon the House of Representatives to ensure that all provisions of the Heritage Act and the Environment Impact of Proposals Act are fully compiled with in respect of National Estate Areas. In particular your petitioners call upon you to adopt the recommendations of the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment on South West Tasmania. Your petitioners believe that this is a national issue and must be resolved by the action of the Federal Parliament.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard and Mr Barry Jones.
Petitions received.
Macedonian Language
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
(I) That the Macedonian language be used by Government Departments in multi-lingual publications.
(2) That the petitioners urge the introduction of the Macedonian language as a Higher School Certificate (H.S.C.) subject in secondary schools.
(3) That the petitioners urge the introduction of the Macedonian language in tertiary institutions and that a course be introduced at Monash University in the Department of Slavic Languages.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate action to implement the above measures. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins and Mr Kent.
Petitions received.
South Australian College of Advanced Education
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Australian Parliament assembled. This humble petition of citizens of Australia showeth that:

Members of the Community are concerned and alarmed at staffing cuts within the South Australian College of Advanced Education.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the consequent deleterious effect these staffing cuts will have on the quality of educational programmes and the access of persons to these programmes at the South Australian College of Advanced Education.
We the undersigned citizens of Australia by this humble petition respectfully pray that the Australian Government provide additional funding to the South Australian College of Advanced Education to enable 1982 programmes and staff levels to be maintained and where needs exist, the resources of the College to be expanded to meet the requirements of the community of South Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrBaume.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the members of the Women's Services of the 1939-45 War not at present considered eligible for Defence Service Home Loans should qualify as "Australian Soldiers-' under the Defence Service Homes Act. They volunteered for service with the Naval, Military and Air Forces, serving wherever they were sent in whatever capacity they were required and yet are refused Defence Service Home Loans.
They took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies which meant to fight His Majesty's enemies, and although not used in actual combat in war zones, they were available for that use and had a sufficiently grave need arisen would have been used, to serve with distinction as have women of other lands.
In accordance with the Acts and Regulations of the period, the women of the Military Forces had enlisted for service anywhere, some of the Naval women to sail in any waters, others with service on warships optional, while the women of the Airforce could have been sent to Papua New Guinea or other territories under the control or care of Australia.
Ex-servicemen of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force who volunteered in the 1939-45 War but were not sent to War Zones are granted home loans. Not to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you favourably consider amending the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrBaume.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled.
The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that some single supporting parents are unfairly disadvantaged in

3104 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Petitions

having chosen to care for children full-time during the formative years, believing such care was essential to their well-being; and that women without dependent children, and who are under 50 years of age are not eligible for a continuing pension. These women have devoted their whole lives to their families and do not have skills relevant to the present employment situation. Their future prospects, with increasing age and length of time out of the workforce are a deterrent to employers. Skilled workers find it difficult to obtain employment and unskilled workers find it even more difficult. Unemployment benefit was not designed for long term usage and the low rate of payment plus the work tests over a long period of time lead to a general decline in the physical and mental health, with the result that the women are being placed on sickness benefits. Sickness benefits, however, were also designed for short term usage and is unable to provide security for these women.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should:
(i) Amend the Social Services Act to reduce the age of eligibility for a Class B Widow pension from 50 to 40 years; and
(ii) Expand existing training schemes to include women taken off Supporting Parents' Benefit.
(iii) Provide rehabilitation for women with disabilities which preclude them from the paid work force.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of we the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Our opinion on paper: That ever since the early seventies, high interest rates of staggering magnitude' have made a complete mockery of justice, unparalleled in our time.
Resulting in the elimination of employment on a vast scale, in every phase of production causing house ejections, with mind elrects and mental disturbances, leading to interrupted education, road toll and social disruption.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your House urge politicians of all parties to nationally unite for the return of justice by using the powers vested in them to immediately and drastically reduce these destructive interest rates. Further and to this end a conscience vote is essential, if justice is to be served.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of we, the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth:
That in recent years thousands of families have lost their homes, the building industry and employment is at an all time low, with social disruption from continued increases in interest rates.
All this, in our opinion, is due to extortionate interest rates that have passed the bounds of all reason and void of equity and moral justification.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your House urge all politicians to unite nationally to do all within their power to reduce interest rates across the board, also in the political arena a conscience vote is essential.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of we the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The heart-rending loss of homes by home purchasers, due to an expanding holocaust of interest rates caused by, and to quote the manager of a leading bank (26.4.81) "with the growing competition for savings, depositors are looking for higher interest returns on deposits. In order to retain our depositors and to meet the increased costs payable on deposits and operating expenses, it is necessary to raise income from loans of all types, including house loans."
Therefore it becomes transparently clear that the constant edging up of interest rates for investors by banks, lending institutions, and banking consortiums are collectively responsible for the monetary explosion, lack of employment and all that that entails and is causing grave social disruption to hundreds of thousands. Behind it all, the absence of control that is now politically essential in the interest of justice and fair distribution of burden.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your House urge all politicians to unite nationally to do all within their power to reduce interest rates across the board.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Miss Boey Fong Boh
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. We, the undersigned call for the concern of all members of Parliament that our country, Australia, is not willing to consider granting Miss Boey Fong Boh permanent residency.
2. Miss Boey Fong Boh is a very warm, intelligent, kind and considerate person who has endeared herself to many people. Her residency here would make her a very much accepted citizen who also has many skills to share.
3. Miss Boh has endured a great deal of hardship re: her Paternity Suit and has COme through this ordeal a very strong person. Her child, Chantelle Ling Boh born 4.11.81, is very much Australian by birth and physical appearance and has every right to remain in the country of her birth and we strongly request her mother be granted Permanent Residency.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will give this matter earnest consideration and your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

Petitions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3105

That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 hottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Slaughter of Marine Mammals
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. Since the Australian Whaling Protection Act, 1980 provides for the banning of importation into Australia of all whale by-products, and
2. The Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the International Banning of Whaling,
3. Then consistent with (I) and (2), this Government should immediately legislate to ban the importation of all marine mammal by-products, including the harp seal of Canada, and
4. Through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly, the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an International ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that consistent with legislation on whaling, this Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products, and support an International ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that Australia Council funding for the Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland has been entirely cut for 1983.
The Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland has made an important contribution to the cultural and artistic life of the Australian community for the past eight years taking innovative and original theatre to sections of the community who would not normally attend live theatre performances.
The Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland is the only theatre company in Australia which consistently presents theatre of social comment and tours nationally every year.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament will resolve to ask the Australia Council to reverse its decision in respect to the Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.

Broadcasting Licences
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Family Radio Ltd represents the largest single interest group in the community-i.e., Christians-who do not have a voice in public broadcasting commensurate with their representation.
That prime time access to existing hroadcasts by Christian groups is virtually non-existent, and access at other times is fast disappearing.
That, by comparison with other capitals, Brisbane is entitled to at least one more category'S' FM broadcasting licence.
That there appears to be no prospect of the release of further category'S' FM licences in the near future for Brisbane.
That satisfactory fulfillment of the aims of family radio and its expansion can only be achieved by broadcasting in its own right under licence.
That Family Radio has a responsibility to the large support groups which have contributed substantially to its development, to achieve the aims in broadcasting and community work for which it was established.
That there is an urgent need for the kind of service and support that Family Radio can provide to other community groups through the particular type of integrated programming proposed by the company under a full-time licence.
And that pruned government resources are obviously insufficient to advance the development of public broadcasting as originally intended.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will support Family Radio's application for a broadcasting licence and will enable more category'S' FM licences to be made available in Brisbane.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not protecting family home huyers from the severe effects of increased and increasing rates by interest on home mortgage loans. Together with causing a drastic slump in the home building and associated industries.
Your Petitioners, therefore, pray that Parliament take immediate and positive action by a I per cent reduction in Savings Bank interest rates to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause detrimental financial, social and psychological pressures on families, and in many cases, positive hardship
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pharmaceutical Declaration Form
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia shows that the decision to make pensioners and financially disadvantaged persons complete a declaration form before obtaining concessional

3106 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Petitions

and free pharmaceuticals is both an unnecessary harassment of the aged and those on low incomes and a time consuming and therefore costly burden for chemists.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government demonstrates some concern for the integrity and welfare of the aged by withdrawing the decision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Slaughter of Seal Pups
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the present hunt for harp seals in Canada is carried out in a cruel and inhumane manner.
That the population of harp seals has not been clearly shown to be increasing.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formally call on the Canadian Government to end the harp seal hunt and use its constitutional powers to halt the importation into Australia of products derived from the harp seal, Pagophilus groenlandicus.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal parliament not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South West of Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Uranium
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That the Uranium Enrichment Group of Australia (UEGA) has suggested sites in the heavily populated region of South-East Queensland for the development of a uranium enrichment plant:
(2) that the Commonwealth Government has approved, in principle, UEGA's suggestions, without consultation with the residents of the area: and
(3) that UEGA and the Commonwealth Government will conduct feasibility studies into the plant, but no confirmation has been made of a study into the safety of the plant.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives condemns the Government for approving, in

principle, UEGA's suggestions to establish a uranium enrichment plant in the heavily populated area of South-East Queensland and requires that the Government (I) conducts a poll of all South-East Queensland residents to determine whether they give assent to the plant and (2) conducts a comprehensive and independent study of the safety of the uranium enrichment plant.
And your petitioners as in duty hound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Sex Discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) that the Australian Government signed the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women in Copenhagen in 1980:
(b) that the Convention came into force on 3 September 1981;
(c) that Australian women suffer serious disadvantages in employment, education, accommodation, membership of licensed clubs, provision of goods and services including services relating to banking, insurance and the provision of grants, loans, credit or finance.
(d) that this disadvantage could be overcome by (i) making unlawful certain discrimination on the grounds of sex and marital status, (ii) eliminating discrimination on the grounds of sex and marital status and (iii) promoting affirmative action for women in employment;
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament pass the Sex and Marital Status Discrimination Bill 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Badgery Creek, New South Wales
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
No airport for Badgery's Creek or its surrounding districts and your petitioners duly will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia in the electorate of Kooyong respectfully submit:
I. That the Federal Government's plans to reduce its share of funding for pre-school education be reconsidered
2. That the Government recognise that any decrease in funding will lead to sharp fee increases and will deny many children access to pre-school education.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Peacock.
Petition received.

Petitions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3107

Retirement Benefits: Private Enterprise
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth our concern that:
\. The Income Tax Assessment Act (the Act) and its administration is inadequate in providing retirement benefits for employees in private enterprise;
2. The Commissioner of Taxation (Commissioner) denies deductions necessary to index retirement pensions;
3. Deductions for the self-employed and employed are inadequate;
4. The Commissioner has exercised his discretion improperly by negating a choice the Act allows on investment in Government Securities;
5. The Commissioner's constant alterations to guidelines and lack of communication has created great uncertainty.
6. The Commissioner is acting arbitrarily, and without proper notice in restricting trustee's investments with employers;
7. The Commissioner seeks to apply new actuarial guidelines restrospectively to July 1981.
Your Petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, take action to remedy these inadequacies and in particular we pray that action be taken:
(i) To ensure that the Commissioner exercises his discretion only with proper regard to legal principles;
(ii) To ensure that the Commissioner does not delegate to auditors part of his function of administering the Act;
(iii) To enact legislation allowing proper levels of retirement benefits to be provided;
(iv) To ensure that retirement benefits are regulated by a Department with a primarily social welfare function.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Thomson.
Petition received,
Philippines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of certain undersigned persons (citizens of Australia) shows concern and dismay that Fr Brian Gore, an Australian citizen and missionary priest in the Phillipines is charged with subversion, possession of explosives and of inciting rebellion, warrants of arrest pertaining to which have been issued and were served on October 18, 1982.
Your petitioners therefore pray that you do all in your power to urge the Phillipine authorities to cease harassment of Fr. Gore and to allow him to continue his missionary work; furthermore that Fr. Gore be allowed his right to legal advice and representation and of access at all times to his friends and religious colleagues.
by MrViner.
Petition received.
Philippines
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The petition of certian undersigned persons (electors of the Division of Moore) shows concern and dismay that Father Brian Gore, an Australian citizen and missionary priest in the

Philippines is charged with subversion, possession of explosives and of inciting rebellion, warrants of arrest pertaining to which have been issued and served on 18 October, 1982.
Your petitioners therefore pray that you do all in your power to urge the Philippine authorities to cease harassment of Father Gore and to allow him to continue his missionary work without threat or fear of arrest, furthermore, as a warrant of arrest has been served, that father Gore be allowed his right to legal advice and representation and of access at all times to his friends and religious colleagues.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Medical Services at Remote Nursing Posts
To the Honourable the speaker and the members of the House Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of the state of Western Australia respectfully petition:
That the Federal Government amend the Health Insurance Act to allow medical services at nursing posts to be eligible for hospital benefits.
In the remote and sparsely populated areas of Australia, particularly Western Australia, there are many communities that cannot on an economic or population need basis, justify the provision of a complete hospital service. In these areas nursing posts have been established to provide first aid and primary nursing care services to local residents and travellers.
Since these premises do not meet the criteria laid down in Section 24 of the Health Insurance Act, they no longer attract hospital benefits from health insurance organisations for treatment received at them.
This provision of the Act places all people in remote areas at a considerable disadvantage to people living in cities or larger centres. We ask therefore that the relevant Section of the Act be immediately amended so that recipients of aid at nursing posts are eligible for health benefits. The present circumstances, although probably caused by an administrative oversight are particularly inequitable.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Government Economic Policies
To the Honourable the speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Isaacs respectfully showeth:
I. That the Government's economic policies are causing undue hardship to millions of Australians.
2. The unemployment problem constitutes a national crisis with far-reaching economic and social consequences.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
I. The Government reverses its economic policies and alleviates the hardships faced by Australian families.
2. Begin a job creation programme in both the private and public sector.
3. Extend Australian training and retraining programmes.
4. Implement a comprehensive manpower policy to meet Australia's future needs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received.

3108 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Petitions

Telecom Australia
To the Honourable the speaker and members of the House of representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Isaacs respectfully showeth:
I. That the proposal to charge local telephone calls on a time basis will increase telephone bills, thereby disadvantaging those people who could least afford it, such as pensioners and other low-income earners.
2. That the proposal to change Telecom into a company would be the first step towards selling Telecom to private enterprise.
3. That the proposal to sell parts of Telecom's more profitable operations can only lead to increased charges, particularly for domestic and country services.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government guarantees:
I. That local telephone calls will continue to be charged on a per call basis.
2. That Telecom will remain a Statutory Authority.
3. That nO part of Telecom will be sold, and that Telecom's more profitable operations must continue to subsidise domestic and country services.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received.
East Killara: Postal Service
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Bradfield respectfully showeth:
That the Post Office needs to open a sub-agency at East Killara for the following reasons:
I. The nearest Post Office is 2 km distant at Killara.
2. Public transport in the area is inadequate in business hours for the general public to be able to obtain normal Post Office services.
3. Many residents of the district are elderly and cannot drive a car. Some are three km from Killara Post Office.
4. No other suburb within the district has such inadequate service by the Post Office. Each suburb has a local sub-agency within one km approximately and the local population has grown considerably in recent years.
5. Suitable premises are available within the local East Killara shopping centre.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective post office service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly and commercially in the area.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Connolly.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education Funding
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned students and staff of the James Cook University of North Queensland respectfully showeth that:
I. Failure to extend eligibility under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) and increase the value of TEAS allowances to cover basic living costs will

(a) continue to deter thousands of Australians from entering tertiary institutions.
(b) continue to force many of Australia's tertiary students to live in a state of dire poverty.
2. Introduction of a comprehensive student loans scheme will
(a) restrict access to education because people from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from studying by the prospect of incurring large debts.
(b) disadvantage women because on average they earn less and have a higher unemployment rate and disadvantage mature age students because they generally already have large financial commitments.
(c) undermine TEAS because government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced.
(d) distort educational choices because students will tend to choose shorter courses and will not go on with postgraduate study.
3. Introduction of fees for post graduate and second degree students will
(a) deter many tertiary students from undertaking of continuing such courses of study for purely financial reasons.
(b) result in the limiting of Australia's capacity to cope with change because fewer people will upgrade their degrees or broaden their fields of knowledge.
(c) seriously undermine Australia's Research effort.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
(i) introduce legislation to extend eligibility under TEAS and increase TEAS allowances to cover basic living costs.
(ii) reject the introduction of a student loans scheme.
(iii) reject the introduction of tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dean.
Petition received.
Australian Capital Territory: Public Transport Interchange
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The petition of certain citizens of the Australian Capital Territory shows:
That the exclusion of Taxis from the Civic Passenger Transport interchange is an unjust decision and places hardship on the sick, elderly, disabled and the public in general.
Your petitioners therefore pray that immediate action be taken to permit Taxis to use the Civic Public Transport Interchange.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
Nursing Homes: Visiting Practitioner Service
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain residents and friends of Swan Cottage Homes, Bentley, Western Australia, respectfully showeth that:

Committee on Foreign Affairs

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3109

Residents are concerned to continue to enjoy the convenience and quality of care offered by visiting medical practitioners at the surgery and in their homes.
Most of the residents of Swan Cottage Homes are either physically or financially handicapped and find it almost impossible to travel to doctors' surgeries.
The loss of the visiting practitioner service will provide a vacuum for which the Government is directly and solely responsible, and shows no regard by the Government for the welfare of the elderly and infirm who in their youth fought for and built Australia into what it is today.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government should withdraw those Item Numbers in the Health Act pertaining to the visiting practitioner service in nursing home complexes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrShack.
Petition received.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
Report
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, I present the Committee's Report on the ANZUS Alliance, incorporating two dissenting reports, together with the transcript of evidence and four submissions received by the Committee.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr SHIPTON-by leave-On 8 September 1981, the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence passed a resolution referring to its Sub-Committee A, the Sub-committee on the Pacific Basin, the term of reference: Australian-United States relations, The Sub-Committee was chaired by the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher) and conducted a wide-ranging inquiry into all the major aspects of Australian-United States relations, including foreign policy, security and defence matters as well as economic and cultural relations. I thank those individuals and government departments who spent time and effort preparing written submissions and giving oral evidence before the Sub-committee.
The focus of this report is Australia's long standing security relationship with the United States, as embodied in the ANZUS treaty. This report has already been tabled in the Senate and I will not repeat the tabling statement to the House. ANZUS is an important part of a wider Australian-United States relationship which, during the last 30 years, has become increasingly more multifaceted and remains Australia's singlemost important external relationship. Chapter 1 of the report traces the history of the ANZUS pact. In chapter 2, the significance of ANZUS in the light of past events, including the Malaysian-Indonesian confrontation in the early

1960s, is discussed, as are also current Australian and American perceptions of ANZUS and its role, including the extent to which, realistically, Australia could expect assistance under the terms of the treaty should this country ever face a serious threat to its security.
The Committee considers that the mutual security provisions of the ANZUS treaty together represent a stronger assurance of military assistance in the event of an attack on Australian territory than a commitment merely to consult. At the same time, the Committee emphasises that official United States statements of its defence thinking in relation to the Asian Pacific region, as well as United States expectations of Australia's role within the framework of ANZUS, indicate that the United States view of its role in the region precludes direct military involvement except in an extreme situation. I think this position reflects the Guam doctrine. The Committee believes that the official Australian view of ANZUS acknowledges this.
In chapter 3, the Committee discusses the benefits and costs of ANZU~ There was Press comment on the report when iL was tabled in the Senate about Australian-Indonesian relations. The report stresses that no major threat to Australia's security has emerged or is likely to emerge in the short term, On page 65, a paragraph concerning Indonesia states, in part:
Indonesia is olle local power well-placed to pose a potential threat
We should amend that sentence to read 'geographically well placed' to explain the meaning of that paragraph. That paragraph reflects the evidence presented to the Sub-Committee. It discusses a purely hypothetical potential situation that could develop, It does not refer specifically to a potential direct threat from Indonesia but to the possibility that at some stage in the future a regional conflict could develop, such as the Malaysian-Indonesian confrontation in the 1960s, which in turn could affect Australia's interests. I think that has been interpreted out of context by the media. The threat has to be read in the context of the previous report of the Committee entitled Threats to Australia's Security'.
In chapter 3, the Committee concludes that the Australian-United States relationship is, and continues to be, mutually advantageous. It also points out that the United States should take seriously Australia's views on matters of mutual concern where we may have a separate national perspective. In this regard, the Committee endorses the assessment of the Department of Foreign Affairs. The United States adopts this position. In chapter

3110 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Committee on Foreign Affairs

4, the Committee evaluated what is perhaps the most significant concern in relation to ANZUS that is, the future of the alliance. The report points out that the stability of Australia's own strategic environment is linked in no small measure to the effective involvement of United States interest and policies throughout the region. The Committee believes that differences between the United States and Australia will exist from time to time but that the management of these differences is likely to be conducted in an atmosphere which favours accommodation. That is certainly the history of these matters.
The Committee's conclusion is, therefore, that the ANZUS alliance remains both useful and necessary and that A!.Istralia should remain within its framework. The report emphasises that the security links between Australia and the United States spring frem shared values, compatible institutions and objectives and continuing popular support within the Australian community for ANZUS and the wider Western alliance. I think that ANZUS and the relations with the United States are part of one relationship but the whole United States-Australian relationship, of which ANZUS is a part, is part of a wider set of relationships, and that is Australia as a committed member of the Western alliance. ANZUS arose out of the Australian-United States relationship. The relationship did not arise out of ANZUS. I think that is an important point to make. It is a flexible and changing relationship, and that is its strength.
The reference is a continuing one. The Committee will consider other aspects of the reference. One aspect I would wish to look at in future is Australia's relations with the United States Congress. The Australian Government enjoys excellent relations, based on mutual respect, with the United States President and Administration. But the United States does not have a Westminster system and the United States Government Administration is not formed from and does not arise out of the Congress; it is separate from it. The executive and legislative power are separate in that country. In our system, of course, they are not. This has led us basically to ignore the importance of the United States Congress in AustralianUnited States relations. I believe Australia has to work to improve future relations between the Australian Parliament and the United States Congress. The Congress will be receptive to the work that needs to be done. I recently spoke to our Ambassador in Washington, Sir Robert Cotton, and I think he understands the problem well. There needs to be a greater manpower effort put in on Capitol Hill by our embassy in Washington.

A mechanism needs to be developed for a permanent and regular exchange of views between members of the Australian Senate and House of Representatives and their United States counterparts. This can only be in the interests of greater understanding between our two nations. In conclusion, I thank Dr Edvi-Illes and Mr Dan Barton of the Committee's secretariat for their assistance and hard work in the preparation of the report. I commend the report to the House.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect)-by leaveWithout wishing to traverse the contents of the report from the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence concerning the ANZUS Alliance, I wish to add something to it. Just as important as the actual terms of the ANZUS treaty are the potential psychological factors of any changes which would have an effect, to my mind, on world peace which, currently, to a large extent is due to the balance of power between the two super powers. The greatest threat to peace would be a belief by the Soviet Union that it could win a quick war. Similarly, in the late 1930s-193839-Hitler thought we would not stand by Poland following the Munich agreement, the invasion of Czechoslovakia and the Hitler-Stalin pact. A decision by Australia to cancel ANZUS would be seen by the Soviet Union as a signal that its drive to the south, whether from Vietnam or through Iran, would not be opposed. In fact, such action by Australia and New Zealand could well persuade the United States population to become more isolationist and to allow the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to speed up its imperialist drive which has been going on ever since the last war. If this happened it would ultimately lead to war. It is, therefore, important that our signals to the Soviet Union are clear. This also applies to other allies of the United States such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation countries.
In the general debate on matters of neutralism, unilateral disarmament and alliances with the United States, I shall read into Hansard part of a speech made recently by James Callaghan, the last Labour Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. According to the London Times, on 18 November 1982, in an address to the Cardiff Fabian Society, he said:
a Labour Government should retain Polaris, allow cruise, keep the American bases, and concentrate its attention on multilateral disarmament talks, comprehensive test-ban negotiations and the pursuit of non-proliferation.
The article continued:
'Why should we unilaterally give away any bargaining counters whilst negotiations are in progress?' Mr Callaghan said. 'To do so would be to hand to the Soviet Union something valuable with no prospect of anything in exchange. The Soviet Union would say "thank you" and pocket it.'

Committee on Foreign Affairs

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3111

According to the article, Mr Callaghan said that some say:
Abandon our nuclear weapons. close down our nuclear bases in this country, and send the Americans back home. If we do. goes the argument. we shall be safe from attack and. as a bonus, other countries will be so impressed that they will follow our lead.
The article goes on to state:
Such a policy was attractive. but wrong. and Mr Callaghan questioned whether Britain could retain its self-respect, given such a policy, if it continued to rely on Nato nuclear protection.
Mr Callaghan is reported as asking:
How could we escape attack in any future war, by any weapons the enemy might think necessary to reduce us?
He is quoted as saying:
Unilateral disarmament does not offer a way out. The only real safety for British people is through collective security and multilateral agreement to disarm the nuclear and conventional arsenals of both sides.
The article goes on to state:
He also said that any unilateral action, which would be certain to damage Anglo-American friendship, might eventually lead to the 'unravelling of NATO on the mainland of Europe'. If America was provoked into isolationism, the alliance would be destabilised, and it would even be possible that West Germany might be forced to seek closer links with East Germany.
He said that everyone shared the unilateralists' horror of nuclear war. But he concluded: 'The task for a Labour Government is to secure a series of comprehensive multilateral agreements to achieve our ends. That way lies safety for the British people, and for the world.'
Similarly, if we send the wrong signals to the world by changing our attitude to ANZUS--I am not suggesting that any significant proportion of the Australian population would want to do that-some of the weaker countries in our area might be prepared to do deals with the Soviet Union or the Soviet Union's satellite of Vietnam. I think it is terribly important to consider that matter of signals and the matter of making it quite clear that we stand by ANZUS. It is in our interests. It is in the interests of the United States. I think it is much more in our interests than it is in the interests of the United States. Most importantly, it is in the interests of the free world and people who want to continue to be able to make decisions as to their lifestyle freely, in the sort of democratic pattern which we are used to and which obviously is not applicable to the Soviet Union and its satellites. Therefore, it is terribly important for us to continue to emphasise our commitment to the ANZUS alliance.
Debate interrupted.
ABORIGINAL HOSTELS LTD
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs)-For the information of honourable

members, I table the annual report for 1981-82 of Aboriginal Hostels Ltd.
Sitting suspended from 5.59 to 8 p.m.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
Report Debate resumed.
Mr MORRISON (St George)-by leave--I must confess that I was away during the consideration by the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence of the report on the ANZUS Alliance. First of all I want to associate IT'yself with two items of the dissenting report. I agree with one of the statements in the introduction to the report which reads as follows:
Australia's basic objective is to fulfil its commitment to the Alliance, with due regard to our national interest and the maintenance of our national sovereignty.
I note the presence in the chamber of the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) who is again a member of the Ministry and who will recall some of the observations I have made over the years about the North West Cape agreement and the abject derogation of Australian sovereignty in that agreement, particularly in the exchange of letters between the United States Ambassador, Mr Battle, and the then Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sir Garfield Barwick. So Australia has not always maintained this national interest and notion of sovereignty in our associations with the United States. We all remember the very demeaning slogan that was mouthed by one of our Prime Ministers about being 'All the way with LBJ'.
What I want to raise tonight is what I perceive as the tone of the report which gives an unreal expectation about the allian-ce. I believe that from the viewpoint of both sides of Parliament and of Australia this is dangerous. I quote United States Under-Secretary of State, Mr Averell Harriman who, in 1963, when the Australian Government of the day was discussing with the United States Administration the question of confrontation and what would be the impact of loss of life or confrontation between the Indonesians and Australians, said:
Defence agreements are not precise as to military movements or diplomatic activity. There is always a grey area.
I also recall the following words of President Nixon:
Our interests must shape our commitments rather than the other way around.
I point out to the House that we should not delude ourselves that ANZUS is a watertight commitment by the United States. I think it is only in the field of foreign affairs that we recognise that the United States will not assume responsibilities it

3112 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Committee on Foreign Affairs

does not see as being in its interests. The report details periods when Australia was concerned about the United States commitment. I need only to mention the confrontation involved in the Indonesians' claim to West Irian. I think we should look at those sections of the report very carefully, and should heed the experiences we went through in that period. Successive United States administrations have made it clear that possible commitments under ANZUS can arise only in the context of the central power balance. This follows from the Guam statements of President Nixon that United States allies are expected to handle in their own way regional disputes that are not associated with the central power balance. I want to raise a particular reservation in the report--- unfortunately I was not in the discussions of the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee to raise this-which appears on page 67. The report states:
The Committee does not see any distortion of Australia's defence policy resulting from the ANZUS Alliance.
I think that if one examines Australia's role over the years one finds that Australia has been a junior partner and has supplied military aid to both the United Kingdom-Great Britain in those days--and the United States, where our force structure was in fact shaped by the alliance. We slotted in our units of the Army, Navy and Air Force to a larger command. They were reponsible for the command and also the logistics of our forces. I believe that if we are dealing with Australia as having a self-reliant defence force we have to make decisions that are outside any alliance that we may have. I think this is brought home to us in the sense that the United States expects us to do that. I fear that over the last couple of years there have been indications that the Government has moved away from this notion of self-reliance and is again taking the part of a junior partner in the alliance operations.
I am not happy about the sections of the report dealing with the Indian Ocean. We should keep in mind our interests in relation to the north-west Indian Ocean are essentially different, and can be different, from those of other countries because we are Australians. That is an area which is, in fact, closer to Europe than to Australia. I believe that in determining our own defence force structure we cannot commit ourselves outside our competence to carry out commitments. Our first functionI believe this is a function that the United States expects of us--is to be able to look after our own affairs in our area. I associate with these remarks the attitude of the present Secretary of the Department of Defence who has

pointed out that we cannot undertake commitments well outside our direct area of influence. I think this is important to consider in terms of our commitment to ANZUS.
CUSTOMS TARIFF (ANTI-DUMPING) AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1982
Bill presented by Mr Peacock, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong-Minister for Industry and Commerce) (8.7)--1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill amends the Customs Tariff (AntiDumping) Act 1975 to repeal section 14 of that Act. Section 14 of the Act imposes an obligation on the Minister not to take action which is inconsistent with the obligations of Australia under international agreements relating to trade. The repeal of this section is principally designed to remove for practical purposes the grounds for any application to the Australian courts raising the issue of Australia's non-compliance with international agreements, including the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade codes and any bilaterial agreements, relating to anti-dumping and countervailing duty action.
The provision of the Customs Tariff (AntiDumping) Act enable the Government to take anti-dumping and contervailing duty action against imports. Both actions are designed to offset export prices which are not established on a fair commercial basis. Australia is a signatory to the GATT, and the related codes which establish rules of conduct for anti-dumping and countervailing actions. The codes, which elaborate on the relevant provisions of the GATT, were part of the outcome of the multilateral Trade Negotiations, Tokyo Round, concluded in 1979. Australia acceded to the Subsidies and Countervailing Duties Code on 21 September 1982 and to the Anti-Dumping Code on 21 October 1982.
The codes require that signatories must take all necessary steps to ensure that their domestic legislation conforms with the provisions of the codes. The Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act was amended in 1981 so that it conforms with the codes. Anti-dumping or countervailing duties cannot be imposed unless it is determined by the relevant authority in the importing country that the goods in question have been dumped-that is, exported at less than normal prices in the country of export or subsidised and as a result an industry in the importing country has been injured or threatened with injury. The codes also limit the extent of countervailing or anti-dumping action to

Customs Tariff Amendment Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3113

an amount equal to the amount of subsidy or of dumping or the extent to which injury is occurring, whichever is the less.
Where a preliminary affirmative finding of dumping or subsidisation is made by the Department of Industry and Commerce as the relevant authority and there is evidence of material injury or threat of material injury to the domestic industry, the GATT anti-dumping and subsidies and
countervailing duties codes permit the taking of provisional action in the form of securities which in Australia are taken under the provisions of section 42 of the Customs Act. The Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act has facilitated proceedings for injunctive relief in these matters before the Federal Court of Australia. The related Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill which I will introduce shortly contains a provision to remove from the scope of that Act decisions to take securities under the Customs Act as provisional anti-dumping and countervailing measures. That provision will supersede the regulations with similar effect introduced on 24 November 1982.
In the injunction proceedings before the Court exporters of goods to Australia have used the provisions of section 14 of the Customs Tariff (AntiDumping Act) as the basis for arguing that the method by which the Department proceeds to the decision to require provisional anti-dumping and provisional countervailing measures is contrary to Australia's international obligations. Whilst the Department meets the requirements of the codes in principle these arguments have nevertheless enabled interim injunctions to be obtained. As a consequence, the Department has been prevented from taking provisional securities and this has operated to the detriment of Australian industry.
The world wide economic recession has led to a
dramatic increase in the number of dumping and countervailing complaints in Australia. The Government is therefore concerned that there should be no impediment to taking quick and effective action to combat unfair trading practices which operate to the detriment of Australian industry. The repeal of section 14 of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act, as proposed by this Bill, will not affect Australia's adherence to the relevant international obligations. The Government's view is that issues concerning Australia's obligations under the international agreements relating to anti-dumping and countervailing duty action are more appropriately considered within the context of the dispute settlement provisions of the particular agreements rather than in the Australian courts. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.

CUSTOMS SECURITIES (ANTI-DUMPING) AMENDMENT BILL
1982
Bill presented by Mr Peacock, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong-Minister for Industry and Commerce) (8.13) - I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is twofold. It amends the Customs Act to place beyond doubt that securities may be validly taken under section 42 of that Act for the purposes of the Customs Tariff (AntiDumping) Act. It also amends the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act to remove from the scope of that Act decisions made under section 42 of the Customs Act to require and take securities in respect of duty that may be payable under the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act. The Customs Tariff (Anti-dumping) Act is the legislation which enables the Government to take anti-dumping and countervailing duty action against imports. This action is designed to offset export prices which are not established on a fair commercial basis.
Where a preliminary affirmative finding of dumping or subsidisation is made by the Department of Industry and Commerce and there is evidence of material injury or threat of material injury to the domestic industry, provisional action in the form of securities may be taken under the provisions of section 42 of the Customs Act. The securities are held in accordance with the time limits specified in the Customs Act until, after inquiry, a final decision is made as to whether dumping or countervailing duties are warranted. If the final decision is in the affirmative the securities held are adjusted to the amount of the duty to be imposed. If the decision is that dumping or countervailing duty is not warranted the securities are returned to depositors.
As a consequence of litigation in the Federal Court the Department has been restrained from taking provisional anti-dumping and countervailing securities in respect of the importation of certain goods into Australia. It has been argued in these proceedings that the terms of section 42 of the Customs Act do not authorise the taking of security for the purpose of protecting Australian industry. The amendments in Clause 4 of the Bill provide an express link between section 42 of the Customs Act and the Customs Tariff (AntiDumping) Act. This is proposed to remove any doubt as to the validity of requiring securities

3114 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Student Assistance Bill

under the Customs Act for the purposes of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act.
In my second reading speech relating to the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill (No.2) 1982, I explained how exporters of goods to Australia have been able to use the existing law to prevent the Department from taking provisional securities. The provisions of clause 6 of the Bill are designed to minimise the opportunities to prevent the taking of such securities. Under this clause decisions relating to the taking of the securities will be exempted from the scope of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act.
Regulations with similar effect to this clause became operative on 24 November 1982. The provisions in this bill will, however, supersede those regulations and it is the Government's intention that the regulations will be repealed after this Bill receives royal assent. The Government believes that the removal from judicial review of decisions on provisional securities is essential if anti-dumping and countervailing measures are to be efffective in combating unfair international trading practices which operate to the detriment of Australian industry. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
STUDENT ASSISTANCE (LOANS GUARANTEE AND SUBSIDY) BILL 1982
Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) (8.17)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide the legislative basis for the implementation of the Tertiary Student Loans Scheme which will be introduced early in 1983. The Bill provides for the Commonwealth to subsidise the interest charged by banks on approved loans and for the Commonwealth to give guarantees to banks that it will repay outstanding debts on approved loans within prescribed limits. The Bill also covers the eligibility conditions applying to loans.
The Tertiary Student Loans Scheme will enable full time tertiary students who are Australian citizens or permanent residents to borrow between $500 and $1,000, per annum from banks to help pay for their education and living expenses while studying. Students will be able to borrow up to $8,000 over the total period of their study.
Many full time students will be eligible for approved loans by virtue of their entitlement to

benefits under various Commonwealth student assistance schemes. These schemes are: The Commonwealth Postgraduate Awards Scheme, the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme known as TEAS, the Adult Secondary Education Assistance Scheme and the Aboriginal Study Grants Scheme. The Tertiary Student Loans Scheme will provide an additional source of support for eligible students receiving benefits under these schemes. Other full time students will qualify for loans providing they satisfy a simple means test, the details of which have already been announced in the Budget context. These details will be prescribed in regulations.
The Government has demonstrated its strong continuing support for student assistance schemes by its decision to increase substantially allowance levels and relax means tests for 1983. The loans scheme will provide another option for students. The interest rate to apply to loans will be the maximum rate permissible for advances by banks of less than $1 OO,OOO-currently 14.5 per cent per annum--reduced by 5 percentage points by a Commonwealth subsidy. The Commonwealth will provide banks with guarantees amounting to $50m per annum on approved loans but the banks will be expected to take all reasonable steps to obtain repayments from defaulting borrowers before the Commonwealth honours guarantees.
The scheme will be administered by the Commonwealth Department of Education in conjunction with the banks and tertiary institutions, and the detailed terms and conditions for approved loans will be prescribed in regulations. Funds to meet payments by the Commonwealth of interest subsidies and the repayments of any defaulted loans will be provided for through the general appropriation legislation. For this financial year the Appropriation Bill (No.2) 1982-83 provides $150,000 for these purposes. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Scholes) adjourned.
STATES GRANTS (TERTIARY EDUCATION ASSISTANCE) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill returned from the Senate with amendments.
Ordered that the ameadments be taken into consideration in Committee of the Whole House forthwith.
In Committee
Consideration of Senate's amendments. Senate's amendments-
No. I - Page 14, clause 26, proposed sub-section 39A (I), lines 15 and 16, leave out " whether or not specified in Schedule 18,'.

States Grants Amendment Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3115

No.2-Page 14, clause 26, proposed sub-section 39A (I), lines 18 and 19, leave out 'a college of advanced education specified in Schedule 18 and situated in the same State as the first-mentioned institution', insert 'a university or a college of advanced education situated in the same State as the first mentioned institution, and at least one of those institutions is specified in Schedule 18'.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) (8.20)-1 move:
That the amendments be agreed to.
Honourable members will recall that on the advice of the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission the Government has required certain colleges of advanced education to enter into amalgamation arrangements aimed at bringing about larger consolidated institutions. Such institutions are better able to handle problems associated with change and can offer students a wider range of educational choice and a higher quality of educational program. Some economies of scale also exist, although such considerations were not the primary reasons behind the Government's decision to require amalgamations. Twenty-six of the 30 institutions concerned have now entered into acceptable arrangements. The Government believes that these amalgamations will be successful and that higher education will be strengthened in the long term.
There are four colleges yet to finalise acceptable arrangements. These are the Armidale, Newcastle and Milperra colleges of advanced education and the Hawthorn Institute of Education. In respect of Armidale and Newcastle it is expected that the New South Wales Government will legislate for the amalgamation of each college of advanced education with the relevant local university following the passage of the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill through the Commonwealth Parliament. The nature of the final amalgamation arrangements has yet to be determined in respect of Milperra and Hawthorn.
The Government has recognised that for maximum effectiveness the precise arrangements for amalgamations should reflect local circumstances and are, therefore, best determined at the local level. The States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill requires the Minister for Education to provide funds for the operation of institutions in 1983 only when he is satisfied that suitable amalgamation arrangements are in hand. Essentially, the amendment which I have moved enables a broader intepretation to be taken as to what constitutes a satisfactory amalgamation. In this respect it seeks to take account of the latest thinking of the State governments concerned as to how the Commonwealth's requirements may be met for the two remaining

institutions. In summary, the amendment recognises that a suitable amalgamation might be affected by an institution assuming certain of the teaching responsibilities of another institution. Such an arrangement might well meet the Commonwealth's requirements in a way which had not been anticipated earlier in the process. The amendment, therefore, ensures that education rationale remains the central concern of the amalgamation exercise.
As foreshadowed by the Minister for Education, Senator Peter Baume, during the debate in another place on the Bill, the Government's decision on a wage pause for the next 12 months will, of course, contain any increases in the cost of running tertiary institutions. Under the Government's prospective cost adjustment arrangements, the sums of money specified in the Schedules to the Bill include an allowance for wage and salary increases in 1983 in accordance with earlier decisions. Following the Premiers Conference yesterday, there will now be savings flowing from the wages pause and the Government will, therefore, restrict the rate of advances under the Bill as from the beginning of 1983 to reflect this. A similar course of action will be taken in relation to grants for both government and non-government schools. These reductions in the rate of advances will be formalised by amending legislation during 1983. In the light of the outcome of yesterday's Premiers Conference the Government is giving consideration to spending the consequent savings available to the Commonwealth, including savings with respect to this matter, on worthwhile programs which employ labour. I commend the amendments to the House.
Amendments agreed to.
Resolution reported; report adopted.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY
PROCEEDINGS
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received the following message from the Senate:
(I) That the following matters be referred to the Joint Committee on the Broadcasting of Parliamentary Proceedings for inquiry and report:
(i) the televising of the proceedings of the Houses of Parliament and their committees in the new Parliament House; and
(ii) the continuous and simultaneous radio broadcasting of both Houses of Parliament.
(2) That the Committee, for any purposes related to this inquiry, have power to send for persons, paper and records.
(3) That the Senate requests the concurrence of the House of Representatives in this resolution.

3116 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Constitution Alteration Bill

Ordered that the message be taken into consideration forthwith.
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
(I) That the House concurs in the resolution transmitted to the House in message No. 323 of the Senate, viz.:
(a) That the following matters be referred to the Joint Committee on the Broadcasting of Parliamentary Proceedings for inquiry and report: (i) the televising of the proceedings of the Houses of the Parliament and their committees in the new Parliament House: and (ii) the continuous and simultaneous radio broadcasting of both Houses of the Parliament.
(b) That the Committee, for any purposes related to this inquiry, have power to send for persons, papers and records.
(2) That a message be sent to the Senate acquainting it of this resolution.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8.29)--1 do not intend to hold up the House for very long. The matter before the House is for a reference to the Joint Committee on the Broadcasting of Parliamentary Proceedings of which consideration will take place. I believe that before members of this House or the other House commit themselves to what seems to be a good idea of televising parliamentary proceedings they should look at what the results of televising the Parliament will be, if it is on anything like the basis on which broadcasting takes place. There are areas which are televised and where parliamentary proceedings are recorded and made available to the Press for its use. Before too many members run away with the attractiveness of television in the Parliament I suggest that the three or four honourable members who are in the Parliament at the moment have a look around and see the sort of camera picture that could be picked up here.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (FIXED TERM PARLIAMENTS) BILL 1982
Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.30)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This is a Bill for an Act to alter the Constitution in relation to the duration of the House of Representatives, the holding of elections for the Senate and the House of Representatives and the appointment and termination of the appointment of Ministers of State. The Bill has already passed the Senate. It was the subject of an amendment in that chamber. It is a Bill that was proposed by Senator Gareth Evans, a member of the Australian Labor Party. I say at the outset that of

course this is a Bill that has been proposed in the knowledge that we are in opposition. However, we hope that the Government of the day will agree to some constitutional amendments. Even though we are in opposition we hope that the proposal the Government will agree to in the Bill, a fixed term for the House of Representatives. It is a reasonable and rational proposal to be submitted to the people for approval, as it must be if there is to be a change.
When Labor becomes the Government of Australia it will offer a much wider package of constitutional reform. Our party for some time has been urging that the people of Australia have a chance to improve the Constitution. We urge the Government to bring it out of the horse and buggy days of the last century into the modern era in which we have to face national and international problems that were in no way envisaged at the time the Constitution was drafted--the I890s. We hope to get not only the politicians involved in conventions and discussions as to the best way to improve our Constitution but also the rest of the people of Australia. They should be involved and asked as to how they see their charter being brought up to date.
For example, a new Constitution ought to have a Bill of Rights in it. In any rational democracy the people are entitled to have rights as against a government. Those rights ought to be enshrined in the Constitution. Even though this is a first step it is a very excellent step. The Senate has approved of that idea in the form of the Bill that we are now to deal with. I was reminded by Senator Gareth Evans that the Government in the Senate opposed the Bill at all its stages. Nevertheless in the Senate, in the form in which it has now been received by us, it received very substantial crossparty support. The Labor Party was joined at the third reading not only by the Australian Democrats and Senator Harradine but also by six members of the Liberal Party. Also the Bill at all its stages had strong and consistent support in newspapers and from respected people interested in constitutional reform.
The Bill has no political content in the sense that it might be of advantage or disadvantage to one side or the other. The real thrust of this legislation is to give some stability to the House of Representatives. Section 28 of the Constitution presently provides that the House of Representatives, the people's House, is entitled to remain for a period of three years. Of course, that has not happened. There has been the inevitability of having to deal with a hostile Senate. Prime Ministers, because of their own personal whims, might

Constitution Alteration Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3117

wish to cut short the normal life cycle of the House of Representatives.
It is a matter of record that since the Second World War the average life of the House of Representatives has not been three years but two years four months. As one of those members left over from the Whitlam era I remind the House that when we were elected to Government in 1972 we faced continual threats of having to go back to the people simply because we had a hostile Senate. In fact we faced elections in 1974 and 1975. As Government members knew~we did not~the House of Representatives was dissolved early in 1977.The dissolution in 1977 was obviously related to the fact that the Opposition at the time was going to change its leadership or something of that nature, and it created dreadful problems for our society. It virtually destroyed the reputation of one man who held the office of Governor-General and, of course, it also affected the person who held the position of Chief Justice. Incredible damage was done not to those people as such but to the very society which we are trying to suggest to the people is strong, efficient and fair. We are very mindful of the fact that if the people elect a government according to the Constitution~for three years~that government ought to remain in office for three years and ought not to be removed by some political force, which is the normal political force of an Opposition.
The Senate was originally conceived as a House that would not be in any way aligned, motivated or affected by party politics. That was an unreal and idealistic view. To their credit, everybody has a political position. Senators are now part and parcel of the professional political arena of the Parliament. They come to party meetings, they take part in party discussions and they abide by party deliberations. It is nonsensical to think that an Opposition in the House of Representatives would not exercise its political muscle and power in the Senate when it had the numbers there because the method of election and the timing of Senate elections are different. This Bill is proposed in the savage knowledge that what happened in 1974-75 should never be repeated. But it can be repeated, because the Bill deals only with a fixed term for the House of Representatives. The term envisaged by the Bill is three years and elections would be held on a fixed date, namely, the third Saturday in November. The life of a parliament would expire in the previous October. There have to be exceptions to that. So naturally and properly the Bill provides that if a government no longer has the confidence of the House it cannot remain in office, which no government would do.

The Bill contains a provision for an election if a government loses the confidence of the House.
We cannot avoid the question of a double dissolution, nor should we. Section 57 of the Constitution provides that if there is a disagreement between the Houses, and the Government is adamant in that disagreement, there shall be an election to decide the issue. Under this Bill that can still happen. Of course, if under this proposed legislation that should happen, the Government and some senators would hold office for only the balance of the term available. In other words, if a government were elected for three years and after two years there were a double dissolution, under this proposal the terms of the Government and of the senators first elected would expire after 12 months. The Bill contains a provision for that acceleration of events and also provides a sanction whereby the Senate would not be so anxious to be difficult if it had to face up to the fact that its terms would not be for six years but would be the life of two terms of the House of Representatives.
A memorandum has been circulated setting out what Senator Evans thinks the Government should address its mind to. He makes the point that the problems are related to the utter lack of stability and predictability in the Australian electoral cycle. We knew that. As a matter of record, we were elected in December 1972 and were under threat of not getting Supply in 1973. That was the year of our very first Budget. The supplementary Supply Bills of 1974 were also under threat, so we had to have a double dissolution. The Supply of 1974 was also under threat and, of course, the Supply of 1975 was not even conceded. We recall the tremendous tension that prevailed.
I think you would almost smile now, Mr Deputy Speaker, if you looked at the proposals of the then Senate which said that it could not give that Government life in political terms because of the rising unemployment at that time. When we consider that more than 560,000 people are unemployed now, we wonder whether the Senate might send the present Government out to the people on that basis. That was the pretext that was used on the previous occasions. Another was the dreadful inflation and yet another the suggestion that the deficit was getting a little out of hand. We are now looking at a deficit of $4 billion. We understand that government has to face the people but it should not be at the whim and the cavalier suggestion of a Senate with resolutions which have no bona fides at all. We still smile at those senators and former senators who said that they were judging us on our merits. We know that they participated in the party room discussion at which

3118 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Constitution Alteration Bill

they were told: 'See whether you can get rid of that Government as soon as possible'. We know that they voted in accordance with political dictates. The concept of this legislation is to try to overcome this sort of cynicism.
I make another point. Why was an early election held in 1977? It was simply because the Australian Labor Party was likely to change its leader and the present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) thought that it was so much easier to beat the leader we had in 1975 if he was stillrhe leader in 1977. We should have gone through until 1978. But that was the real rationale. Speeches that were made in Queensland at the time readily identified that rationale. It has brought about a cynicism as to what we are all about in this place. The people are sick and tired of the number of elections. They just cannot understand how we can be making any progress by continually having elections, particularly in the present economic climate. They are looking for some national concepts. This is where Australia is so bereft at present. It has no national spirit; it is governed, or over-governed, by at least eight governments at present. The people are out of their minds and fed up to the neck because what we would call 'some administration' is costing the earth. They say that they are dreadfully over-governed, and they are right. We can never get them from this position to that of looking at a new constitution, which I think they would fairly draft on a non-political basis, with the following concept: 'We will elect the governments and they will remain for the period we determine'. As a matter of interest, [ think public opinion would now be that a fouryear term is better than a three-year term.
We want to have a Senate. Everybody agrees that we should have a Senate as a House of legitimate review, not a House of confrontation or a House of rejection, which it has become. If we adopted a new method of ele;;ting members of the Senate, namely, on a first-past-the-post basis rather than on the basis of proportional representation, we might get more political stability in this area; but we certainly would nor get the genuine House of review or the genuine contribution that minority groups are entitled to have, which proportionai representation guarantees. We need to wake up and be alert to the fact that we have a precious ele'11ent called democracy. We can lose it if we go through the political mechanisms of the sheer, abrupt use of power or ambu~h in a Senate which is anxious always to send the House of Representatives back to the people but which would not dare to go to the people itself. That is still the unfortunate position in which we find ourselves. An effort was made in the original draft of this

Bill to provide that, in terms of Supply, section 53 would not give the Senate the power which it now has to reject or not grant supply. We should bear in mind that in that context the word 'reject' does not appear in section 53. It appeared in the original draft of the Constitution and was deleted because the forefathers, in their wisdom, said that we cannot have two financial Houses, and that finance --in other words, tax--has to come from the House of the people. That was a legitimate and valid proposition. But because it did not say that the Senate shall not reject Supply, which it could have done because it assumed that by removal of the word 'reject' the Senate would not threaten Supply, during the period 1972-75 we had to face the fact that Supply was threatened and in fact not granted.
Whilst this Bill set out to say that the Senate would not do that, the Senate would not let that provision remain in the Bill, and it has been deleted from it. So we still run the dreadful gauntlet of a hostile Senate not giving a government supply and may face continual elections, a situation which this Bill cannot correct. This matter has been discussed by various constitutional conventions. The great problem with those conventions, as I said, is that they are always attended by members of parliament, both Federal and State. Naturally, those people will fight to hold their present preserve. The people of Australia do not have any input at all. It was interesting at the Perth convention to note that we in the Labor Party were asking why we need to give the Senate the power to reject Supply. Democracy is destroyed if the Senate can continually reject Supply for a government which basically needs Supply every six months. The unfortunate situation could develop in which a government could continually be returned to the people and re-elected and the Senate may not do anything about it. That would be a nonsensical situation.
We proposed suggesting to the people of Australia, on a non-party basis, that the Senate not have those ridiculous powers. Sir Charles Court put a somewhat doubtful amendment. He said that if that were to happen there ought to be a double dissolution and that it would be a sanction on the Senate. Of course, a re-election might still give the same result because the method of election is different. Proportional representation allows for minorities in the Senate. It does not allow for that anywhere else. We could well find that the Senate would still be just as difficult and the nation would become ungovernable. If we were not to give finance to a government in the normal way it would not be able to govern.

Constitution Alteration Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3119

Section 53 of the Constitution~I am speaking from memory~refers to the ordinary annual services of government. It does not refer to anything special; just annual services. It refers to the continuity of government. Why should a Senate be allowed to adopt the past practice of using all sorts of mechanisms to suggest that because the economy was not going right, because inflation and unemployment were too high, a government should not get the ordinary annual appropriation? That would mean that public servants could not be paid, no money could go to the States, every school would have to close, and hospitals could not function. In other words we would have anarchv. But that was the rationale at the time. The C~urt amendment was no solution because no State government would be able to function if this sort of position were deemed to be the way to play the political game in Australia. If upper houses, wherever they exist, have the power to refuse Supply we will get these problems.
This nation is bedevilled enough at present. I suggest, purely on the basis of sheer intelligence in support of the principle of democracy, that we ought to have some clear indication of that what we are about in this nation is protecting people's rights. When people exercise their right to elect a government we should not destroy it on the basis that perhaps they have changed their minds in the interim. It is difficult for a government always to maintain popularity during its term if it has to introduce taxation measures. The political climate can change within three years. If the Senate is always to seize on the fact that the gallup polls show that this is the right time to remove the government we will find that it will never get Supply. The government might be anxious to impose some additional tax which the Senate, out of sheer devilment, decides not to give it at that time and wants to see whether that government can win an election now because it might not be so popular.
All those judgments by the Senate would be political judgments. They would not be based on fairness, equity or democracy but on the continual struggle for power and supremacy. The fixed term parliament proposals give us some indirect solution. It is not the best solution. Senator Evans admits that. He said that the legislation is the second best solution. It does not involve talking about the past, the errors or the mistakes. It is trying to offer some reasonable alternative. We still face the overwhelming problem that the power of Supply can be destructively exercised. But the

real issue is that the basic constitutional prohibition of premature elections would make the blocking of Supply perhaps pointless and politically counter-productive. To the extent that the basic prohibition could be avoided in a particular case~for example, by the existence at the time of the blocking of some deadlocked measure for which the double dissolution trigger was already cockedthe argument is that the rule that an incoming government could only serve out the term of the predecessor would operate as an overwhelming, practical disincentive to the Senate pursuing the matter. I think that is right.
The Bill provides for a basic fixed term and it amends section 28 of the Constitution. There are further amendments to indicate clearly that the Senate terms are equivalent to two House of Representatives terms. The conditions are created for Senate elections to be always held at the same time as House of Representatives elections. There are further amendments to the Constitution to ensure that the writs for House and Senate elections are issued at the proper time. I make the point that one could have the House of Representatives passing a no confidence motion. If that happened there would have to be an election for the House of Representatives but it would be only for the balance of the term.
One can think of situations which perhaps show gaps in this Bill on which we need not dwell because we are basically talking about the positive aspects. One could find extraordinary situations in which one might not have a Prime Minister or the Prime Minister resigns and, therefore, no advice could be given to a Governor-General. But those possibilities are so remote in practical terms that we had better not waste too much time on them. The point we are anxious to make is that there will always be opportunities to remove bad governments. The best way to do it is through the people in the normal course and not by a Senate trying to judge its views. Certainly, if there were a motion of no confidence in the House it would not mean that one has to go to an election if, in fact, one could reform a government within the context of the occupants of the House of Representatives. If they could get a vote of confidence there would be no need for the unnecessary election. I think that all Senator Evans is saying in these expressions is that he has a chance to indicate clearly that we might go along the track to solving the difficulties we have experienced.
As he has said, this Bill is a serious minded and realistic attempt to grapple with the questions of fundamental constitutional importance and of

3120 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Constitution Alteration Bill

crucial importance to the future of our parliamentary system. It is a genuine attempt to find a possible middle-of-the-road solution, as Senator Evans calls it, to the major problems which have been weighing heavily on both sides. We want to ensure, in the interests of the Australian people, that democracy really means something and that it can work. We should leave it to the people to judge the question of when governments should be changed and not to the Senate. The subject matter, as Senator Evans says, is such that the temptation to score in political terms is obvious. But it is a temptation which has been resisted in the course of this debate. The only way constitutional reform on this or any other issue can be achieved is through consensus. I think that is clear.
If we can get the Australian nation to reach consensus-which I think can be done---on a new Constitution we will make enormous progress in this country. People would identify with the concept of one nation, one Australia. They do this in times of crisis. Unfortunately, the crises are usually wars. A better Australian spirit was never seen than when Australia was under attack and its very survival was at stake. Nobody worried what State he belonged to or where he was born; it was a question of Australia surviving. Our present world has shrunk but is very competitive. Distances are no guarantee of safety. There is competition for survival in other nations and in our own. If we are not able to make a go of democracy and a success of this nation, if we are too divided on the major issues, other nations will look at that as weakness. They are entitled to do so. Many of them, of course, do not practice democracy and are not likely to do so. We do not want democracy to be second best simply because words can be manipulated.
If we look at the intentions of the people who drafted the Constitution we find that they were anxious to create a strong and fair Australia in which all people had equal rights. A proper constitution is desperately needed. Knowing the conservative nature of the Government, we think that this is something that the Government might be prepared to offer the people. The only way it can do that is to pass the Bill we are now introducing. The Opposition makes the point that an opposition certainly ought to be able to bring down a government, but should only be able to do it in the House of Representatives. That is clearly the position. I make the point again that we are no longer urging the abolition of the Senate. We think it has a valuable role to play; one of an intelligent

contribution towards legislation, not one of playing the gut politics of going for the jugular vein to prevent the lifeblood of Supply.
Sir James Killen-I should know but I don't; do I take it that your Party no longer advocates the abolition of the Senate?
Mr LIONEL BOWEN~It does not. It has altered its platform.
Sir James Killen-Senator Evans, when he arrived, in his maiden speech--
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I did not know Senator Evans was in the chamber. I am delighted to see him. I hope he does not mind my saying this, but I think our party policy also suggests that we should not have any Ministers in the Senate. The Leader of the House would not object to that. With the Evans Bill, as we call it-- I think it is entitled to have that profile because he deserves a lot of praise for the effort that has gone into it and enormous praise for even getting it through the Senate, which shows that there is some hope at times-the issue there is
Mr Ruddock-A free vote?
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Yes, a free vote, if that will help at all. I mentioned other restraints. I will not weary the House with them. The Bill is positive in what it offers. It offers, as Senator Evans said, not the best but the second best solution. It is a good solution if in the use of the second best we can get the best, by what would be called custom or convention, in that the Senate will not continue to urge elections as it wants as opposed to what the people need. There could be no better time to discuss this matter than in the present world economic climate. It is not very healthy. The world is re-arming and is very anxious about energy resources. It is certainly going to need them. If we talk to the scientists of the world we find the world will be very short indeed of a number of necessary resources which Australia has. If Australia does not make a proper contribution to the stability of democracy it is endangering its very lifeblood. It is also perhaps guaranteeing that somebody else will take a very keen interest.
The political representation Australians have is not the best. It is not A-grade material; it is very much lower than C-grade. When one looks at the politics that have been played in the past one sees

Redevelopment of Fort Queenscliff

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3121

that it has been in what one would call the kindergarten or infantile stage. It has offered nothing by way of a solution to what we are about. The Evans Bill has done something. It has altered the people of Australia-those who think and want to discuss on a non-party calm basis what ought to be done-to the fact that we need something done about this Constitution. A small and a very valuable step is to guarantee that the House of Representatives can have a fixed term. I commend the Bill to the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr ScholesI second the motion and seek leave to continue my remarks later.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
REDEVELOPMENT OF FORT QUEENSCLIFF, QUEENSCLIFF,
VICTORIA Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (9.1) -I move:
That. in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Redevelopment of Fort Queensciiff, Queenscliff, Victoria.
The proposal is for the provision of new and upgraded facilities at the Army Command and Staff College, Queenscliff. In recommending construction of the work in the reference the Committee concluded that existing facilities are inadequate for the present and future requirements of the staff college and recommended their replacement. The Committee concluded also that the scope and design of the proposed redevelopment is justified. The estimated cost of the work is $8.3m in September 1982 prices. The Committee has recommended construction of the work in the reference. If the House agrees to support this motion planning can proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.

great deal of restoration work has taken place there. It is a very important asset, I believe, in our historical annals. It is well worth preserving. Those people who have done work in that area of preservation-largely private work, nevertheless with considerable support--have done an extremely good job in restoring or maintaining one of our assets.
On the other side of Port Phillip Bay-as the by-election is over I can say this without anyone suggesting this is political-the Officer Cadet School at Portsea is to move, in the not too distant future, its operations to Duntroon because of the building of the Australian Defence Force Academy and the surplus capacity which will then come about. That area, for very different purposes, should also be the subject of very serious discussion-I know that the matter is under active consideration-as to the permanency of occupation of the Commonwealth in that area. On both sides of the bay there are historic military reasons why we should be there. There are good environmental reasons why the area on the Portsea side of the bay should not be allowed to be over-utilised or damaged.
1raise that matter because it is one of those that may get lost by change, cost cutting or some other factor in the not too distant future. If the area is ever subject to relaxed vigilance it will, in fact, disappear. This will include, very likely, substantial proportions of the coastline. That will change the whole environment of Port Phillip Bay and the surrounding areas. It is very welcome that the works at Queenscliff are to be commenced and completed. Fort Queenscliff is a very important part of our current military training. The senior Army staff college operates at Queenscliff. That area is not represented by me at the moment; it was when I was first elected. I welcome the works that are to be done. 1 congratulate those who in the very recent past have done an enormous job of restoration in that area.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr N. A. Brown:

Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.2)-1 support the

That the Bill be now read a second time.

motion for new works at Queenscliff. In the last, Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-

couple of weeks the fort at Queensliff has been Minister for Communications)-Mr Deputy

subject to centenary celebations. In recent times a Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest

3122 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1982 and the Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1982, as they are related measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these three measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (9.6)-This is a cognate debate for the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill 1982 and two consequential measures, the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1982 and the Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1982. We applaud the legislation so far as it goes but we do not think it really goes far enough. The policy of the Australian Labor Party is to get new services into regions and, as far as it can, encourage local inputs without going too far in the direction of parochialism. We are concerned that the local organisations, stations and outlets should not be swamped by networks. It is also important that stations have a fair prospect of viability.
The intention of the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill is to get such services into the country. Although the Opposition will not oppose the second reading of the Bill, it thinks that the legislation proposed is incomplete. We would like to have seen a broader consideration of the broadcasting system as a whole. We take the view that, if new services cannot be obtained by the existing commercial configuration, perhaps there ought to be more opportunity for public or national broadcasting. It is long overdue for the Government to consider what it will do about a second Australian Broadcasting Commission regional network, for example, and to provide further outlets for community stations especially in those areas, some of them metropolitan areas, which are not presently serviced such as Melbourne's western suburbs about which I have spoken to the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) on several occasions. The Bill introduces supplementary licences for television and amends existing provisions so far unused for radio. It increases the maximum size of the membership of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal from five to eight.
There is a different concept in this Bill from its parent Act. There is the provision for the licensing

of services rather than the licensing of transmitters. In this legislation, a supplementary licence is one granted in the same area to an existing licensee. It is not subject to the normal ownership and control provisions, that is, it is seen as being one with the existing licence for certain purposes. The legislation does not apply to the five mainland State capitals. The question of supplementary licences does not arise for them. Under the legislation for radio, the supplementaries must be by frequency modulation transmission. For television ultra high frequency or very high frequency and radiated subscription services are permitted. Under the legislation, a total of 99 commercial FM services and 36 commercial TV services could be established.
As I said earlier, the Bill creates licences for services as distinct from the existing system of licences for transmitters. If a service area requires several transmitters-that is, the main one and one or more translaters-one licence is to cover the lot. The procedure is this: An existing licensee applies to the Minister for a single supplementary licence. A consortium of licensees serving the same area may also apply. The Minister may accept the application and forward it to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal which may conduct an inquiry into the grant. Secondly, the Minister may reject it on planning or technical grounds. [n response the Broadcasting Tribunal will either recommend to the Minister that invitations for an independent licence be issued or grant the supplementary licence for up to a five-year period. It should be noted that the position with respect to a potential independent who may initiate action for a licence is unaffected by the Bill. However, it could be affected by the establishment of a government policy on supplementary manifest by the Bill. At the moment if a person-that is, a natural person or a legal entity --wants a licence in an area he fills in an expression of interest form with the Department, which then asks him to complete a planning pro forma. The pro forma must then pass the test of whether it is within government policy. If it is, the Minister at that point makes a decision on whether he will invite an application. This existing procedure is unaffected by the Bill.
Until now, with no settled policy on how commercial frequency modulation services are to be extended to the country, no application has passed the test of whether it is within government policy. Now that a policy has been settled it is theoretically possible for the Minister to invite applications. However, it seems likely that the Minister will never invite an application for an

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3123

independent licence as a result of this process because to do so would be to declare that a particular independent is viable-something that otherwise would normally be a matter for determination by the Tribunal. A Minister would be in a somewhat embarrassing situation if, after holding an inquiry, the Broadcasting Tribunal knocked him back and cast doubt on his judgment because it did not think the application had viability. So presumably it is a right that would be exercised with some trepidation by a Ministerunless perhaps it was the Minister's predecessor.
Although there is nothing about it in the Bill, it is understood that when the Minister makes a statement on the scheme after the Bill's passage he will announce the date by which applications must be in from existing licensees. Otherwise he will say that he will call for independent licensees to make their applications. But this is considered a hollow threat. The reality of the situation is that all licensees will apply to forestall independence. There will be a long queue for processing. I do not know whether the mills of the ABT grind exceedingly small but they certainly grind very slowly. The fact that it is chronically short of staff and there are many--
Mr Ian Cameron-Efficient government.
Mr BARRY JONES-Not when it does not deliver the goods. That is the test of efficiency. In holding its inquiry the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal is required to determine whether an independent commercial licence would be viable and, if so, whether it would be in the public interest to invite applications. There is simply no specification of what the onus of proof of viability is and where it lies.
The Bill says that the Broadcasting Tribunal is to have regard only to the following public interest criteria: Firstly, the nature of the community to be served; secondly, the diversity of the interests of the community; and, thirdly, the nature of the broadcasting and television services of which satisfactory reception is being obtained by the community. Honourable members should note that there is no reference to any criteria such as media concentration of Press and other electronic media holdings because of that word 'only'. The ABT cannot take them into account. Honourable members should note also that there are no public interest criteria whatsoever for the granting of a supplementary licence. In other words, an existing licensee can argue against an independent applicant on two broad groundsthat is to say, non-viability and that the public interest criteria are not satisfied. By contrast, a

potential independent applicant cannot argue against a supplementary licence on public interest grounds, presumably because the Bill specifies grounds to be noted for an independent applicant but not for a supplementary licence that precludes general grounds or grounds arising elsewhere in the Act in considering a supplementary licence. It therefore seems that potential independents will not be treated equally with the incumbents. It is not known what the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal criteria of viability will be but presumably consistent criteria would have to be developed.
After eight years of operation, special renewal procedures take effect. At that stage the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal must determine whether an independent licence would be viable and, if so, whether it would be in the public interest to invite applications. If the ABT determines that an independent licence is viable, it then renews the supplementary licence for up to two years and recommends the Minister to invite applications for an independent service to begin three years later. There is then a procedure whereby the licensee can give up one of his two licences and transfer it; that is, he can sell it and only if he cannot sell it does a hearing take place for the independents. The effect of this, of course, is that the licensee is in a position where he selects his successor and gets the market value of the station.
On the face of it, if the licensee has scope under the ownership and control of provisions-that is, if he has not got a prescribed interest in the permitted maximum number of licences-he could transfer the licence to a company controlled by himself. He would then be in a position to own two independent licences in the one area. However, by virtue of clause 2 of the Bill, existing section 89A (I D) (c) (ii) of the act will apply to the transfer of a supplementary licence. This provides that the Broadcasting Tribunal shall have regard to 'the need to avoid undue concentration of influence' on the transferee, where a country licence is being transferred. This could presumably allow the Broadcasting Tribunal to refuse consent to a transfer even within the ownership and control limits. It should be noted that the Government has deliberately made a point of trying to prevent undue concentration in this case. Therefore, it may be argued that it admits the principle and it should be applied to the granting of supplementary licences in some way.
The approach adopted by the Opposition is: Firstly, we agree that a principle should be

3124 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

adopted and that some way has to be found for country areas to get new services; secondly, we believe that new services should, if possible, be independent of existing ones to provide for a greater range of choice; thirdly, we agree that if independent services could not possibly be viable, then supplementary licences should be issued; and, fourthly, we insist on avoiding undue concentration of influence across all media, which we believe is not only in the public interest but also even in the interests of advertisers. Therefore, we will propose some amendments giving guidence to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; for example, by directing it to adopt a liberal attitude to the question of viability.
If, for instance, a station which is automated is doing, say, the 'beautiful music' format which is common on some frequency modulation stations using syndicated news services it may well be that it could be profitable on a much lower budget than is conventionally regarded as necessary in the industry. There is very little in the way of overheads and hardly anything in labour costs. If one station in the area is local, there is also the possibility that program regulations could be adjusted to relax localism requirements for an FM commercial station. There is also the philosophical point about the degree to which governments should guarantee a market in such an industry. At the moment that is the Government's problem. The fact is that neither the Department nor the Broadcasting Tribunal has the resources, nor I think the critical attitude necessary to develop and to establish an appropriate viability level. Both will be heavily influenced by the existing industry in whose interests it will be to set the level as high as possible. The only real way to tell would be to let some independent operators try it out and then observe the results.
At the Committee stage I will move an amendment to ensure that a potential independent has the same facility to initiate an inquiry as an incumbent; secondly, an amendment to create a presumption of viability of an independent; and, thirdly, an amendment requiring the Broadcasting Tnbunal to have regard to concentration of influence in granting a supplementary licence. Obviously the very act of granting a supplementary licence may be in itself-that is a supplementary licence to an already existing licencee- . a concentrating of service. So the test would not apply to that. The granting is regarded as a last resort if there is no possibility of independent viability being established. But there remains the problem of concentration across other media. It is not a

theoretical problem. In Tasmania, for instance, the Rouse interests own all television stations, Launceston and Hobart radio and the Press. As the Bill stands there is nothing preventing them gaining an extra television station and an extra radio station in both Launceston and Hobart. That would surely, even to this libertarian Government, be excessive.
The Department's rationale is to say: 'But if one denies them supplementaries on the ground of concentration then you deny the people of Tasmania, or wherever, services. Therefore you have to give it to the existing interests. It is too bad but there it is'. This argument stands up only if there is no other way in which these commercial services can be provided. There are at least two other recourses and the procedure would go like this: Firstly, the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal would look at viability and then apply a public interest test on concentration, taking regard to media concentration generally, factors of ownership and also general geographical factors. If a case fails the concentration test-that is, where there is undue concentration such as in the Rouse case-then clearly the viability test could be more liberal insofar as it affects the incumbent. In other words, in business terms, because the incumbent owns radio, Press and television he would be less seriously affected by a forced sharing of, for example, the radio market with a newspaper, with a newcomer, than if he were simply a radio operator and nothing else because he is able to sprood his general business risk. Different viability criteria apply. His own viability would not be seriously threatened if he had a competitor in the field. Thus we could argue that the viability test be removed altogether in that case or in the general case of an incumbent who has extensive support elsewhere in the media. For example, take the case of Rupert Murdoch. Or at least there could be a heavy onus on the incumbent to prove why a newcomer would actually damage the services to the area, quite apart from the question of whether he would damage his own profits. In other words, it would be on the newcomer's head to make a go of it.
Secondly, alternatively as a competitive proposition to be put to the Tribunal, there could be aggregation of service areas for purposes of providing independent services where single service areas are found to be non-viable but where the incumbent fails the concentration test. In general there must be economies in running a networking situation over several service areas. Therefore there must be an aggregation of service areas so that the aggregation is viable. Although a lack of

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3125

localism may be advanced as an argument against this there are undoubtedly areas which have very strong regional features such as the Central West and North Coast of New South Wales or Gippsland. Each area encompasses several local service areas and they are identifiably regions in economic and other terms, such as sport. There is of course, a long-standing case for the promotion of regional radio and television.
The third factor is that although more politically difficult it would be possible to permit the granting of a supplementary licence to an incumbent radio or television station only if that licence were divested from any concentrated pan-media grouping. Such a provision would need to be accompanied by a way of ensuring that a potential independent could initiate an inquiry. But if there was no right to initiate an inquiry the incumbent would just sit tight. There could be a provision saying that if the incumbent refused to divest, as he would of course, then an independent would be allowed to proceed with his application as a matter of course. While admitting that here would be areas where the only recourse would be supplementary licences, it is highly likely that the existing industry greatly overstates the viability issue because it is in its obvious direct interest to do so. Furthermore, given eight years of incumbency it is highly unlikely that a station would ever be divested. The industry would prevail on a Liberal-National Party Government, if such a government were in office, to change the Act if that ever looked like happening. There are plenty of precedents for that.
As I mentioned earlier in my opening remarks, the other two pieces of legislation are merely consequential. The Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill and the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill simply provide for the licencees to be paid for supplementary licences. In conclusion I point out to the House that at the Committee stage we will be raising a number of matters by way of amendment.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (9.25)-The Broadcasting Television Amendment Bill, in terms of listeners to radio stations and viewers of television stations in country areas of Australia, is probably one of the most significant pieces of legislation to come before this Parliament in more than 20 years. It is part of the overall long term Government project of extending to those people in remote and rural areas the best available programming that can be provided through existing television and radio services. This is yet another

step by this Government to try to bring to them that range of services which obviously in the past they have so sorely missed. In fact, it is an opportunity for some 99 commercial FM radio services and 36 new television services to be considered for these rural and remote areas of Australia. That in itself is rather a significant move. I do not really think that any honourable member in this House would deny that the choice of programs available to many of these rural listeners and viewers has in the past been most restricted indeed.
One of the other interesting aspects of this Bill is the fact that it is directed, in the case of radio, primarily to the FM mode. That is important too. I suppose in many respects it was almost by mistake that Australia was introduced to FM radio which potentially is the best broadcasting medium that we can possibly provide in this country. If we take our minds back through history we will see that under the terms of the old Wireless Telegraphy Act FM radio was initially introduced into Australia. This legislation helps in providing a more professional use of FM radio and, most importantly, a professional use of FM radio in these regional and remote areas of Australia. It is an opportunity for existing country stations to test the markets and to see whether they can provide alternative programming through this particular mode.
I was interested to listen tonight to the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) and some of his arguments that he put. Honourable members will excuse me I am sure if I am wrong in saying that I think there was almost an assumption in his speech that most of the existing country radio operators were almost sitting on a bed of roses in terms of their profitability. I do not really think that is the case. In actual fact an analysis of the incomes and profit margins of many regional operators in Australia would show that their viability is very much at stake. I would also see this legislation as providing them with an opportunity to try to make their present situation more viable for very little outlay. Certainly there are opportunities within the proposed legislation for a market to be tested to see whether so many of these regional centres may in their own right be entitled to an additional independent service. Importantly too I think we have to give that opportunity to back up many of these regional operators so they can continue to provide not only their AM service but also these alternative services as well. Of course, one would hope that they would take great advantage of their opportunity to enter this particular mode-the FM mode-especially to

3126 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Broadcastmg and TV Amendment Bill

provide all that is best in terms of the technical quality in the broadcasting services. That really is what FM radio is all about. One would hope that any operator of these particular licences would move to use that medium to the very best advantage.
With the capital city stations-certainly this legislation does not apply to them-we have seen a very great acceptance of FM by listeners. A look at recent radio services around Australia would certainly indicate that the general public is adapting to such stations very quickly indeed. Surveys would indicate a very great increase in the number of listeners to FM radio services in capital cities. That has especially been so in cities such as Perth--as shown in recent surveys--and Brisbane and Sydney as well. We could see that as indicating that perhaps Australians are quicker than most people in other countries to adapt to new forms of communications and to new services that might be available. In that respect, the legislation should be welcome. It is a very real opportunity for Australians to have even greater diversity in their radio information and entertainment.
I mentioned a little earlier that this is just part of a total package of this Government to expand the whole area of communications on a much grander scale than we have known in the past. It provides an opportunity for Australians in country and remote areas to receive full services and an opportunity for people in the cities over the next few years to have on their hands almost a revolution in communications. Whilst we speak tonight of the supplementary licences for FM radio and for rural television interests, it is only a few years down the track when Australia will be benefiting from the services that the communication satellite can bring and from the even more exciting prospects of the introduction of radiated subscription television or cable television.
Although the legislation before the House tonight will not give the electronics industry such a tremendous chance to increase its participation in the manufacturing areas of the industry, I guess that it is a start. The Australian industry has caught on to FM radio, and one wonders what the true potential of the whole area of communications will be over the next five years. At a time when we are Iboking for employment and when the Australian electronics industry is going through severe periods of hardship, legislation such as this can in itself create a lot of the much needed employment in Australia. One hopes that this Government will be forward-looking enough in its very near future to make some very real

statements about the future of the new communications media, especially cable television. We have already had in this House over the last few years some debates about the communications capabilities of cable television. One would think it was almost time for the Government to start really making some recommendations about the possible introduction of cable television, perhaps even more than RSTV, for the future expansion of the electronics industry in Australia.
I would be most happy if the Government would make a commitment for the almost immediate introduction of cable television services in Australia. I say that bearing in mind that we have to make some rather hard decisions about the regulations that might govern the future of cable television in Australia. If we look at the cold, hard facts, we see that Australians have proved themselves to be amongst world leaders in accepting new technology. That was evident with the introduction of colour television into Australia. Within a matter of months of the introduction of colour television, something like 62 per cent of homes in this country were saturated with it. Australia has the greatest acceptance of any country in the world of home videotape recorders. The saturation level is something like 32 per cent already. With the early introduction of cable television services, which would cover not only entertainment but also all sorts of information services, that record would be improved upon even more.
The most exciting part of the introduction of cable television is not the services that it can bring but the employment opportunities that it can provide at a time such as this. On my estimations even the announcement of the initial plans to go ahead with cable television could start in the employment area such a revolution that, by the time it was introduced, at least 20,000 jobs would have been created in the electronics industry. The introduction of cable television here would mean a very high usage of labour. It would mean also a very high usage of capital, and at a time such as this that is probably what we need more than anything else. There is no denying that cable television would be restricted initially to the capital cities only. But that is well and good because that is where it will be viable and easily introduced and that is where there is already an expectation of the new technology which is just around the corner. If we introduce 20,000 jobs into the electronics industry, we can also look at the entertainment and information aspects of cable to see what sort of employment they will generate too.
The experience in the United States of America is that cable television services are great consumers of television programs of all types, not

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3127

only in the entertainment area but also in the information area. Already a fledgling industry in Australia is providing some entertainment services to cable television stations in the United States. I am sure that most members of this House have already heard of the acceptance, for example, of Australian Rules football in the Los Angeles area. I guess it was a case of providing some fill-in programs but it certainly opened a whole new market for the Australian football business on the West Coast of the United States. A gentleman I know from my home city of Brisbane who has been producing a travel series for Australian television services has just sold his programs to an American cable concern. His return on the cost of that production has been about three times his outlay. Already he is making plans for the expansion of that service throughout other areas of the United States. I suppose that is an indication of the potential for Australia if we get into that mode early enough.
There is an opportunity in the general information areas and the educational areas for Australians to take advantage of this whole new technology. If we can get in early enough we can provide not only a home market but also a whole new export market. I hope that within the coming months we will look very seriously indeed at getting down to the job and making sure that we have our own regulations correct in terms of the things that should govern the introduction of cable television. I hope that Australia will get on the bandwagon and take advantage not only of the local market but also, through our own technology and the advancements that have already been made in that field, an export market of not inconsiderable proportions through Asia and beyond in the years to come.
As I said at the beginning of my address tonight, this legislation is yet another step in the everexpanding concern that this Government has for all Australians to receive the best communications services available. This will certainly mean that people in many of the country areas of Australia will have a greater diversity of services and a greater quality of services. In those respects, with the safeguards that are envisaged in this legislation, I certainly commend the Bills.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (9.38)-The honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) made most of the main points that need to be made by the Opposition in relation to this legislation. I will confine my remarks to certain aspects which I think are important and which illustrate the reasons for our amendments. To begin

with, I think there has been a slight misrepresentation of the importance of this legislation. An extremely important measure is being undertaken here. A series of improved radio and television services is proposed not just for what might be called the strictly country areas but also for large regional cities. In fact, the provisions of the legislation extend to every place in Australia except the five capital cities. They extend not only to remote areas but also to major cities, such as Newcastle, Wollongong, Hobart, Launceston, Darwin and Alice Springs. In that sense the provisions before us deal not just with inadequate services in certain remote areas but also with cities of hundreds of thousands of people. In that sense they have to be looked at carefully, not simply in terms of the claimed aims but also in terms of what they are going to do in relation to the concentration of media ownership in this country.
We in the Australian Labor Party applaud any attempt to increase services for country areas. We believe that there should be a maximum effort on the part of the Government to provide such increased radio and television services. It should be emphasised that this legislation is not concerned with the different methods of providing such regional services but is primarily concerned with the provision of commercial services. In my view the commercial nature of these services needs to be questioned. Let us ask this question: If w\! are concerned to provide more regional and country services why are we not giving out more public radio licences and extending Australian Broadcasting Corporation services and multicultural and ethnic services? This legislation does not address itself to those areas at all. It does not address itself to the matter of more public radio or television. There is a big demand for the extension of public radio and television in these other regional centres. As I mentioned, they are not all remote centres; some of them are very big cities.
Mr Jull-They can already get a licence under the Wireless Telegraphy Act.
Dr THEOPHANOlJS-Not under the provisions of this legislation. They can apply only if they are prepared to take on advertising and what have you.
Mr Ian CameronWhat is wrong with that?
Dr THEOPHANOlJSWhat I am saying is that this legislation deals primarily with commercial interests and not with the other aspects of the problem. The Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) has explained why it is that the Government, if it is sincere in wanting to provide

3128 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

these extra services, has not put forward a know from experience that this is the sort of tactic

program of extending public radio and television Australia's media monopolies carry out.

or extending the ABC. In many places throughout

Australia the ABC has only one radio station rather than two. Certainly, there is a growing need throughout the nation for consideration of second ABC television stations. The Government has made comments about extending multicultural television to other areas but it has not gone beyond the capital cities. It has not mentioned these other regional centres. In many of these regional centres there are substantial concentrations of ethnic people, and they need to be taken into account. Ethnic radio has been a great success in the capital cities, but again there has been no provision of ethnic radio for regional and country centres where, as I mentioned, people who speak
other languages and for whom English is a second language do not have anything like the same opportunities as people in the capital cities.

I remind the House once again that we are not talking only about small towns; we are talking about large cities being involved in this situation. We are talking about multimillion dollar operations and the profits which can be made from gaining access to radio and television licences in these cities. In that context, the fact that those who are applying for supplementary licences will be given preference in a certain way to those applying for independent licences under the provisions of this Bill-this was outlined by the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry 10nes)-indicates the extent to which, in fact, this Government is committed to the existent monopolies in broadcasting and television. Time and again we in the Labor Party have complained about the concentration of media ownership. The

Bill in its present form does not prevent, for

The other point that needs to be example, a huge media giant who has big interests

emphasised--in fact it comes up in relation to in the capital cities from applying for a sup-

considerations of ethnic radio-is the Governplementary licence in a large city such as Hobart

ment's commercial interest and its perpetual conor Wollongong. Not only is he not prevented but

cern with profit rather than the provision of seralso he can put in various claims to discredit

vices. This matter has come out even in the area of someone who applies for an independent licence.

ethnic radio. A report which has recently been Obviously, those sorts of people have the money,

prepared argues that the ethnic radio stations, the know-how and the expertise to do this and to

2EA and 3EA, ought to be given over to private undermine those who would like an independent

enterprise and made commercial radio stations. licence to be granted.

This would be an extremely retrograde step which

would be totally resisted by all ethnic communities. In fact what we ought to be doing is considering extending these kinds of services that are provided by 2EA and 3EA to regional centres.

What do we see in this Bill? In the guise of a pretence of wanting to extend services-we have no quarrel with the extension of services-- we see very little in the way of provision of public ser-

Mr Ian Cameron--There are no people of ethnic origin there anyway.

vices, government services or ethnic services, but
we see the attempt to provide a supplementary licence setup which, in fact, clearly favours those

Dr THEOPHANOUS-That is typical of your knowledge. If the honourable member refers to regional cities such as Newcastle and says that there are no people of ethnic origin in those places that goes to show how much he knows about Australia. Let me now express what our difficulties are in relation to the commercial stations. First, the provisions in the Bill are such that they
discourage the establishment of independent licences. The independent licensee has to prove that his proposition is commercially viable. If he has to prove that, those who are interested in a supplementary licence can make submissions to try to disprove his claim. In other words, those who may have a vested interest in getting hold of a

who are already in the media monopoly game and which discourages those who wish to establish independent stations. Our amendments do not oppose the extension of the services. They make this a fairer game in that those who are seeking an independent licence will be given some benefit of the doubt and also they will be able to argue against the granting of a supplementary licence in the same way in which the person who wants a supplementary licence can argue against those
who are seeking the independent licence. That leads me to the final point, which concerns local content and local programs. How can a multimedia monopoly, if it gets hold of all these regional stations--

supplementary licence in fact will be trying to dis-

courage the Government from granting a licence Mr Ian Cameron-How do you know they are

to an independent. This is a serious matter. We going to?

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3129

Dr THEOPHANOUS~-According to the provisions of this Bill they will. Do not worry about that. In the big regional centres that is what they will do. As I mentioned, some very big cities are involved under the provisions of this Bill. If those multimedia monopolies get hold of the supplementary licences, what kind of local content will be provided for the people in local areas? These monopolies do not care very much about local content. They are not concerned about providing local news services and all the rest of it. Their interest is simply to maximise their profitability. Given that situation, the aim of the Bill could very easily be undermined. The original aim of the Bill was to provide, in these regional and local centres, independent radio and television stations for the local community. If these stations are not to be independent they will not provide those sorts of things for the local community. Anyone who does not see that clear point is simply kidding himself when, as I mentioned, especially in the big regional centres, millions and millions of dollars of profits will be involved.
I conclude by saying that of course in smaller regional centres where an independent station is not viable we do not oppose this supplementary principle. In my view the amendments we are putting forward will solve the kinds of difficulties which I have raised regarding the concentration of media ownership and the failure to provide for local content. I remind honourable members opposite that there is no provision in the Bill which requires that local stations actually have substantiallocal content at all. I believe that the Government ought to accept the amendments moved by the Opposition to ensure that we get a bipartisan approach to this matter.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
Clauses I to 8--by leave-taken together.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (9.52)- The first two amendments the Opposition offers relate to clause 8 which states:
Subject to sub-section (3). the holder of a licence for a commercial broadcasting station or a consortium each member of which is the holder of such a licence may lodge with the Minister, in accordance with a form approved by the Minister, an application for the grant of a licence
And so on. We simply propose to add to new subsections 82A (I) and 82A (2) of the principal Act the words, 'or any other person'. The point is

simply that the purpose of this amendment is to put potential independent operators on the same footing as the holders of the licences to initiate an inquiry into the grant of supplementary and independent licences. As the Bill stands, only holders may initiate an inquiry. If one is a holder of a licence, an incumbent, it is extremely unlikely one would want to have an inquiry so that one could be knocked off. It is like sitting members of the Liberal Party or indeed of any other party saying, 'Look, I think I will initiate a challenge to myself for pre-selection'. It does not make an awful lot of sense. One cannot imagine that there would be too many incumbents who would be racing around trying to organise somebody to run against them. If one is to have an inquiry, if one is to have the option open, one has to have the right of application by the person who wants to challenge the status quo.
Mr Jull--But you can do that under existing legislation.
Mr BARRY JONES-Let us make that clear. The legislation is by no means-as the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown), I think, would generously concede-the easiest piece of legislation in the world to read. It is not exactly Gibbonian in its lucidity.
Mr N. A. Brown-Gibberish.
Mr BARRY JONES-Yes. It is quite patent on the face of proposed new section 82A that that right is exclusively the right of the licence holder. The licence holder is the only person named who may lodge an application with the Minister. If the Minister says that there is some alternative right, no doubt he will exercise his rights to explain what it is. But I think we have to make this absolutely clear by inserting the words 'or any other person' in proposed new sections 82A (I) and 82A (2). If the existing licensee does not really want a supplementary licence-of course, he may be doubtful about its economic value to him-he can block the process of determination whether there should be an independent or a supplementary licence by simply not applying. In other words, if he does not want the matter opened up at all, he just does nothing. There may be a marginal case for that, one way or the other.
Mr Bourchier-Then it lapses and others can apply for it.
Mr BARRY JONES-That is not at all clear in this provision. I would be interested to hear, as a piece of textual exegesis, the honourable member's views on it. We believe on the basis of

3130 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

our policy that a prime requirement is to get new services to rural areas. There should be a process whereby a determination can be brought to a head.
The arguments which may be made against an amendment to the clause are, firstly, that anyone can apply to a Minister now to invite an application. There is no formal process for this-just a request to the Minister whose power it is to call for applicants. This is true. But, since the Bill gives the right to an existing licensee to apply, it should as a matter of equity give the same right to others. Secondly, it may be argued that we are creating a new automatic right and therefore taking planning power away from the Minister. We argue that that is not so because the legislation makes a recommendation that the Minister call for applications for a licence if the Minister finds that an independent licence is viable. We could have put up an amendment making it mandatory for the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal to grant an independent licence. This would have made a parallel process to the granting of a supplementary licence. But we believe that the recommendation carries enough force. We think the opportunity should be there for further review by the Minister.
The Minister may argue that all licensees will apply anyway or that he will announce that he will call applications for independent licences in all areas if applications for supplementary licences are not received by a certain date. There is no reason why a potential independent should be held up by such a process or be made subject to the Minister's discretion when that independent's competitors-the existing licensees-have a statutory right. It is just a matter of simple equity. The incumbent has a statutory right conferred by the legislation; in effect, the independent is subject to the discretion of the Minister. He relies on ministerial whim, if one likes. We believe that that is quite inequitable. Therefore, 1 urge the Government to accept the amendments to insert in both cases the words 'or any other person'. 1seek leave to move the two amendments together.
Leave granted.
1 move:
(I) Clause 8, page 4, line 6, after 'licence' insert 'or any other person '.
(2) Clause 8, page 4, line 14, after 'licence' insert 'or any other person '.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (9.59)-1 presume that at 10 o'clock the procedures of the chamber will take effect, but in the meantime, 1 say that the Government is not able to accept the

two amendments that the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) has moved.
Consideration interrupted.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)-- Order! It being 10 p.m., I shall report progress.
Progress reported.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., 1propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr N. A. Brown-I require the question to be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (10.1)-1 said a moment ago that the Government was not able to accept the amendments proposed by the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones). The reason why the Government is not able to accept those amendments is that they proceed, with the greatest of respect, upon a misapprehension of the nature of the supplementary licence scheme. The very basis of the supplementary licence scheme is that machinery is created by the Bill under which the licensee is able to activate the whole mechanism. He is able, as the Bill provides, to lodge with the Minister an application for the grant, in effect, of a supplementary licence. To say that somebody other than the holder of the licence can do that is, with the greatest of respect, a nonsense. It would be the exact complete negation of the whole supplementary licence scheme to provide, as the honourable member for Lalor has proposed, that someone other than the current licensee has the right to lodge the application. Even if one accepted the sort of principle that the honourable member has contended should be implemented, he would have to do a complete redrafting exercise of the present provision. That is so because the honourable member for Lalor would ask us to accept that when his amendment was added to the Bill, proposed new section 82A for example, would mean that the holder of the licence for a commercial broadcasting station, et cetera, may lodge with the Minister, et cetera, an application for the grant of a licence for a broadcasting service to someone other than himself. Clearly, the other person would not be applying for a supplementary licence. As 1 said, the proposed amendments are not consistent with the whole structure of the

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3131

scheme. If one wanted to implement the principle contended for it would require the whole series of provisions to be redrafted.
In addition, I make the point that the proposed amendments would have the effect of compressing two inquiries into one and telescoping two independent inquiry processes involved in the supplementary licence scheme into one public inquiry. That would mean that the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal would be required to decide two things at the one time and in the one hearing. In the first place it would have to decide whether an independent licence was viable and in the public interest and whether a supplementary licence should be issued to an existing licensee. It ~ould also have to determine, if an independent lIcence were viable, which of the applicants should be offered the licence. I do not know whether anyone would be able to work out who was bouncing the ball at an inquiry of that sort but it would be, in our submission, unnecessarily ~~nf~sing. if the Tribunal were embarking upon a JOint inqUiry concerned with both of those matters at the same time. We are of the view that the issues can be properly resolved only by two separate public inquiries. Apart from involving the Tribunal in those excessively complex supplementary licence inquiries, the one process dealing with the two investigations to which I have referred would mean that prospective licensees for an independent licence would be required to prepare detailed applications for inquiries in doubtful areas on the off-chance-that is all it would betha.t the Trib~nal might determine that applicatIOns for an Independent licence should be considered. The whole thing would be utterly confusing.
I revert to the main point; that is, that we are unfortunately unable to accept the amendment because to do so would negate the whole structure of the scheme, the very basis of which is that we take the current licensee and, in effect, invite him under the scheme to apply for a supplementary licence. If he does not do so then the field is open an.d the Minister may activate the machinery to brIng the potential independent aspirants into the field. But there is no point in going on with the supplementary licence scheme if this proposed amendment were added to the Bill.
!l~ THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (10.6)-The MInister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown), may be quite lucid but his logic is rather twisted. I cannot see why we cannot add the words, 'or any other person' after the mention of:
The holder . . . or a consortium each member of whi<;,h is the holder of such a licence may lodge with the Minister, m accordance with a form approved .

~ould thi.s not have the effect which we are tryI~g to achl~ve, namely, that if somebody in a particular regIOn or a particular area wants a second or further television licence, that is a television licence or a radio licence other than the ones that exists that person would not be able, under these provisions, to apply for that licence? The Minister made the point in his remarks that the power in the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill is given to the person with an existing licence who wants to apply for a supplementary licence. The Minister said: 'If that person does not apply then the field is open for others'. But why should an opportunity be given in the first instance to the person who has a licence in a particular town or city? Why not simply say: 'All right, if someone feels that they can make a go of a television station or a radio station, whether or not they happen to be t~e owner of an alternative station, why not simply allow them, under the provisions set out in the Bill, to apply and to meet the conditions required so that we can treat independents and those who are already owners in the same way'. The principle of equity is important here as is the principle of concentration of media ownership. There is nothing in proposed new section 82A which is inconsistent with adding the words which have been suggested by the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones).
Amendments negatived.
Clauses agreed to.
Clause 9 (Consideration of applications by Tribunal).
The TEMPORARY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)-Before I call the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) I assume that he is seeking leave to move the amendments that have been circulated. I indicate to him that the circulated amendments (4) and (5) should more properly be one amendment because they refer to the same line of the Bill. Amendments (4) and (5) become amendment (4). Amendment (6), as circulated, becomes amendment (5).
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (10.9)-by leave-I move:
(3) Clause 9, page 7, line 6. after 'licence' (second occurring) insert 'and the Tribunal has not refused to grant the licence by vIrtue of paragraph 83 (6) (gr.
(4) Clause 9, page 7,line 19, after paragraph (e) insert the followmg paragraphs:
'tea) by adding after paragraph (f) of sub-section (6) the following paragraph:
"(g) the Tribunal is satisfied that, where the licence is a supplementary licence, the granting of such licence would not result in undue concentration of influence, whether direct or indirect, on the applicant, having regard to the ownershIp and control of other media serving the area to be served by the licence.". '.

3132 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

'reb) by inserting after sub-section (6) the following sub-section:

"(6A) In making a determination under sub-paragraph 83 (6) (e) (i), the Tribunal shall determine that a licence, other than a supplementary licence, would be reasonably likely to be commercially viable unless, on the basis of evidence supplied to the Tribunal, the Tribunal concludes otherwise.". '.

?f the amendments (3) and (4), amendment (4) IS .the key amendment. I will just say something bnefly by way of introduction of amendment (3). Amendment 3 deals with the case where the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal has not found 'undue concentration'. It says that in that case the course is to follow the Bill's procedure; that is, the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal goes on to determine whether an independent is viable and, if so, it recommends that the Minister invite an independent to apply for a licence. If not, it grants the supplementary licence. I want to say a few more words about amendment (4). Amendment (4) proposes to add in section 83 of the principal Act paragraph (g), which reads:

The tribunal is satisfied that. where the licence is a supplementary licence, the granting of such licence would not result in undue concentration of influence. whether direct or indirect. on the applicant. having regard to the ownership and control of other media serving the area to be served by the licence.

Amendment (4) says that a licence will not be

given to a licensee if he is part of a cross-media

grouping. It is meant to apply, for instance, in the

case I mentioned in the second reading debate, to

the Rouse case in Tasmania. We will not counten-

ance the situation where all radio, television and

Press in the town are owned by one person or

company. This is unhealthy for diversity. It is also

unhealthy for advertisers. We do not believe that

this amendment would deny new services to

country people. It would work as follows. Section

83 (6) of the principal Act in effect says that if the

Tribunal holds an inquiry and a set of the con-

ditions set out in section 6 paragraphs (a) to (f)

are satisfied, the licence will be granted. The sec-

tion applies to all licences and within the set para-

graph (e) deals with supplementary licences. A

new paragraph (e) is created in this Bill. Amend-

ment (4), which would insert a new paragraph

marked (ea), would set a seventh condition-that

is, paragraph (g)-which says that for a sup-

plementary effect, is to

licence an 'undue concentration' be frowned upon. Notice it is

~oint

undue concentration of ownership but undue

concentration of influence. The term is used else-

where in the Act, so we are not introducing a new

concept.

Amendment (4) (eb) provides for evidence
about commercial viability to be presented to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal if there is to be

any challenge to the presumption of commercial viability. Amendment (5) treats the case where the Broadcasting Tribunal has found 'undue concentration '. It says that if a supplementary licence has been refused on those grounds the recommendation goes automatically to the Minister and he then invites application for an independent. In other words, it then abandons any test of viability.
It is important to emphasise that the inquiry ceases at that point. In our view it would be wrong to allow such a concentration of influence. It is contrary to the established philosophy along those lines originally set as far back as October 1935 when the first regulations against concentration of ownership in radio were made. It has had twoparty support ever since. As recently as the time of the former Minister---who is now an aviation superstar-- the Honourable A. A. Staley, this Government decided that FM was to be subject to the provisions along with AM radio, thus following the policy.
The arguments to be adduced in addition to those I have just given are, first, that if the licensee in a cross-ownership situation wants a supplementary licence badly enough he can divest himself of his other interests, when he will then be able to pass the 'undue influence' test; that is, he would be eligible or, alternatively, if he is cross-owned he ?ught to be viable enough to withstand any mdependent competition. Therefore, it is up to the mdependents to make a go of it. This is, paradoxically coming from us, a free enterprise argument if ever there was one. We are great advocates of free enterprise under certain limited circumstances. It is unlikely to be the established licensee who will be in trouble; it is much more likely to be the newcomer. If the argument that is put up here fails a Labor government would be prepared to consider in future other ways of bringing new services to the country.
I repeat what I said when I opened my remarks at the second reading stage. The flaw of this Bill is that it considers commercial services in isolation. There are other ways such as public or national broadcasting by which new services could be brought in. Unfortunately this Bill ignores these. In fact those alternative methods might well turn out to be more acceptable to many existing commercial broadcasters. I hardly need to restate the argument on the question of undue concentration. I simply say that we stand by the view that we need diversity and multiple sources of information in a society like ours. We believe that there s?ould be competition and advertising and that It IS very unhealthy for all outlets to be tied up by one group in one town of which probably

Broadcasting and TV Amendment Bill

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3133

the most outstanding examples in Australia would be Launceston and Mildura.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (10.17)-1 have no doubt whatsoever that the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) is motivated by some pure motives. The objective of competition of course is desirable but the Government is unable to accept the proposed amendments. I draw the honourable member's attention to amendment (4). At the start we could not accept this in any event because there seems to be a drafting fault which creates a double negative. Therefore it seems to achieve exactly the opposite of the effect which, I presume, is intended by the honourable member. If I read the opening words of the provision of the Broadcasting and Television Act and then add the clause proposed by the honourable member I think the fault will become apparent. Section 83 (6) of the Act provides:
The Tribunal shall not refuse to grant a licence to a person unless it has held an inquiry into the grant of the licence and
I now adopt the honourable member's words:
(g) the Tribunal is satisfied that. where the licence is a supplementary licence. the granting of such licence would not result in undue concentration of influence .
The honourable member intended to say that the licence would not be granted if there were an undue concentration of influence but in fact he has, with respect, said the opposite. As I have said section 83 (6) provides that the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal shall not refuse to grant a licence unless a number of things happen. If one of the things that happens is that there is not undue concentration of influence presumably the intention would be that the licence would not be issued. However the result would be that the honourable member would have a licence issued in that case. It is probably just a drafting mistake but it illustrates one of the several problems that we have with the legislation.
The second matter is that the reference to, and I quote from the honourable member's amendment, any 'other media' does not have any definition. There would inevitably be difficulties of interpretation which may result in applications for judicial review and endless arguments if the Tribunal gave concentration of influence as a reason for any decision made against the grant of a licence. The fact that there is no definition of any other media would seem by itself to make this an unworkable amendment in our submission. In any event this is probably the substantial objection that we have. If one imposes this criteria it is, once

again, at variance with the whole basis of the supplementary licence scheme. It is at variance because it would enable the Tribunal to refuse to grant a supplementary licence, which is what the whole exercise is about, on grounds of concentration of ownership even in those areas where the Tribunal has found that an independent licence would not be viable. Therefore, we could get to the stage where the Tribunal could find that an independent licence would not be viable and the result of that would be that the community would miss out on the service because the licence would be denied to the applicant on the grounds, presumably, of undue concentration of ownership. As I said, that could arise even where the Tribunal has found that an independent licence would not be viable to serve the area. Therefore, people would miss out on obtaining that service.
In respect of the other amendment-I am assuming that the honourable member has said what he proposes to say about it-we do not believe that it is appropriate that there should be this onus of proof provision worked into the legislation as it would result in an automatic Tribunal determination that an independent licence would be viable unless evidence to the countrary were offered. We think this is an undersirable way of putting it. In the first place, we say that the proposed amendment does not state what the standard of proof is that will be required by the Tribunal. As the applicant would attempt to supply and the Tribunal would require that evidence anyway, the amendment in our submission is unnecessary and probably unworkable.
Secondly, the proposed amendment overlooks the extensive powers and statutory obligations of the Tribunal to inform itself thoroughly on these matters. I refer the Committee to section 25 (1 ) and section 25 (2) of the Act. Section 25 (1) provides that:
The Tribunal shall, without regard to legal forms and solemnities, make a thorough investigation into all matters relevant to an inquiry under this Division. and may give all such directions and do all such things as the Tribunal considers are necessary or expedient for the expeditious and just hearing of the inquiry.
Section 25 (2) provides that:
The Tribunal is not bound by legal rules of evidence and may inform itself on any matter in such manner as it thinks tit.
Therefore, the Tribunal already has a very wide charter to look at a whole range of matters. The Government takes the view that, having gone down the path of giving extensive powers to the Tribunal and having vested the Tribunal with the responsibility of hearings and issuing licences to applicants, it is appropriate that it should be allowed to have a wide ambit, to have regard to the

3134 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Adjournment

matters to which it wishes to have regard and to conduct its investigations in its own way, without shackling it by specific provisions relating to an onus of proof which would unnecessarily restrict its activities and the proper performance of its functions. As 1 said at the outset, although I am sure the honourable member is well motivated by the principles which he has espoused the Government is not able to accept the amendments proposed.
Amendments negatived.
Clause agreed to.
Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole, and agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr N. A. Brown)-by leave-read a third time.
BROADCASTING STATIONS LICENCE FEES AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr N. A. Brown:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr N. A. Brown) read a third time.
TELEVISION STATIONS LICENCE FEES AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr N. A. Brown:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr N. A. Brown) read a third time.
ADJOURNMENT
Multiculturalism Motion (by Mr N. A. Brown) proposed:

That the House do now adjourn.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (10.27)-1 wish to speak about what is happening in the field of ethnic affairs and multiculturalism in this country. Let me say at the outset that 1 am very disturbed at the attempts that have been made to blame the present economic crisis on immigration and, more seriously, on the role of migrant and ethnic communities in this country. We just cannot afford at a time of serious economic problems to have divisions arising because people are blaming ethnic or migrant communities for those problems. The fact is that for nearly 40 years now we have worked to build a multicultural and integrated Australia. In working towards this goal we have had difficulties and problems. Nevertheless, we have not attempted to divide one section from another or to blame one section of the community for our economic problems. Unfortunately, however, there are certain indications that this is happening.
What is more unfortunate is that certain prominent people in the community are attacking the very concept of multiculturalism and of a multicultural society. It is good that the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) is in the House to answer the extraordinary statement by Professor Kramer, the Chairman of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. She not only said that we can get rid of multicultural television but also virtually implied that multiculturalism had no place in our community. Statements of that kind by prominent individuals such as Professor Kramer are divisive and are calculated to attack the basis on which we have tried to build our society since the Second World War. They should be denounced. I am perturbed that that kind of claim has not been denounced by the Government.
The concept of a multicultural society was approved by this Government and by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in particular. The Government and certain of its spokespersons are backing away from that concept. The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) recently made an absolute fool of himself at the national language conference when he tried to tell us---
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:

Papers

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3135

Mr Newman to present a Bill for an Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Mr Carlton to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Mr Hunt to move--
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969 and by reason of the urgent nature of the work, it is expedient that the following proposed work be carried out without having been referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works: Construction of a Chemical Milling Facility for the Government Aircraft Factories at Fishermen's Bend, Vic.
Mr Hunt to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969 and by reason of the urgent nature of the work, it is expedient that the following proposed work be carried out without having been referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works: Construction of R.A.N. minehunter catamarans and shipbuilding facility.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 8 December 1982, pursuant to statute:
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act-- Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 317.
Air Force Act-Regulation--Statutory Rules 1982, No. 333.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982, No. 327.
Apple and Pear Levy Act-Regulations---Statutory Rules 1982, No. 328.
Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court ActRules of Court-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 316.
Australian National University Act--Statutes-No. 156 Vice-Chancellorship Amendment No.5. No. 157-Deputy Vice-Chancellorship Amendment No. 5. No. 158Enrolment, Courses and Degrees Amendment No.16. No. I59-Library Amendment No. I. No. 160-Admission to Status (The Faculties) Amendment No.2. No. 161-Board of the Faculties Amendment No. I. No. I62-Faculties (The Faculties) Amendment No. 16.
Australian Tourist Commission Act--RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982, No. 309.
Customs Act Regulations Statutory Rules 1982, Nos. 310,311.
Dairy Industry Stabilization L.evy Act-Regulations--- Statutory Rules 1982, No. 330.
Defence Act Determinations1982No. 42-Service Allowance. No. 43Higher Duties Allowance, and other allowances. No. 44 .. Special Allowance for Medical Officers and Dental Officers. No. 45---ln Port Allowance Regulations-Statutory
Rules 1982, Nos 331, 332. Freedom of Information Act--- Regulations-Statutory
Rules 1982, Nos 322, 323. Human Rights Commission Act--Regulations-Statutory
Rules 1982, No. 321. Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act-
Regulation--Statutory Rules 1982,314.

Lands Acquisition Act -Statements (3) of lands required by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (I).
Law Reform Commission Act--Regulations-- Statutory Rules 1982, No. 319.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos 312, 313.
National Health Act-- Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 334.
Naval Defence Act - Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos 324, 325.
Navigation ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No.
315.
Parliamentary Counsel Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 320.
Public Service ActAppointment-Department of Social Security-M. D.
Liddle. Determinations -- 1982-- Nos 14, 15.
Regulations -Statutory Rules 1982, No. 329. Public Service Arbitration Act-Public Service
Arbitrator-Determinations accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with the Law -1982-
No. 470-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff
Association. No. 471-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Ship-
wrights Union and others.
No. 472--Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association.
No. 473--Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and others.
No. 474-Professional Officers' Association, Aus-
tralian Public Servic~. Nos 475 to 477-Amalgamted Metal Workers' and
Shipwrights Union and others. No. 478-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.'
No. 479-Australian Theatrical and Amusement Employees Association.
Nos 480 and 481--Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 482-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and
Technical Employees. No. 483-Civil Air Operations Officers' Association of
Australia. Nos 484 and 485 -Professional Radio and Electronics
Institute of Australasia. No. 486---Australian Public Service Association
(Fourth Division Officers).
Nos 487 and 488-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association.
Nos 489 and 490Professional Radio and Electronics
Institute of Australasia and another. No. 491-Federated Storemen and Packers Union of
Australia and another. No. 492-Australian Theatrical and Amusement Em-
ployees Association. Nos 493 to 495-- Australian Broadcasting Commission
Staff Association.
No. 496Printing and Kindred Industries Union. Nos. 497 and 498--Commonwealth Medical Officers
Association and another. Nos. 499 and 500-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and
Shipwrights Union and others. No. SOl-Australasian Society of Engineers. t No. 502-External Plant Officers Association. No. 503-Administrative and Clerical Officers Associ-
ation, Commonwealth Public Service.
No. 504-Customs Officers' Association of Australia, Fourth Division.
No. 50S-Australian Public Services Artisans' Associ-
ation and another. No. 506-Professional Officers Association, Aus-
tralian Public Service.

3136 REPRESENTAT1VES 8 December 1982

Papers

No. 507 - Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia.
No. 508 --Federal Clerks Union of Australia. No. 509 - Association of Draughting, Supervisory and
Technical Employees.
Nos. 510 and 51 I-Federated Clerks Union of Australia.
No. 512-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.t No.513 Civil Air Operations Officers' Association of
Australia.
No. 514-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and another.
No. 515--lndustrial Arbitration Registrars' Association.
No. 516 --Australian Workers' Union.t
No. 517-- Australian Journalists Association.
No. 518--Amalgamated Metal Workers and Ship-
wrights Union and others.t No. 519Merchant Service Guild of Australia. No. 520-- Transport Workers Union of Australia.
Nos. 521 and 522 Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service and others.
No. 523 --Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union of Australia.t
No. 524 Federated Furnishing Trade Society of
Australia.t
No. 525Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners of Australia and others.t
No. 526 - Professional Officers Association, Aus-
tralian Public Service and another. No. 527-Administrative and Clerical Officers Associ-
ation, Commonwealth Public Service.
No. 528 -- Australian Journalists Association. No. 529 - Professional Officers Association, Aus-
tralian Public Service.
No. 530 Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and others.
No. 531 -- Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia.
Nos. 532 and 533 Professional Officers Association,
Australian Public Service. No.534 Arbitration Inspectors' Association. Nos. 535 and 536 -Professional Officers Association,
Australian Public Service. No. 537 -Administrative and Clerical Officers' As-
sociation, Commonwealth Public Service.
No. 538--Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and another.
No. 539 - Electrical Trades Union of Australia.t
No. 540 Association of Professional Engineers, Australia.
No. 541-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service.

No. 542-Printingand Kindred Industries Union.
No. 543-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 544-Association of Professional Engineers, Australia.
No. 545- - Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees.
No. 546-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers) and others.
No. 547-Transport Workers' Union of Australia.
No. 548-- Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service.
No. 549---Federal Firefighters' Union.
No. 550- -Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service.
No. 55 I-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees.
No. 552-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service.
No. 553Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service and others.
No. 554Australian Building Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation.t
No. 555Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service.
(t Not accompanied by statement) Remuneration Tribunals Act--Regulations -Statutory
Rules 1982, No. 308.
Seat of Government (Administration) ActOrdinances-I 982 -
No. 89-Co-operative Societies (Amendment).
No. 90-Co-operative Societies (Amendment) (No.2).
No. 91 -Parole (Amendment) (No.3). Regulations-1982 -
No. 49 (Careless Use of Fire Ordinance).
No. 50 (Motor Traffic Ordinance). Variations of plan of lay-out of City of Canberra and its
environs, dated 10 November 1982.
States Grants (Petroleum Products) Act--Amendments of the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of-
New South Wales, South Australia, Victoria and Western Australia, dated 4 November 1982.
New South Wales, Queensland and Western Australia, dated 5 November 1982.
Student Assistance Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 326.
Superannuation Act-Regulations --Statutory Rules 1982, No. 318.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3137 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Industrial Relations
(Question No. IOI2)
[In substitution for that part of the answer relating to the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission which appeared in Hansard pages 2813-2824 of 29 October 1981.]
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on I April 1981:

What are the (a) names (b) dates and terms of appointment and (e) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is set out in the attachment. The information is provided as at 23 October 1981:

AUSTRALIAN CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION COMMISSION

Dateof

Term of

Appointment Appointment

Salary

President -Sir John Moore
Deputy PresidentsMr Justice Williams Mr Justice Robinson Mr Justice Coldham Mr Justice Ludeke Mr Deputy President Isaac Mr Justice Staples Mr Justice Alley Mr Deputy President McKenzie Mr Justice Marks Mr Justice Maddern Justice Judith Cohen Justice Elizabeth Evatt Mr Justice Kirby
Commissioners J. L. Gough E. J. Clarkson T. J. Brack J. Stanton N. J. Mansini F. W. J. Brown A. S. Paine G. L. Walker

1.7.73

4.11.85

30.12.68 8.8.70 18.2.71
23.5.72 2.1.74
24.2.75 1.2.77
31.1.79 14.4.80 21.4.80 3.6.80 30.1.73
1.1.75

24.7.91 20.1.96 17.2.89 14.8.91 10.3.87
1.6.94 24.11.87
12.5.86 13.4.86 9.9.2002 6.2.91 10.11.98 17.3.2004

4.6.62 1.3.65 2.9.68 5.4.71 4.8.72 27.11.72 18.12.72 19.5.75

15.7.84 30.6.85 15.6.85 5.11.83 4.10.89 6.2.93 23.6.92 10.9.89

$73,000 p.a. plus $3,375 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
$67,000 p.a. plus $3,075 annual allowance
Seconded to Family Law Court
Seconded to Law Reform Commission
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2, 153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance

3138 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

P. M.Griffin J. W. Coleman R. G. Sweeney V. Connell P. St G. Barnes K. C. Turbet F. J. Neyland R. F. Merriman I. T. McKenzie A. McLagan E. C. Bennett B. R. Johnson R. H. C. Watson N. A. Taylor L. H. Booth M. E. Heagney
Public Service Arbitrator R. H. C. Watson
Deputy Public Service Arbitrators L. H. Booth
N. A. Taylor

Date of

Term of

Appointment Appointment

1.7.75

20.12.90

1.12.75

17.3.87

6.12.76

3.9.94

13.5.77

20.11.92

1.7.78

18.5.85

1.7.78

8.5.2000

10.12.79

12.8.91

21.4.80

21.8.2000

5.5.80

20.12.90

23.6.80

9.2.84

22.9.S0

21.12.89

27.10.80

21.2.2003

15.7.68

9.4.84

6.11.72

5.10.86

27.11.72

15.4.84

27.11.72

24.8.85

20.8.81 27.11.72
14.8.79

8.4.84 15.4.84 5.10.86

Salary
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2, I 53 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2, I 53 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2, 153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2, 153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
Appointed as Public Service Arbitrator
Appointed as Deputy Public Service Arbitrator
Appointed as Deputy Public Service Arbitrator
Appointed as National Director, Trade Union Training Authority
$53,600 p.a. plus $2,460 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance
$46,900 p.a. plus $2,153 annual allowance

Illegal Export of Spitfire Aircraft
(Question No. 3307)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Following the conclusion of legal proceedings against certain parties concerning the illegal export from Australia of a rare Spitfire Mk VIII MV 154 will the Government pursue the return of this aircraft to Australia now that the caSe has finished.
(2) What steps are being taken to prevent the possible future illegal exporting of historical aircraft.
(3) Will the penalties for the export of historical aircraft or artifacts be increased.
(4) If the Government is not to proceed with attempts to recover the Spit tire, what are the grounds for not doing so.
Mr Peacock-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (4) The Secretary of the Attorney-Genera!'s Department has advised the Comptroller-General of Customs

that an English court would probably not enforce a claim by the Commonwealth based on the forfeiture provisions of section 229 of the Customs Act 1901 and has advised against the instituting of proceedings in the United Kingdom. The then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs accepted that advice and I have found no reason to disagree with that decision. Proceedings to recover possession of the aircraft to which the honourable member refers will not be instituted in the United Kingdom.
(2) The Department of Industry and Commerce exercises control over such exports through the Customs (Prohibited Exports) Regulations. Offences or attempted offences against this legislation render the persons concerned subject to the penal provisions of the Customs Act including the forfeiture of the goods concerned.
It would seem that there are persons who are prepared to become involved in schemes to circumvent known Customs controls over the export of aircraft of historical interest. Assurance is given that the Department will investigate such attempts and take appropriate action wherever necessary.
(3) Yes. Legislation recently passed by Parliament, but not yet proclaimed, increases the penalties from $1,000 to $50,000 or three times the value of the goods (where the Court can determine the value), whichever is the greater.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3139

Draw Poker Machines
(Question No. 3969)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) Are machines known as draw poker machines which are unlicensed and are used for gam bling and payment of cash prizes operating in some hotels and clubs in Canberra.
(2) Has the attention of his Department and the Australian Federal Police been drawn to the use of these machines over a period of months; if so. why has effective action to control their use still not been taken.
(3) What action does he intend to take to bring these machines under the control of the ACT Gaming and Liquor Authority.
Mr HodgmanThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. However, draw poker machines are not required to be licensed.
(2) Yes. Although I earlier announced my support for the ACT House of Assembly's recommendation to ban draw poker machines, I am not now convinced that such action would necessarily be in the best interests of the community. Accordingly I have referred the matter back to the House of Assembly for its earliest consideration.
(3) The involvement of the ACT Gaming and Liquor Authority will depend on the final decision made on whether draw poker machines should be permitted in the ACT.
Personal Care Subsidy
(Question No. 4519)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 29 April 1982:
(I) Is the Commonwealth personal care subsidy paid only to institutions caring for old and frail and disabled persons; if so, why are (a) individuals caring for themselves and (b) persons caring for disabled people in private accommodation not eligible for this subsidy.
(2) Are parents caring for handicapped children at home eligible to receive the handicapped children's allowance of $18.25 whilst institutions are entitled to claim a personal care subsidy of $35 for the same children; if so, why.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Commonwealth Personal Care Subsidy is paid only to organisations eligible under Part III of the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act which provide approved hostel accommodation and personal care services to their frail residents. The subsidy which was recently increased by 50 per cent to $30 a week. is intended to assist those organisations to employ sufficient staff in their hostels to assist the frail residents to live as independently as possible.
Individuals caring for themselves and people caring for aged or disabled people in private accommodation are not eligible for Personal Care Subsidy because they do not meet the requirements of the legislation.
The Commonwealth Department of Health administers the Domiciliary Nursing Care Benefit under the National Health Act. This benefit is available to people who provide full time nursing care for chronically ill relatives in their homes: these patients would otherwise require admission to a nursing home. For a person to qualify for this benefit, the patient must:

be 16 years of age or over;
have a certificate from their doctor stating that, because of infirmity or illness. disease, incapacity or disability, they have a continuing need for nursing care;
be receiving adequate care from a registered nurse.
The current rate of benefit is $42 a fortnight and at 30 June 1982 there were approximately 18,000 approved beneficiaries.
There is also an attendant care pilot scheme being developed by the Department of Social Security which was allocated $100,000 for this purpose in the 1982-83 Budget. This pilot will be administered as part of the Handicapped Persons Welfare Program Up-grading Scheme. The Attendant Care Scheme will investigate the provision of alternative modes of personal care services to severely handicapped people who live in their own homes.
(2) The maximum rate of handicapped child's allowance currently payable is $85 a month. The allowance was introduced to assist parents who provide constant care and attention to their child where the child is severely or substantially handicapped and is cared for in the family home rather than in an institution. Handicapped children's benefit is currently paid at the rate of $5 per day. It is payable to approved charitable or religious organisations in respect of each handicapped child under the age of 16 who is accommodated in the residential centre conducted by the organisation. The amount of the benefit is required to be deducted from the account sent to the child's parents.
Crisis Accommodation
(Question No. 4604)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in his policy speech on 30 September 1980, promise to establish crisis accommodation for families in distress.
(2) If so, when was this promise implemented and in what form.
(3) What was the Commonwealth's appropriation and spending on this program in (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(4) How many families were assisted in each year.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) On 24 February 1982 in a joint news release with the then Minister for Housing and Construction. the Hon. D. T. McVeigh, I announced the new Crisis Accommodation for Families in Distress Program. The press release indicated that the funds allocated could be used by the States, the Northern Territory and Aboriginal Hostels Ltd for the construction, purchase. or leasing of suitable dwellings for crisis accommodation for families.
(3) (a) 1980-81 AppropriationNil, Expenditure Nil; (b) 1981-82 Appropriation--$2m, Expenditure $2m.
In addition, I announced on I October 1982 the distribution of the $4m allocated for crisis accommodation by the Budget for 1982-83.
(4) Information on the number of families assisted is not available. However in 1981-82 the States, Northern Territory and Aboriginal Hostels Ltd used the $2m to: purchase 30 dwellings; construct I dwelling; lease about 180 dwellings; and provide accommodation for 13 additional beds in an Aboriginal Hostel.

3140 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Accounting Standards Review Board
(Question No. 4705)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Further to my repeated questions regarding the urgent need to set up an Accounting Standards Review Board. can the Attorney-General intimate whether the submissions to the National Companies and Securities Commission relating to the Board have been completed.
(2) Has the Commission completed its findings; if so, has a report been made; if not, when will a report be made.
(3) Will the Commission's report be tabled in the Parliament.
(4) Is the National Companies and Securities Commission seeking information by way of submissions regarding the content of the revamped Schedule 9, that is, a re-listed old Schedule 7; if so, for what purpose.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities, at its meeting on 20 November 1981, directed the National Companies and Securities Commission (NCSC) to publicly expose until 31 March 1982 its proposals in relation to an Accounting Standards Review Board. The NCSC subsequently issued a media release on 26 November 1981 setting out its proposals for the establishment of such a Board. Further background on these proposals is contained in the answer given in this House by the then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs on 29 October 1981 to Question No. 2694 from the honourable member (Hansard, page 2798).
(2) The NCSC has advised that it expects its report to be available for consideration by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities at its next meeting.
(3) It would be undesirable to make a decision on tabling the report until the Ministerial Council has had an opportunity to consider the issues raised in the report.
(4) The NCSC, on 12 May 1982. sought submissions by 16 August 1982 from a number of interested persons on the form and content of Schedule 7 to the Companies Regulations. In seeking submissions, the NCSC indicated that it wished to develop proposals for:
(i) making information contained in the published financial statements of companies more accessible and comprehensible;
(ii) removing inconsistencies, imprecision or ambiguity in the requirements;
(iii) amending requirements which may be inconsistent with recognised accounting standards; and
(iv) establishing a process for the continuous future scrutiny and, where necessary, revision of the requirements.
Any amendments to the regulations will be made following consideration by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities.
Aborigines at Robinvale, Victoria
(Question No. 4715)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:

(I) Has the Human Rights Commission, or any other body under his control, made any investigation of allegations of racism directed towards Aborigines in the town of Robinvale, Victoria, as reported on the ABC TV program Nationwide, on 15 March 1982.
(2) If so, (a) who made the investigation, (b) has the Government been furnished with any report of that investigation and, if so, when and (c) what recommendations have been made to the Government following that investigation.
(3) Can the Attorney-General now state what further action the Government proposes to take in respect of this matter.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) In response to requests from the Aboriginal community in Robinvale to the Commissioner for Community relations, two officers of the Human Rights Commission visited Robinvale, Victoria, in the course of conciliation field trips made to various centres in Victoria and Southern New South Wales during the period 4-16 May 1982 and met with a number of people in Robinvale including some who had been involved in the issues which had been the subject of the Nationwide program.
The Human Rights Commission has informed me that it appeared that there were no complaints which needed to be pursued under the Racial Discrimination Act but the team did what it could to assist in restoring good community relations in the town.
Further visits were made during the period 13-16 June 1982 by the team during which it was informed by the Aboriginal community that the situation was satisfactory.
(3) No further action is at present considered by the Human Rights Commission to be required but contact is, I understand, being maintained with members of the community in Robinvale as is the practice in relation to centres which have made complaints to the Commissioner.
Children Illegally Taken out of Australia
(Question No. 4763)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) How many children have been illegally taken out of Australia in each of the past 5 years.
(2) Is the Attorney-General able to give the figures on the basis of country of origin of the abducting parent.
(3) How many claims for legal aid have been (a) lodged and (b) granted in connection with these cases.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised that with regard to parts (I) and (2) of the honourable member's question, no details are kept of the number of children illegally taken out of Australia. I am therefore unable to give the figures requested nor am I able to give figures in relation to the country of origin of the abducting parent.
With regard however to part (3) of the question which concerns the number of claims for legal aid lodged and granted in connection with children being taken illegally from the country, I am advised that during the period 1977-1979 there were 9 applications for aid, 3 of which received act of grace payments recommended by the Attorney-General and approved by the Minister for Finance.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3141

In August 1979 the Government introduced the Overseas Custody (Child Removal) Scheme to provide assistance to parents whose children have been removed from Australia illegally. Since then 73 applications for assistance under the Scheme have been lodged of which 18 have been granted. Of the remaining 55, 5 applications have been refused, 38 were not proceeded with and 12 are still being considered.

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 4806)

Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.

(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.

Mr WiIson-The Minister for Social Security
has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) and (2) The Department of Social Security makes a large number of grants or payments to non-government organisations. Because of the wide range of programs administered and the decentralisation of administration of those
programs. production of a complete list of those nongovernment organisations which received grants or payments would be a major, time-consuming task. Where information is
not held in a form permitting it to be collated without an un-
reasonable diversion of resources, only aggregate figures can be provided for the relevant programs.

Grants or payments made to non-government organisations in 1981-82 (excluding those made in the ordinary course of
business for goods and/or services supplied) are listed below in two groups:

(a) those which are identifiable; and

(b) those for which individual identification would be an excessively onerous task-shown by purpose of outlay and, where practicable, by category of organisations.

(a) Payments to Universities and Other Organisations for Special Studies and Research-

Social Welfare Research CentreUniversity of New South Wales
ACTU Social Welfare Research Unit
Victorian Council of Social Service
Brisbane CAE Activity Therapy Demontration Project
Crisis Accommodation for Families in Distress
Aboriginal Hostels Ltd
Grants-in-Aid Australian Council of Social Service
Australian Council for Rehabilitation of Disabled
Australian Council on the Ageing
Australian Early Childhood Association
Shelter Incorporated
Community Welfare Agencies (various)
IYDP National Committee of nongovernment organisations

$
550,000 20,000 7,185
46,538
100,000
185,000
279,200 156,634 50,000
* 10,000
808,629
81,278

- Paid by the former Department of Housing and Construction

(b) Other Grants and Payments by Purpose of Outlay

No. Amount

Childrens Services Program Grants under Aged or Disabled Person
Homes Act-- Religious Charitable or Benevolent Ex-Service Other Grants under Aged or Disabled Persons
Hostels Act -- Religious Charitable or Benevolent Personal Care Subsidy
Grants under Delivered Meals (Subsidy) Act
Religious
Charitable or Benevolent Other Grants under Handicapped Persons As-
sistance Act Grants under Homeless Persons Assist-
ance Act Capital, rental etc. subsidies Food and accommodation subsidies Assistance for the Print Handicapped
Handicapped Persons Program UpgradingScheme

640
26 66
9 I
7 5 N/A
15 542
2
N/A
N/A N/A various
various

$m 22.4
9.211 14.374 2.282 0.026
5.310 2.339 21.692
0.224 5.649 0.013
61.666
3.495 1.991 0.300
0.220

N/ A -not available.

Uranium Plant in Queensland: Approaches on Possible Establishment
(Question No. 4861)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Has his Government been approached by either the Queensland Government, French industrialists or the French Atomic Energy Commission concerning the possible establishment of a uranium plant in Queensland.
(2) If so, what was the nature of these approaches and the Government's response.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Government has not been approached by either the Queensland Government, French industralists or the French Atomic Energy Commission concerning the possible establishment of a uranium enrichment plant in Queensland.
The Government has been approached by French industrialists concerning the Ben Lomond uranium deposit near Townsville in regard to the development of a uranium mine and processing plant.
(2) Minatome Australia Pty Ltd. the French company associated with the Ben Lomond project, has been informed of the Commonwealth Government's environmental and foreign investment policy requirements which would need to be met before development approval could be considered.
Social Welfare: Organisations in Division of Lilley
(Question No. 4870)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:

3142 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

What organisations in the Electoral Division of Lilley have applied for financial assistance from the Department of Social Security since November 1980; for which grants have they applied, a"d with what success.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Organisations have applied for funding under the following programs:
(a) Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act
(b) Delivered Meals Subsidy Act
(c) Handicapped Persons Assistance Act
Details are as follows:
(a) Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act: St Paul's Luthecan Church at Nundah lodged an application on 29 October! 981 for 30 hostel units. This is being considered for the 1983/84 program on a priority basis.
(b) Delivered Meais Subsidy Act: Nudgee Meals on Wheels applied on 23 July 1982. Approval has been given for this service.
(c) Handicapped Persons Assistance Act:
(i) Sisters of Mercy, Holy Cross Laundry at Wool()owin. Capitai 2 applicationsboth approved for $379,260. Equipment-37 applications approved for $132,486. I application pending. Salary-- I application since November 1980--approved. Recurrent Salary (c1aims)-$297,595. (all salary payment since November 1980). Holiday Rent-3 applications-all approved $1,244. Maintenance - - 12 applications- -all approved $25,890.
(ii) Help Industries Ltd, Sheltered Workshop at Eagle Farm. Capital -- 3 applications approved for $255,711. Subsidy, I application pending. Equipment 134 applications approved for $104,643. Subsidy, 4 applications pending 4 applications not approved. Salary3 applications approved no rejects. Recurrent Salary (claims) --$231 ,972. (all salary payments since November 1980). Maintenance I application only pending. Training Fee--I application onlyapproved $500.
(iii) Church of England Men's Society, Residential at Clayfield. Equipment5 applications--all approved $4,249. Salary No new applications. Rec u rren i --- $ 72, 179. M ai ntena nee--' Nil' applications.
(iv) Endeavour Foundation, Sheltered Workshop at Northgate. Capital--2 applications--both approved $6,593. Equipment 9 applications approved $6,002; 2 not approved; I lapsed; I pending. Salary-no new applications. Recurrent $149,773. Maintenance-one application approved $547.
(v) Uniting Church in Australia, Special Caring Services Division at Bracken Ridge. CapitalI application approved $67,542. Equipment 2 applications-both approved $8,122.
(vi) Endeavour Foundation, Adult Residence at Northgate. Applications for capital, equipment received-- pending.

Department of Business and Consumer Affairs: Assistance to Firms in Division of Lilley
(Question No. 4879)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
What firms and/or companies in the Electoral Divisio'n of Lilley have applied for financial assistance from his Department and/or the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs since November 1980; for which grants have they applied, and with what success.
Mr Peacock-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government's bounty and subsidy schemes provide financial assistance to industry. The schemes were administered by the former Department of Business and Consumer Affairs and are now administered by the Department of Industry and Commerce.
The various bounty and subsidy Acts provide for the Parliament to be furnished with an annual return showing the amount of bounty or subsidy paid to claimants. The 1981-82 returns were tabled recently.
These returns will provide the honourable member with the information she is seeking and I have arranged for copies relating to 1980-81 and 1981-82 to be forwarded to her.
North West Cape Joint Communication Station
(Question No. 4883)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice. on 19 August 1982:
What additions and alterations to equipment and facilities at the North West Cape joint communications installations are proposed for (a) 1982-83 (b) 198384and(c) 198485.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The details set out below reflect current US and Australian planning intentions for the North West Cape naval communication station. They are subject to change due to budgetary and other considerations. For security reasons details of matters such as changes to cryptographic equipment are not included.
(a) 1982-83 (I) Replacement of an AN /TSC-54 satellite terminal
with an AN/GSC-39 terminal.
(2) Installation of a wide band secure voice terminal compatible with the AN /GSC-39 terminal.
(3) Installation of an additional teletype in the Australian national room.
(4) Replacement of land lines to Very Low Frequency (VLF) site.
(5) Replacement of Rhombic Antennae with a second Loop Rosette Antenna at the High Frequency (HF) receive site.
(b) 1983-84 (I) Installation of new station timekeeping system.
(2) Installation of narrow band secure voice equipment in the Australian national room.
(3) Replacement of voice frequency carrier telegraph (VFCT) equipment at the technical control and HF transmit sites.
(4) Construction of an addition to the maintenance shop.
(5) Construction of a vehicle maintenance shop.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3143

(c) 1984-85 (I) Construction of an electronic/electrical storage and
maintenance facility.
(2) Establishment of a microwave link to the HF receive site with associated updating of technical control site.
(3) Replacement of rotable log periodic antennae at the H F receive and transmit sites.
Telephone Tapping: Airport Calls
(Question No. 4929)
Mr Scott asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
(I) Are any telephone calls made to, or from, any of Australia's airports tapped.
(2) If so, which airports are affected, and to what extent.
(3) Under whose authorisation and in what manner is this surveillance made.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) The interception of a telephone communication is illegal unless done pursuant to a warrant issued under the Telecommunications (Interception) Act 1979 to the Australian Security Intelligence Organization or the Australian Federal Police.
That Act provides that, in certain circumstances related to security, the Attorney-General may authorise the Australian Security Intelligence Organization to intercept telecommunications. it also provides that a judge (as defined) may authorise the Australian Federal Police to intercept telecommunications in certain circumstances relating to the investigation of narcotic offences.
It is not the practice of the Government to provide information concerning telephone interceptions.
Accountancy Profession
(Question No. 4981 )
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 26 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the paper entitled 'The Accountancy Profession: Supply, Demand, Pricing and Manpower Planning' written by J. Nieuwenhysen and M. Williams Wynn for the Committee for Economic Development of Australia, published in December 1981.
(2) Does the registration and membership of Australia's 2 accounting bodies give them a monopoly control over the profession.
(3) Is he able to say whet her the report is causing concern about the efficiency of Australia's labour markets in general and professional services in particular.
(4) Has he caused any investigations into (a) the accounting profession, (b) fees for services, (c) demand for accountancy services and (d) the supply of accountants.
(5) What control can the Government exercise in the accountancy profession.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) to (5) Control of the accounting profession is a matter for the States. The Commonwealth has an involvement through the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities

in relation to the registration of auditors and liquidators under the Companies Act 1981 and associated State companies codes.
Office of Speaker of House of Assembly, Australian Capital Territory
(Questions No. 4996-5000)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
4996--Does the decision to accept the recommendation by the ACT House of Assembly, that an office of Speaker of the Assembly be cre~ted. indicate an acceptance by the Government that the ACT Assembly has the status of a Parliament; if not. can hr say v;hat bodies, other than Parliaments with legislative authority, have appointed a person to the office of Speaker.
4997Does the ACT House of Assembly currently perform, and have authority to perform, legislative functions normally associated with a body which has a Speaker as its spokesman; if not, is the title Speaker appropriate for the presiding officer of the ACT Assembly.
4998-( I) Wilt the Speaker of the ACT House of Assembly have an entitlement to attend meetings of Parliamentary Presiding Officers in (a) Australia and (b) other Commonwealth countries; if so, wilt the Government provide the neGessary funds; if not, is the Speaker entitled to take part in conferences of local government Mayors and Presidents.
(2) If the Speaker is not entitled to participate in either presiding officers or local government conferences, what is the status of the Speaker of the ACT House of Assembly.
4999-Does the Speaker of the ACT House of Assembly have all the immunities and privileges accorded to the office of Speaker in the House of Representatives; if not, what privileges and immunities are accorded to the Speaker of the ACT House of Assembly.
5000-What actual powers does the House of Assembly of the Australian Capital Territory have to (a) legislate, (b) exercise executive action in relation to any matters in the ACT and (c) claim for its members the privileges and immunities of the members of a properly constituted House of Parliament under the Crown.
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions on notice are as follows:
4996--No; no.
4997-No; ye:;.
4998 - (I) (a) No, unless invited to attend as an observer. (b) No, attendance at meetings of Parliamentary p, es,ding Officers and at conferences of local government Mayors and Presidents is a matter for consideration by those '>,.dies.
(2) The Speaker presides over meetings of the House of Assembly.
4999 -- No; the privileges and immunities accorded the Speaker of the ACT House of Asembly are those accorded the Members of the ACT House of Assembly.
5000~(a) None. (b) None. (e) None.
National Takeovers Code: Resolution of Disputes
(Question No. 5020)
Mr Jacobi asked the Acting Attorney-General, upon notice, on 8 September 1982:

3144 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(I) Is the normal judicial process inappropriate for the authoritative and expeditious resolution of disputes which arise under the National Takeovers Code.
(2) Is it a fact that parties to a takeover litigation may have to wait for more than 6 months for the final resolution of a dispute by the High Court.
(3) Will the Attorney-General initiate urgent discussions within the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities with a view to setting up an expert tribunal to deal effectively and expeditiously with all disputes arising under the Takeovers Code.
(4) Is it a fact that, because of the lengthy delays involved, the final appellate court, or for that matter any appellate court, might find it impracticable to grant the relief sought by a plaintiff in takeover litigation even though the plaintiff's legal arguments are accepted.
(5) Can the Attorney-General say whether parties to takeover litigation with very meritorious cases have been forced to abandon appeals from dubious single judge decisions because delays within the appellate court system appear to make it extraordinarily difficult for an appellate court to satisfactorily unscramble a takeover.
Mr N. A. BrownThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (5) While legislation governing takeovers of companies needs to take account of considerations such as those mentioned by the honourable member and to minimise delays which are avoidable, it has to be borne in mind that takeovers involve the rights of individuals and that they give rise to questions as to whether those rights have been breached. The resolution of such questions is properly a matter for the courts and the judicial process. I am not prepared to propose to the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities that such questions be determined by an administrative body.
Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Issue of Writs
(Question No. 5064)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) Why does he retain the right to issue a writ for the election of a new member to the ACT House of Assembly when a vacancy occurs.
(2) Why has the Speaker of the Assembly not been authorised to issue the writ in these circumstances.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Any change to the form of election to the House of Assembly would have implications for the future form of government of the ACT. As stated on numerous occasions, no change to the present form of government will be contemplated pending receipt of the report of the Grants Commission into the finances of the ACT.
(2) See my answer to (I) above.
Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Commission to Administer
Oaths
(Question No, 5065)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:

(I) Has the Speaker of the ACT House of Assembly been commissioned to administer oaths of affirmations to any member not present at the initial swearing-in on the first day of meeting of a new Assembly; if not, why not.
(2) Can he say whether the commissioning of the Speaker to perform this task is normal in other bodies where the presiding officer is described as, and has the authority vested in, a Speaker.
(3) Can he say whether it is normal for the presiding member or the chief executive officer of local government bodies to have authority to administer the oath to members of these bodies.
(4) Why did he retain the requirement that a Judge of the Supreme Court of the ACT will administer the oath to members of the House of Assembly.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) See my answer to question 5064 (I).
Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Positions on Statutory
Boards and Authorities
(Question No. 5066)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) Is the Speaker of the ACT House of Assembly allowed to hold positions on statutory boards and authorities.
(2) Can he say whether this is normal Parliamentary practice.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) This is not normal parliamentary practice. The House of Assembly, however, is not a parliament and therefore the standards applicable to a parliament are not those applicable to the House of Assembly.
Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Priority of Legislation for
Appointment
(Question No. 5067)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) Does the creation of the position of Speaker in the ACT House of Assembly represent an initial step towards ACT self-government.
(2) Was legislation to create the position of Speaker given a higher priority than other urgently needed ACT social legislation.
(3) Do the responsibilities of the Speaker overlap with those of any other position within the Assembly, such as Leader of the House.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) No.
(3) No.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3145

Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Priority of Legislation for
Appointment
(Question No. 5068)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
Did the amendment to the ACT House of Assembly Ordinance, relating to the creation of the position of Speaker, take precedence over other legislation relating to the ACT; if so, why and what were the titles of the legislation.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The question of precedence did not arise. The amendments to the House of Assembly Ordinance creating the office of Speaker were relatively simple and straight forward, and so could be dealt with in the drafting process without any appreciable impact on the total drafting program. Therefore, there has been no change in priority in the drafting of other Ordinances for the Australian Capital Territory, and no issue of precedence had to be considered. When drafted, the Ordinance was made in the usual way, again not affecting progress of any other.
Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Priority of Legislation for
Appointment
(Question No. 5069)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
How was it possible to prepare legislation for the amendments to the ACT House of Assembly Ordinance relating to the position of Speaker in such short time when other pieces of legislation relating to the Territory, although promised for years, are still not forthcoming.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
See my answer to question 5068.
Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Filling of Positions of Majority Leader and Minority Leader
(Question No. 5070)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) How are the positions of (a) majority leader and (b) minority leader in the ACT House of Assembly constituted.
(2) By what procedures are these positions filled.
(3) Can he say whether this is normal parliamentary practice.
Mr HodgmanThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) These two positions were constituted by resolution of the Assembly on 21 July 1982.
(2) These positions were filled under the procedures of the Assembly.
(3) No. Parliamentary procedures may vary from parliament to parliament.

Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Role of Leader of the House
(Question No. 5071)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September, 1982:
(I) In the ACT House of Assembly what is the role of the Leader of the House, how is a member elected to this position and by whom.
(2) Can he say whether this is normal parliamentary practice.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The role of the Leader of the House in the ACT House of Assembly is for the Assembly to determine. How a member is elected to this position and by whom are also matters for the Assembly.
(2) See my answer to question 5070 (3).
Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Staffing
(Question No. 5072)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
Who, in the new structure of the ACT House of Assembly, is responsible for its staffing, staff structure and staff allocation.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No change has been made to the structure of the ACT House of Assembly. The Secretary to the Department of the Capital Territory remains responsible for the Assembly's staffing and staff structure and, in consultation with the Clerk, for the allocation of staff.
Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Self-government
(Question No. 5073)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
Does the change to the structure of the ACT House of Assembly constitute a step towards self-government for the Territory; if not, why not; ifso, when will this take place.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No; see my answers to questions 5064 (I) and 5072.
Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Change of Structure
(Question No. 5074)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
What was the purpose of the change of structure of the ACT House of Assembly when its functions remained unchanged.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
See my answer to questions 5072 and 5073.

3146 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Australan Capital Territory Fire Brigade
(Question No. 5075)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) What are the duties of the following officers of the ACT Fire Brigade (a) Fire Commissioner, (b) Deputy Fire Commissioner, (c) Superintendent and (d) District Officers.
(2) In the case of the Deputy Fire Commissioner, what duties were formerly performed by the (a) Commissioner and (b) Superintendent.
(3) What is the estimated cost of creating the additional position of Deputy Fire Commissioner.
(4) Was this position made necessary (a) by a Government decision to provide an additional political appointee to overcome the need for a career officer to act as Commissioner on occasions or (b) because the work load of the Commissioner and the Superintendent were excessive.
(5) Have requests for lifting of staff ceilings been received.
(6) Why is the salary of the Deputy Commissioner lower than that of the Superintendent.
(7) Did (a) the Commissioner or (b) the Superintendent request relief from an excessive work load.
(8) What staff will be assigned to the Deputy Commissioner.
(9) Will these personnel be in addition to the staff of the (a) Commissioner and (b) Superintendent.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The duties of the members are:
(a) Fire Commissioner: general control and management of the Fire Brigade.
(b) Deputy Commissioner: assist the Commissioner with the general control and management of the Fire Brigade.
(c) Superintendent: the duties of the Superintendent will be:
I. Oversight the work of the Fire Prevention, Firefighting and Service Maintenance Sections.
2. Evaluate new equipment and submit for ratification to Commissioner findings based on- (a) practicability, (b) cost analysis, (c) interchange with existing equipment and (d) involvement connected with training, stowage, etc.
3. Process returns relating to personnel that is Long Service Leave, Sick Leave, Compassionate Leave, etc.
4. Oversight station and roster changes for personnel.
5. As directed, liaise with various organisations on the implementation of policy established by the Commissioner.
6. Attend and assume command of fires and emergent happenings involving life risk and any other incident deemed necessary until the arrival of a more senior officer.
7. Oversight examinations.
8. Responsible to Commissioner for the welfare of personnel.
9. Prepare, subject to direction. reviews of projected needs for the Brigade.
10. If required, represent the Commissioner at conferences, seminars, functions, etc.

II. Determine, prior to final submittal to the Commissioner, the gravity of all discipline charges associated with all personnel employed by the Brigade.
12. Keep Commissioner fully informed of all fires, offences against discipline and the general function of the day to day operations of the Brigade.
(d) District Officer: while on duty shall:
I. Have charge of the District or Section which has been assigned.
2. Attend fires and take control until the arrival of a more senior officer.
3. Check and pass reports and requisitions for repairs and supplies.
4. Be responsible for the proper working of the assigned District or Section and the maintenance of strict discipline.
5. Perform all other duties required as a District Officer or which may be expressly assigned.
(2) The duties of the Commissioner are unchanged as above. The Superintendent's duties as outlined in I (c) are substantially the same.
The Deputy Commissioner will assist the Commissioner over the full range of the Commissioner's functions and it is expected the Deputy Commissioner will deputise for the Commissioner at more important conferences and meetings and assist with industrial relations matters.
(3) The cost of the position when staffed would be in the vicinity of $65,000 (includes salary and oncost charges). Other costs associated with the establishing of the additional position are insignificant.
(4) (a) No. (b) The position was necessary because of the workload of the position of Commissioner.
(5) No.
(6) In anticipation of the creation of the position of Deputy Commissioner, the Remuneration Tribunal determined a salary as at 7 June 1982. The Superintendent's salary was increased by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission in a variation to the Fire Brigade Employees (ACT) Award 1975 handed down on I July 1982.
(7) The Commissioner requested a position of Deputy Commissioner because of the top management workload.
(8) No personal staff as such will be assigned to the Deputy Commissioner. However, as the Deputy of the Commissioner, the full resources of the Brigade will be available.
(9) Not applicable.
Naturalisation Ceremonies in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 5078)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) Who is empowered to conduct naturalisation ceremonies in the ACT.
(2) Who has the authority to administer the citizenship oath in the ACT.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The ACT House of Assembly conducts Australian citizenship ceremonies in the ACT with the agreement of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. It is the normal

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3147

practice throughout Australia for citizenship ceremonies held in public to be conducted by local government authorities. Delegated officers of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in the ACT are also empowered to conduct citizenship ceremonies.
(2) The Australian Citizenship Act provides that oaths and affirmations of allegiance may be taken or made before a judge of a Federal court or a judge or magistrate holding office under the law of a State or Territory Or before a person delegated by the Minister. Apart from delegated officers of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, persons in the following positions are delegated to administer the citizenship oath/affirmation of allegiance:
The Leader of the House, ACT House of Assembly;
The Minority Leader, ACT House of Assembly;
The Chairman of Committees, ACT House of Assembly.
1\Iational Health Promotion Program
(Question No. 5100)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
(I) Is it a fact that no funds were allocated to the National Health Promotion Program in the 1982-83 Budget.
(2) Is it also a fact that only $140,000 was spent out of the $500.000 appropriated for the Program in 1981-82.
(3) If so. does this mean that the Government is abandoning its role in the field of health promotion despite the promise of the Prime Minister in his policy speech of 30 September 1980 and his speech to the ANU Public Affairs conference on Health Policy in which he referred to the promotion of individual health as the front line of health care; if not, what is the future Commonwealth role in this field.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) No. Funds for the National Health Promotion Program were frozen in February 1982 as part of a general restraint of expenditure across a wide range of Government programs and activities.
The Government is concerned about promoting the health of individuals and encouraging Australians to value good health as an asset which is worth achieving and maintaining. Just as health services are mainly provided by States so too health promotion is primarily the responsibility of States. This will not, however, preclude the Commonwealth from taking further initiatives in this most important side of health care as and when the appropriate time and need arises.
Defence Recruitment from the British Armed Services
(Question No. 5111)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 September 1982:
(I) How many specialist officers and other ranks have been recruited from the British Armed Services for each of the 3 Australian services in 1979-80, 1980-81, 1981-82 and in 1982-83 to date.
(2) How many British specialist officers and other ranks have been recruited for Australian submarines in the last 5 years and what percentage of the crews do they represent.

(3) What has been the impact of the Falklands war on (a) recruitment for all armed services from Britain and (b) recruitment for Royal Australian Navy submarine crews.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Defence Force does not directly recruit officers and other ranks from the British Armed Services. Prospective applicants may enlist in the Defence Force on the same basis as other applicants.
Statistics as to place of origin are readily available only within the RAN. Neither the Australian Army nor the RAAF maintain separate statistics on the place of origin of their enlistees and to obtain this information would require a search of many thousands of individual records-a task beyond the capacity of available manpower resources.
The information in respect of the RAN is as follows:
(1)-
1979-80-13 officers, 10 sailors 1980-81--13 officers. 9 sailors 1981-82-9 officers. 20 sailors 1982-83-(July to Sept)-7 officers, 9 sailors
(2)-
Officers 4----3. 7 per cent of Submarine Arm on 30 June 1982
Sailors 17-3.0 per cent of Submarine Arm on 30 June 1982
(3) The question assumes a relationship between the Falklands conflict and the number of persons from the United Kingdom joining the Australian Defence Force. No such relationship necessarily exists.
Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority: Connection of Solar Hot Water
Systems to Off-Peak Supply
(Question No. 5115)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 21 September 1982:
(I) Has he received representations protesting against the ACT Electricity Authority's ACTEA decision to connect solar hot water systems compulsorily only to Off-Peak supply.
(2) Has he examined the report of the ACT House of Assembly Standing Committee on City Management in which the committee criticises this decision and draws attention to the large number of units that have not been tested by the ACTEA.
(3) Why was the decision to restrict solar hot water services only to Off-Peak supply made.
(4) Why does this restriction not apply to other systems connected to Off-Peak supply.
(5) Has he made any response to the findings of the committee; if so. what was the reponse.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows.
(I) Yes.
(2) The report by the ACT House of Assembly's Standing Committee on City Management, which contains a number of recommendations, was presented in the Assembly on 25 October 1982 and has now been referred to me.
I am currently studying the contents of the report.
(3) This decision was made in the interest of a fair distribution of costs across the whole spectrum of electricity consumers.

3148 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

The Authority is billed for bulk supply of electricity on the basis of both the energy consumed and the highest demand recorded during the month. In addition, the Authority must provide plant capacity equal to or greater than the highest consumer demand likely to occur within the ACT on the coldest day.
Except for a small number of very large customers who are billed for both energy and demand, the average consumer is billed only for the energy used. Therefore the tariff charged must be structured so that costs associated with the demand generated and the plant installed are recovered as well as the energy consumed.
Charges for electricity are constructed on the basis of a reasonable expectation that electricity will be consumed both during and outside peak demand times. While non-solar hot water heaters add significantly to peak demand, they operate ouside peak hours often enough for the Authority to recover costs.
Solar Water Heaters, on the other hand, while adding to the peak demand, do not require electric boosting during daylight hours. This, as a consequence, denies the Authority a significant amount of potential revenue and requires the shortfall to be subsidised by all other classes of consumers in the ACT. The Authority, therefore, considers that connection to Off-Peak supply is the fairest method of ensuring that Solar Systems 'pay their way'.
The Authority believes very strongly in energy conservation and applauds the Solar Heating Industry for its resourcefulness and dedication. However, the cost of providing standby boosting for Solar Water Heaters should not be borne by those not fortunate enough to afford the capital cost of their own Solar System.
(4) The restriction does apply to other systems connected to off-peak supply. The ACTEA Schedule of Charges provides that with Off-Peak Water Heating Charge 'booster elements are not permitted'.
(5) See my answer to question (2).
Appropriation for Marine and General Services
(Question No. 5125)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
In relation to item 972:4:03 of Appropriation Bill (No.2) 1982-83 concerning marine and general services, (a) what estimate can be provided of the real change in the provision made for this item in 1982-83 compared to 1981-82 and (b) what are the reasons for this change.
Mr Hunt~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) The expenditure during 1981-82 was $4,847,000 and the estimated expenditure for 1982-83 is $4,740,000. This means that there is an estimated marginal decrease in expenditure for 1982-83. Assuming that there will be an element of inflation during 1982-83, the estimated marginal decrease represents a decrease in real terms. It is not possible however to provide an estimate of the real change in the provision made in 1982-83 compared to 1981-82, mainly because this capital expenditure largely results from ongoing programmes with cash flows varying from year to year depending on manufacturing schedules amongst other things. For example the installation of light vessels in Bass Strait will continue in 1982-83 whereas bulk cash payments against this project were made in 1981-82.

Recommendations by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 5134)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
(I) What are the details of all recommendations made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions which related specifically to the Ministers' Department.
(2) What are the details of the implementation of those recommendations to date.
(3) Where a service formerly provided by the Minister's Department is now provided by private interests, what have been the (a) cost savings and (b) cost penalties incurred to date in each case.
Mr Anthony~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The details of all recommendations made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions which related specifically to the Department of Trade and Resources are:
(a) International Commodity Organisations
Examination to be made of
industry payment of full direct cost of membership of international commodity organisations:
Membership to be withdrawn where industries are not prepared to meet these costs.
(b) 'Export Now' Campaign
To be terminated.
(c) Uranium
Uranium Export Office staffing to be significantly scaled down.
(d) Export Incentives
(i) Export Expansion Grants Scheme to be continued in its present form to June 1982 and extended to June 1983 with grant rates reduced by 50 per cent.
(ii) Export Market Development Grants Scheme to be continued in its present form to June 1983.
(iii) Current and future methods of assisting the expansion of export of goods and services to be referred to the lAC by 31 December 1981.
(2) The details of the implementation of these recommendations to date are:
(a) The government has reaffirmed its existing policy on the costs of membership of International Organisations. Australian membership is to continue on the present basis. Membership of particular organisations is to be considered from time to time as new agreements are negotiated.
(b) The 'Export Now' Campaign has been terminated.
(e) The staffing levels of the Australian Uranium Export Office have been reduced in accordance with the Government's decision on the level of staffing required.
(d) Parts X and XI of the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act No. 74, 1981 put into effect parts (i) and (ii) of the Review of Commonwealth Functions decisions relating to Export Incentives. The question of current and future methods of assisting the

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3149

expansion of exports of goods and services was referred to the Industries Assistance Commission on 17 June 1981.
(3) Not applicable to the Review of Commonwealth Functions decisions relating specifically to the Department of Trade and Resources.
Withdrawal of Australian Battalion from Singapore in 1974
(Question No. 5162)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the address by the Prime Minister to the National RSL Congress on 15 September 1982 in which he said that the decision to withdraw the Australian battalion from Singapore in 1974 was one of the great mistakes in Australian defence decisions.
(2) Why has this alleged mistake not been rectified previously.
(3) Does he propose to deploy a similar sized unit to Singapore. if not. why not.
(4) Has he had discussions with the governments of either Malaysia or Singapore for a deployment of this kind; if so. what has been their response.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Government while in opposition made clear its intention to discuss with its Five Power partners the question of regional defence co-operation. In view of the lapse of time between the withdrawal of the main body of the battalion at the end of 1973 and the return to office of the present Government in 1976. and the substantial re-arrangements and accommodations that were forced on the Singapore Government and our other partners by the withdrawal of the battalion. the Government has sought other practical means to demonstrate our willingness to co-operate with neighbouring countries to enhance the security of the region. Examples include:
A revitalisation of the Five Power Defence Arrangements.
An Expansion of Defence Co-operation programs.
An increase in combined exercises with our South East Asian neighbours.
Provision of access by Singapore to training areas in Australia.
(3) and (4) See (2) above.
Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 5187)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange line telephones.

(5) What was the cost of (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The number of officers in the Department of the Capital Territory and Statutory Authorities within my jurisdiction with private exchange lines connected in their offices are:
Department of the Capital Territory25 Australian Capital Territory Electricity AuthorityAustralian Capital Territory Fire Brigade --I Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority --I Canberra Commercial Development Authority-3 National Capital Development Commission I I
(2) The designations of officers concerned are:
Department of the Capital Territory Secretary First Assistant Secretary, Transport and Technical
Services First Assistant Secretary, Management Services Assistant Secretary, Legislation Assistant Secretary, Finance and Supply Assistant Secretary, Traffic and Transport Assistant Secretary, Residential Leases Assistant Secretary, Public Transit Director, Information and Public Relations Director, City Parks Administration Director, Forests Director, Engineering (Public Transit) Director, Motor Vehicle Registry Director, ACT Emergency Service General Manager and Travel Service Manager, Can-
berra Tourist Bureau Controller, Systems Development, Motor Vehicle
Registry Canberra Public Library Service Principal Librarian Librarian Class 3, Belconnen Library Librarian Class 3, Woden Library Computer Room, Motor Vehicle Registry Supervisor, Testing Office, Motor Vehicle Registry Workshop SupervisorPublic Transit Senior Storeman--Public Transit Workshop Reception-Public Transit
ACT Electricity Authority Chairman Secretary Chief Engineer
ACT Fire Brigade Fire Commissioner
ACT Gaming and Liquor Authority Chief Executive
Canberra Commercial Development Authority General Manager Operations Manager Commercial jMarketing Manager
National Capital Development Commission Commissioner Associate Commissioners (2) Secretary and Manager Chief Architect Chief Planner Chief Engineer Chief Construction Manager

3150 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Assistant Secretary, Programme Management Assistant Secretary, External Relations and Information Administrati'/e Officer
(3) Yes.
(4) The Department and the above Authorities provided exchange lines for one or more of the following reasons:
where there arc ,peeial or emergency considerations, especially where there is a need for continuous communication outside normal hours;
where senior officers may need to be contacted urgently or require immediate access to outside numbers;
where particularly sensitive and/or confidential matters are mvolved;
where urgent or after hours STD access is required and when internal PAaX or PMBX extensions are barred from such access
(5) The approximate costs of these exchange lines during the financial year 1981-~2 were:

Booked Metered trunk Rental calls calls

$

$

$

Departrnent of the Capital Terr-

itory

3,654 8,876

103

ACT Electricity Authority

500

275

nil

ACT Fire Brigade

165 2,410

15

ACT Gaming and Liq uor

Authority

130

443

30

Canberra Commercial Develop-

ment Authority

836 3,536

105

NatIOnal Capital Development

Commission

1,827 4,010

39

(6) Department ofth~ Capital Territory:
separate lines with a silent extension number off the PABX system would in some instances meet needs. However, the number of extensions available off the Department's PABX is limited and enlargement to provide more lines is not an e~onomic proposition at present. Telecom Australia ha, estimated tlje cost of extending the Departmer,ta I PABX to be in the vicinity of $43,000.
ACT Electricity Authority, ACT Fire Brigade, ACT Gaming and Liquor Authority. Canberra Commercial Development Authority and the National Capital Development Commission have advised that silent extension numbers would not serve the same purpose.
Leopard Tank
(Questi(}n No. 5193)
Mr Beazley asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) Is an efficiency audit of the management of the Leopard tank capability being undertaken by the Auditor-
Gen~ral.
(2) When did the audit commence.
(3) What person'~el have been, and are currently involved in the audit and what was and ;s their public service clessification.
(4) What sec:!iuns of the Department of Defence have been interviewed in connection with the audit.
(5) What aspects of the Leopard program have been st udied during the investigations.

(6) How much has the audit cost.
(7) When will the final report he presented to the House and what aspects of the program will be reported upon.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The efficiency audit investigation began in April 1980.
(3) During the investigation phase of the audit the audit team comprised one Class II officer, two Class 9 officers and one Class 7 officer.
As at 23 September 1982, one Class 7 officer was engaged on the audit, report editing being undertaken by Audit Office management.
(4) During the course of the audit, enquiries were undertaken within elements of the Department of Defence Central Office, the Army Office, Logistics Command, Training Command and Field Force Command.
(5) The audit examined management and support systems relevant to the role of the Leopard tank capability. It extended to both service and departmental activities including personnel and training, supoly and support systems and engineering support.
(6) Up to and including 23 September 1982 the audit has cost $127,758.
(7) A report on the audit is expected to be presented to the Parliament during the Autumn Session 1983. However, the final content of the report has not yet been determined.

Uranium Division, Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 5212)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
What is the estimated expenditure in 1982-83 for the activities of the Uranium Division of his Department, including salaries, allowances, travel, administrative and other expenses.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The estimated expenditure for salaries and allowances is $815, 680 and for travel is $71,000. Departmental records do not break up administrative costs on a Divisional basis.

Uranium Advisory Council

(Question No. 5213)

Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:

What is the estimated expenditure for the Uranium Advisory Council in 1982--83, including the cost of servicing the Council and the salaries of the officers involved.

Mr Anthony--The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:

The estimated total expenditure for the Uranium Advisory Council is as follows:

$

Council-sitting fees Salaries and Allowances of staff Administrative costs

64,000 180,150 95,000

Total Cost

339,150

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3151

Department of Home Affairs and Environment: Estimated Expenditure Associated with Uranium and Nuclear Energy Policies

(Question No. 5216)

Mr Uren asked the Minister for Home Affairs
and Environment, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:

What is the estimated expenditure in 1982-83 for activities
in his Department associated with the Government's uranium and nuclear energy policies, including salaries, allowances, travel, administrative and other expenses.

Mr McVeigh-The .answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Department of Home Affairs and Environment

Environment Division Salaries and allowances Travel and subsistence Consultancies Publications Advisory Committee expenses

$
260,600 20,100
9,500 7,600 21,800

319,600

In addition, the honourable member may be interested to know that a statutory authority within my portfolio, namely
the Supervising Scientist for the Alligator Rivers Region (the Alligator Rivers Region Research Institute) has estimated the
following expenditure in 1982-83 associated with the Government's uranium and nuclear energy policies:

The Alligator Rivers Region Research Institute
Salaries and allowances
Travelling allowance Administrative expenses Other expenses
Capital works and services

$
1,469,900 344,100 901,000 336,000
1,685,000

4,736,000

Visual Display Units: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 5331 )
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
How many display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Home Affairs was established in December 1977. The number of visual display units in use in the Department since that time is as follows:
1977-78-Nil 197879--1 1979 80--2 198081--4 1981 82-15
For statutory authorities currently within my portfolio the number of visual display units in use for each of the last ten years is as follows:

1972-73Nil 1973 74-nil 1974-75nil 1975 76-3 1976-77 18 1977 78-19 19787932 1979-80-44 1980 81-97 1981-82--143
Federal Tax Structure: Questions on Notice
(Question No. 5340)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) How many questions on notice has he received since assuming his portfolio inquiring about the progressiveness of the Federal tax structure.
(2) How many of those questions have not been answered.
(3) Of the replies that were provided, how many made allowance for tax avoidance and/or evasion.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) A check of the records indicated that I have received three (3) such questions and all have been answered. (But see my answer to Question No. 5341.)
(3) One reply made reference to tax evasion and tax avoidance.
Federal Tax Structure: Questions on Notice
(Question No. 5341)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) How many questions on notice has he received since assuming his portfolio inquiring about the regressiveness of a Federal tax structure containing a greater emphasis on indirect taxation.
(2) How many of those questions have not been answered.
(3) Of the replies that were provided, how many made reference to statistical or other factual information in support of the reply.
(4) What are the details of the information to which he referred.
Mr Howard-- The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) A check of the records indicates that I have received two (2) such questions, one of which has not yet been answered.
(3) and (4) In answering parliamentary questions it is usual practice, where appropriate, to refer to statistical and/or factual information to support the reply. This practice was followed in the answer to Question No. 2935 which appeared in the Hansard for 20 February 1979, to which I refer the honourable member.
Franklin River Power Scheme: Letters from Queenslanders
(Question Nil. 5350)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister far Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:

3152 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(I) How many letters has he received from Queenslanders concerning the Franklin River Power Scheme since the Tasmanian Government's decision to go ahead with the dam.
(2) How many of these letters were (a) in favour of and (b) against the proposed scheme.
(3) To how many of these letters has he sent replies.
(4) What is the form of these replies.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) From June I to October 19, 1982, 43 such letters were received.
(2) All were against the proposed scheme.
(3) Five prior to I November 1982.
(4) The replies noted the Commonwealth's position and actions of particular relevance to the issue.

Googong Dam Catchment Area: Application of Agricultural Chemicals

(Question No, 5358)

Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:

(I) What is the (a) size and (b) Australian map grid coordinates of the water catchment area of the Googong Dam which supplies water to Queanbeyan, New South Wales and Canberra.

(2) When, and how, was this area resumed by the Commonwealth and what was the date of the Gazette notice.

(3) What agricultural chemicals have been applied by his Department in that water catchment area in each financial year since that resumption.

(4) What were their (a) trade and generic names, (b) quan-
tities, (c) dates, (d) meterological conditions at time of application, (e) costs, (f) numbers of employees involved in each
application, (g) details of protective clothing issued to those employees, (h) details of (i) routine and (ii) any unusual
health monitoring of those employees and (j) details of any regulations which apply to the use of these chemicals in territory under Commonwealth control, including such things as
the distance from watercourses where these chemicals must not be applied.

(5) Why do New South Wales fishing laws apply in this catchment area.

(6) Is he able to say whether there are any restrictions under New South Wales fishing laws on the application of agricultural chemicals on or near bodies of water to which those laws apply.

Mr HodgmanThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) 87,300 hectares, (b) Australian map grid co-
ordinates of selected points on or near the boundary of the water catchment area are:

Yarrow
Foxlow Cowangerong
Bald Mountain Burra
Dam

6076500 N 6064000 N 6050500 N
6018800 N 6057600 N 6078000 N

711400 E 717700 E
727300 E 726300 E 698000 E 704000 E

(2) Notices of acquisition of 5184 hectares comprising an area that extends about 800 metres east and west of top water
level and southerly for a distance about 6.4 kilometres upstream from the impounded water were published in the Gazettes of 17 October 1973, 22 January 1974, 10 June 1975 and 24 October 1975.

(3) and (4) In the years until construction of the dam was completed in 1977 it is unlikely that herbicides and pesticides chemicals were applied in the acquired area (the only part of the catchment under Departmental control) but no records are available.
Since 1977 the following usage is recorded:

(a) Trade and generic name

(b) Quantity litres

(c) Dates

2,4,5-T

20-30

Tordon 50-0 (Picloram and 10-15

2,4-0)

Tordon 50-0 (Picloram and Small quantity-no

2,4-0)

precise record kept

2,4-0

20-30

2,4-0

Small quantity--no

precise record kept

Grammoxone and Reglone 10

(Paraquat and Diquat)

Frenock (Tetrapion)

7

Frenock (Tetrapion)

10

Banex (Dicamba)

2

Velpar (Hexazinone)

0.5

Gesatop (Simazine)

2

Amitrol and 2,2-DPA

6.5 kg

Larvacide (Chloropicrin) less than I

Larvacide (Chloropicrin) less than I

Multigrow

Max. 200 kg p.a.

1977 1978
1981 1978
1981 1979
1980-81 1982 1980 1982
1981-82 1981-82
1980 1981 Not recorded

(d) Conditions at the time of application are not always recorded. However, spraying is not carried out in wet or windy conditions.
(e) The cost of individual applications is not recorded.
(f) Two employees are normally involved, however on small tasks of short duration one operator may be used.
(g) Overalls, gumboots, gloves and full-face screens.
(h) (i) no routine health monitoring is carried out; (ii) ifan incident is reported of an employee coming into undue contact with an agricultural chemical, a medical examination is immediately arranged.
(i) Departmental officers and employees are instructed that agricultural chemicals may not be applied in the Water Quality Protection Area (the land and water area surrounding the dam wall and water off-take tower), or within 100m of top water level of the reservoir or within 10m of the bank of any stream.
(5) The Googong Reservoir is located in New South Wales and New South Wales laws apply even though land has been acquired by the Commonwealth.
(6) Yes, Section 34 of the Fisheries and Oyster Farms Act.
Report of House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure: Government Response
(Question No. 5372)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) When will he provide specific responses to each of the 30 recommendations of the Report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure on the Australian National Railways Commission which was tabled on II March 1982.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3153

(2) Why has he failed to comply with the Parliamentary practice of providing the Government's response to committee reports within 6 months of the tabling date.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I will be in a position to report the Government's response to the House in the near future.
(2) The report raised a number of issues which required extensive consultation between Government Departments and with State Governments, and this consultation process was unable to be completed until recently.
Internal Reyiew into Children's Services
(Question No. 5374)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) Has the Government published a response to the Internal Review into Children's Services, excluding block funded pre-school (the Spender Report): if so. what was that response: if not, when can a response be expected.
(2) If there is to be no published response, what are the Government's priorities regarding the long-term funding of day care centres and family day care programs.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) The Government's response to the recent review of the Children's Services Program was encompassed within the decisions relating to the Program announced in the Budget context. Work is proceeding to implement those decisions and announcements concerning them are being made progressively.
Claims by Vietnam Veterans: Answer to Question on Notice
(Question No. 5420)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 October 1982:
When may I expect an answer to Question No. 4472 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 27 April 1982.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to my answer to question No. 4472 (Hansard, 9 November 1982, page 2933).
Trade Practices Commission: Consumer Protection Inyestigations
(Question No. 5432)
Mr Hayden asked the Acting Attorney General, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(I) Did the Trade Practices Commission. in its 1981-82 Annual Report. advise that one effect of the Ministerial Direction of 25 May 1981 has been that the Commission is unable to take the first initiative in investigations in relation to consumer protection.
(2) Did the Commission also advise that the very tight control of investigations has meant that some matters have necessarily come to the Commission inadequately developed and with too little information.

(3) Has the Government provided the Commission with any additional resources to enable it to (a) undertake investigations at its own initiative and (b) ensure that investigations are fully and adequately prepared for the Commission.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Trade Practices Commission advised that until recently the tight control, by which staff needed the Commission's approval for each investigation, and also the need to institute cases within twelve months, meant that some matters could not be taken up with the companies concerned so that they came to the Commission inadequately developed and with too little information. The TPC has now taken administrative steps to improve this situation by delegating to senior staff the power to seek initial comments from the company complained of.
(3) The Government keeps under notice both the impact of the Direction and the level of staffing in the Commission to ensure that it is able to carry out its responsibilities under the Trade Practices Act. Additional resources have not been required because:
(a) The Ministerial Direction of 25 May 1981 required the Trade Practices Commission to confine its consumer protection investigations to matters raising issues of importance at the national level and where such matters are brought to its attention by another person. This Direction accords with the Government's decisions announced by the Prime Minister on the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
(b) As noted above, the Commission has now taken administrative steps to speed up the development of possible cases.
Royal Australian Nayy: Recruitment of British Officers
(Question No. 5438)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(I) Has the Royal Australian Navy sent a recruiting team to Britain to seek Royal Navy officers for the RAN.
(2) If so, how many officers are being sought.
(3) What technical or special requirements are needed that cannot be found amongst Australian naval personnel.
(4) Why are non-commissioned ranks in the RAN denied the opportunity for promotion to fill these positions.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Two RAN officers have been sent to the United Kingdom to expedite and streamline procedures for the induction into the RAN of former Royal Navy officers who have already applied to transfer to the RAN. These two officers are not a recruiting team and they have been directed not to undertake any active recruiting. The requirement for their visit to the UK arose because of the inability of the Australian High Commission to process ex-RN officer entrants to the RAN following recent staffing reductions.
(2) The RAN is not actively seeking RN or ex-RN officer entrants. There are at present 43 RN or ex-RN officers who have been given conditional approval to enter the RAN and unsolicited applications continue to be received.
(3) RN or ex-RN officers being inducted into the RAN are principally engineers or maritime warfare specialists of the requisite rank and experience required for unfilled billets in

3154 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

the RAN. There is a world wide shortage of engineers and this is in part responsible for the RAN shortages. Appropriately trained and experienced naval specialists are not available from within the RAN's own ranks.
(4) Non commissioned ranks in the RAN are not being denied any opportunity for promotion because of these measures. Initial offers of service to ex-RN officers guarantee neither permanency of employment nor promotion and with very few exceptions, these ex-RN officers serve in the RAN for limited periods and without career prospects. The RAN is continually striving to enhance the career prospects for both eligible non commissioned ranks and its junior officers but such is the complexity of modern maritime warfare that it is not possible to by-pass either essential training or experience during career progression if Australia's navy is to remain a credible fighting force with its officers demonstrating professional competence.

Royal Australian Navy: Recruitment Outside Australia

(Question No. 5439)

Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:

(I) How many Royal Australian Navy ratings have been promoted to officer level in each of the last 5 years.

(2) How many RAN officers have been recruited from outside Australia in each of the last 5 years.

(3) What special skills were involved in each of those cases where the requirements of the officer position could not be filled by Australians.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The number of RAN sailors who have been promoted to officer level since I July 1977 is as follows:

I July 1977 30 June 1978

28

I July 1978 30June 1979

46

I July 1979-30June 1980

45

I July 1980 30Junel981

62

I July 1981-30June 1982

43

Total

224

(2) The number of officers recruited into the RAN from outside Australia in the same periods is 16, 12, 13, 13, 10 respectively, totalling 64.
(3) See my answer to Question No. 5438.

Royal Australian Navy Fleet Air Arm
(Question No, 5442)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(I) Have personnel in the RAN Fleet Air Arm been notified that their services will not be necessary after the completion of their present period of service.
(2) Where personnel have not qualified for Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits retirement what will be the financial terms applied to their retrenchments.
(3) Why are these officers not capable of filling vacancies occurring in other sections of the RAN.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Personnel in the Fleet Air Arm have not been notified that their services will not be necessary after their present

period of service. Re-engagements for the Fleet Air Arm sailors are still being processed and approved. However, until the future of the Fleet Air Arm has been resolved, most Fleet Air Arm sailors are being offered re-engagements of two years ata time.
(2) There is no plan to retrench members of the Fleet Air Arm and therefore no financial policy for retrenchment.
(3) Many Fleet Air Arm officers are capable of tilling officer vacancies in non aviation sections of the RAN but, until the future of fixed wing aviation in the Fleet Air Arm is resolved, the vast majority remain posted to aviation billets. Officer posting plans to cover all contingencies are nearing completion and will be finalised after the Government's decision on a replacement carrier to Melbourne has been taken.
Western Australia Community Law Centres
(Question No. 5448)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 21 October 1982:
(I) Are any community law centres to receive Commonwealth funding in Western Australia; if so, from what source will the funds be received.
(2) Which centres are to receive funds.
(3) On what criteria will the funding be based.
(4) What initiatives have been undertaken by the Government to encourge the Western Australian State Government to provide funding for community law centres.
(5) What steps has the Attorney-General taken to ensure that community law centres are represented on the Commonwealth Legal Aid Council.
(6) Has the Attorney-Genera!'s attention been drawn to the fact that despite extensive patronage the Sussex Street Community Law Service in East Victoria Park, WA, has not received State or Federal assistance to date.
(7) Will the Attorney-General give consideration to providing financial assistance to this service.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) It is expected that some community law centres in Western Australia will receive funds from the Commonwealth in 1982-83. The funds will be provided under the Commonwealth's ongoing program of provision of grants to supplement voluntary and community legal aid schemes.
(2) The provision of grants to particular centres is the subject of correspondence with the Legal Aid Commission of Western Australia.
(3) The evaluation of the Commission's recommendations will include consideration of the criteria upon which the recommendations are based. It is the Commission's role to propose criteria in the first instance.
(4) The Commonwealth will be advising the State Government of Western Australia concerning the Commonwealth allocation of funds to community law centres. It is hoped that the State will also fund community law centres.
(5) The Attorney-General has appointed a person familiar with the work of community law centres as one of his representatives on the Commonwealth Legal Aid Council.
(6) Yes.
(7) This Service will be considered along with other applicant bodies in Western Australia for the provision of financial assistance.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3155

Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 5547)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etc., of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not. will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) I am informed that no PCBs are in use or storage in the Department of the Capital Territory, nor is there any equipment containing PCBs.
(2) Yes.
(3) None exist for either (a) or (b).
(4) Not applicable see (I) above.
(5) No, see (I) above.
(6) No, it is not considered necessary. See (I) above.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 5548)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etc., of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.

(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The only equipment in use within the Department known to contain PCBs are two transformers installed at Repatriation General Hospital, Hobart, which are maintained by the Department of Transport and Construction.
(2) Yes.
(3) Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations prohibit the importation of polychlorinated biphenyls, terphenyls and other polyphenyls unless the permission of the Minister for Industry and Commerce has been granted. This regulation has been in force since 1973. Health implications of the use of PCBs in Australia have been kept under surveillance by the Commonwealth Department of Health and the National Health and Medical Research Council for many years. It is also relevant that, in connection with its involvement with the Australian Environment Council, the Department of Home Affairs and Environment has reviewed the use of PCBs in Australia and has liaised with industry to encourage the phasing out of PCB use. Regular inspections are carried out by the Department of Transport and Construction as a precautionary measure against possible leaks from the transformers.
(4) There are no immediate plans to replace PCBs due to problems of disposal within Australia.
(5) No.
(6) All staff who are required to work in the area where PCBs are used have been informed of the hazards and correct methods of safely handling PCBs.
Defence Force: Location of Personnel
(Question No. 5569)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
(I) How many Defence (a) service and (b) civilian personnel are located in each State or Territory.
(2) How many service personnel are primarily engaged in combat related units.
Mr Sinclair-The answers to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b)-

State

Service Civilian

personnel personnel

as at

as at

30 June 30June

1982

1982

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Australian Capital Territory Northern Territory

26,623
15,333 14,229 3,531 3,420
285 6,050 1,221

6.103 6,252 1,534
605 396
96 4,095
127

The service personnel figures include 79 Army personnel
absent without leave and 78 Army personnel on maternity leave.

3156 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) Operational Forces and their direct logistic support-29,690.
Beyerley Uranium Project
(Question No. 5584)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
(I) Is it a fact that his Department considers that the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the Beverley uranium project prepared by the South Australian Uranium Corporation fails to meet the requirements of the administrative procedures of the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act and is unacceptable.
(2) If so, in what respects does his Department consider the Draft EIS to be of an unacceptable standard.
(3) In particular, does his Department consider that the Draft EIS (a) provides inadequate technical detail (b) contains inconsistencies, particularly with respect to groundwater movement data, (c) contains highly questionable interpretation of the geology of the orebody and its surrounds and (d) betrays a lack of expertise in regard to the proposed in-situ leaching method and the geohydrology of the area.
(4) Will he reject the Draft EIS; if not, what action will he take.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) See (I) above.
(3) (a) to (d) Comments received on the Beverley draft EIS from the public and from State and Commonwealth authorities identified a number of deficiencies in the draft ElS, including inconsistencies in the geology. geohydrology and groundwater movement section. The proponent company is currently preparing a final ElS for submission to the Department of Home Affairs and Environment and the South Australian Government. The Administrative Procedures under the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act require the proponent to take into account comment received during public review in preparing a final ElS.
(4) No. The Department of Home Affairs and Environment will examine the final EIS, as part of the Department's assessment of this proposal, to ensure that appropriate responses have been made to public comment and that deficiencies have been corrected.
Department of the Capital Territory: Lighting of Public Buildings
(Question No. 5632)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 November 1982:
What was the cost of illuminating public buildings in Canberra during 1981-82.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
It is not possible to provide the information requested by the honourable member since the illumination of public buildings in Canberra is not separately metered.

Payments to Aboriginal Students
(Question No. 4442)
Dr EYeringham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
Is the Minister able to provide details of (a) the average payment to the student and parents by (i) the Commonwealth and (ii) each State and Territory Government in respect of each Aboriginal student over the past 10 years for (A) preschool, (B) primary, (C) secondary, and (D) tertiary students and (b) how these averages compare with the a,;erage payment in respect of other students in Australia.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The only available information concerns Commonwealth schemes of assistance to students, including schemes designed specifically for Aboriginals. The following tables provide in relation to each assistance scheme (i) its availability; (ii) the main benefits applicable for 1982 (these will be substantially higher in 1983 as a result of the decisions taken in relation to levels of student assistance in the 1982-83 Budget), (iii) numbers of students assisted and expenditure for each year since 1972 (or the inception of the scheme whichever is the later). Some Aboriginal students may be included in the figures for those schemes which are not specifically intended for Aboriginals-this certainly would be so in the case of the Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme (AlC).
The tables do not show average benefits per student. For each of the Commonwealth schemes, an average figure obtained by applying student numbers to overall expenditure would not serve as a basis for valid comparsion because of the variety of schemes involved and considerations such as discontinued study, provision for part-time study (for example, under the Aboriginal Study Grants Scheme) and other factors.
Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme-- TEAS (commenced 1974):
(i) Availability: for full time students at universities, CAE's, TAFE and some non-government institutions
(ii) Main Benefits 1982: Maximum living allowances--At home $1,675 p.a. ($32.21 p.w.). Away from home $2,583 p.a. ($49.67 p.w.). Independent $2,583 p.a. ($49.67 p.w.)
Allowances also provided for dependent spouse and children, as well as an incidentals allowance and assistance with travel.
(iii) Numbers of students assisted and expenditure each year since 1974:

Year
1974
1975
1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
1981

Numbers assisted
56,975 (at 30 June)
67,173 (at 30 June)
95,803 99,153 98,220 93,559 91,571
91,096

Expenditure
$ 67,574,806
92,076,129
112,247,979 153,825,444 158,136,548 159,733,282 154,813,791
(revised) 172,609,043

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3157

Adult Secondary Education Assistance Scheme-ASEAS (commenced 1975):
(i) Availability: for mature students to undertake matriculation level courses.
(ii) Main benefits 1982: benefits same as for Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme.
(iii) Numbers of students assisted and expenditure each year since 1975.

Year
1972
1973 1974 1975

Numbers assisted Expenditure

not available
10,671 11,882 12,800

$
4,276,325 (1972-73)
6,093,414
6,553,202 7,795,179

Year
1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

Numbers assisted
1,400 2,489 2,537 2,601 2,235 2,096 2,127

Expenditure
$ 2,058,174 3,634,987 5,164,836 5,233,627 4,289,240 4,024,502 4,600,848

Postgraduate Awards-PGA (commenced 1959):
(i) Availability: for people undertaking full-time Masters and PhD programs.
(ii) Main benefits 1982: Living allowance--$4,620 p.a. Allowances also provided for dependent spouse and children as well as an incidentals allowance and assistance to take up the Award in a different city.
(iii) Numbers of students assisted and expenditure each year since 1972:

Year
1972
1973
1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
1981

Number of students assisted (at 30 June
each year)
2.055
2,055
2,157 2,225 2,230 2,214 2,053 1,910 1,849
1,867

Expenditure
$ 6,043,000 (rounded) 7,009,000 (rounded) 7,743,768 8,555,141 7,724,852 9,465,242 9,550,247 8,688,928 8,225,131 (revised) 9,052,494

Aboriginal Secondary Grants Scheme-ABSEG (commenced 1970):
(i) Availability: for parents of students of Aboriginal descent undertaking secondary schooling.
(ii) Main benefits 1982: Living allowance, $303.80 p.a. (Junior), $484 p.a. (Senior); Books and clothing, $300 p.a. (Junior), $360 p.a. (Senior).
The Scheme also provides boarding allowances as well as allowances for tuition and travel costs, a personal allowance, and assistance with excursions.
(iii) Numbers of students assisted and expenditure each year since 1972. (commenced in 1970).

(estimated)

1976

13,824 8,683,403

1977

14,848 11,139,286

1978

15,052 12,459,499

1979

16,187 13,445,272

1980

17,509 15,291,314

1981

18,718 19,276,349

Aboriginal Study Grants Scheme-ABSTUDY (commenced 1969):
(i) Availability: for people of Aboriginal descent undertaking full-time or part-time courses after leaving school.
(ii) Main benefits 1982: Living allowance-$62.98 p.w. (over 18 or married)-$51.98 p.w. (under 18).
Allowances also provided for dependent spouse and children, clothing, establishment and travel.
Fees, textbook, equipment costs met.
(iii) Numbers of students assisted and expenditure each year since 1972.

Year
1972
1973
1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

Numbers assisted Expenditure

689
I 113
1,467 1,875 2,253 2,451 4,341 7,202 10,875 11,502 (preliminary)

$ 613,415 (1972-73) 904,514 (1973-74) 1,125,988
1,437,570 2,023,737 2,667,462 4,360,906 6,079,069 8,722,030
11,126,396

Assistance for Isolated Children Scheme-AIC (commenced 1973):
(i) Availability: for parents of isolated primary and secondary pupils.
(ii) Main benefits 1982: Maximum boarding allowanceBasic boarding $780 p.a. Additional boarding $600 p.a. Special supplementary $726 p.a.
Allowances also provided for second home, short term boarding and correspondence students.
(iii) Numbers of students assisted and expenditure for each year since 1973

Year 1973

Numbers assisted Expenditure

17,661

$ 5,604,834

3158 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Year

Numbers assisted Expenditure

$

1974

17,448 7,787,918

(revised)

1975

19,418 9,332,018

1976

18,729 10,267,629

1977

18,606 12,905,451

1978

18,965 13,887,586

1979

18,862 12,878,377

1980

19,031 11,889,057

1981

19,213 17,285,228

Secondary Allowances Scheme-SAS (commenced 1974):
(i) Availability: for low income families with children in final two years of secondary school.
(ii) Benefit 1982: Maximum allowance $726 p.a.
(iii) Numbers of students assisted and expenditure for each year since 1974

Year

Numbers assisted Expenditure

$

1974

9,000 1,957,914

(estimated)

1975

9,783 3,774,034

1976

15,356 6,087,787

1977

15,766 7,451,342

1978

19,070 8,970,627

1979

21,828 10,056,386

1980

23,529 10,714,469

1981

25,751 14,352,880

Funding of Organisations by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 4552)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 21 September 1982:
(I) What organisations in the Electoral Division of Grayndler receive funding from the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the addresses of these organisations.
(3) What is the amount and type of funding for each organisation.
Mr Hodges~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3)-
(a) GRANT-IN-AlD-
The following organisations have been awarded a grant-in-aid in the Electoral Division of Grayndler to assist with the employment of social welfare workers to deliver welfare services to migrants:
Centre for Human Services--lst grant, 334 Marrickville Road, Marrickville, NSW 2204. $24,000 p.a.
Centre for Human Services-2nd grant, address as above. $22.130 p.a.
Polish Welfare and Information Bureau, 182 Liverpool Road, Ashfield, NSW 2131. $23,050

(b) MIGRANT PROJECT SUBSIDY SCHEME-
The following organisations have received project funding under the MPSS Scheme during the 1980-81 and 1981-82 financial years. Such grants assist ethnic and voluntary organisations to meet the cost of projects aimed at introducing new approaches to migrant welfare or to restructure existing services:
1981-82 FINANCIAL YEAR
Addison Road Community Centre, 142 Addison Road, Marrickville, NSW 2204. $1,500.
Australian Jieh Association, 7 Warratah Street, Canterbury, NSW 2193. $2,300.
Filipino Community Centre, Hut 37, Addison Community Centre, 142 Addison Road, Marrickville, NSW 2204. $3,300.
Vietnamese Community Services Association, 312 Marrickville Road, Marrickville, NSW 2204. $3,400.
Women's Refuge-Marrickville, P.O. Box 170, Newtown, NSW 2042. $1,200.
1980-81 FINANCIAL YEAR-
Marrickville Old Age/Invalid Persons Amenities Centre Appeal Fund, P.O. Box 14, Petersham, NSW 2049 (opperates from Marrickville Town Hall) $1,500.
Additionally, there are grants to other agencies in adjacent electorates which also partly service the Electoral Division of Grayndler.
Education: Discipline
(Question No. 4681)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the 1982 direction of the Government of Eire, which followed the example of most European Governments, that, in National Schools, (a) teachers should have a lively regard for the improvement of their pupils, treat them with kindness combined with firmness and should aim at governing them through their affections and reason, and not by harshness and severity, (b) ridicule, sarcasm or remarks likely to undermine a pupil's selfconfidence should not be used in any circumstances, (c) the use of corporal punshiment should be forbidden, and (d) any teacher who contravened these rules would be regarded as guilty of conduct unbefitting a teacher and subject to severe disciplinary action.
(2) Has the Minister's attention also been drawn to the reports of spectacular success in the use of self-discipline by teachers in overcoming problems of difficult pupils in Education for Tomorrow's World. by Henden, Forland and Fraenki, published in 1970 by Grosvenor Books, London.
(3) Will Australia follow Ireland's example; if so, when.
Mr Fife~The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(J) Yes.
(2) Yes.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3159

(3) As my predecessor indicated in his reply to Question No. 3954 from the honourable member earlier this year, the Commonwealth's direct involvement in the administration of schools is limited to the Australian Capital Territory. The ACT Schools Authority has urged all ACT government schools to work towards the abolition of physical punishment.
ACT Government schools each have a school board which determines educational policy and philosophy for the school, operating within the general directions set by the ACT Schools Authority.
Schools in the ACT generally wish to be known for their caring relationships, where the teachers are aware of children's needs and guide and promote the whole development of each child, where the teacher's respect for the child as a person cultivates in him or her the desire to learn, and where caring and respect is mutual between all members of the school community.
As far as government schools in the States and nongovernment schools are concerned these are matters for the respective State and non-government school authorities to determine. However, I believe that in all schools, teachers who take a professional approach to their duties would adhere to humanitarian principles.
Commonwealth Land
(Question No, 4697)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) What is the total area of (a) urban and (b) rural land owned by the Commonwealth and its authorities in the (i) Baulkham Hills, (ii) Blacktown, (iii) Fairfield, (iv) Hawkesbury, (v) Holroyd, (vi) Liverpool, and (vii) Penrith local government areas.
(2) What rates are paid by the Commonwealth and its authorities to each of the above councils.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (i) Baulkham Hills-- Urban, 4.1293 Hectares; Rural, Nil.
(ii) Blacktown --Urban, 12.0355 Hectares; Rural, 3,192.7283 Hectares.
(iii) Fairfield--Urban, 22.0880 Hectares; Rural, Nil.
(iv) Hawkesbury--Urban, 9.1068 Hectares; Rural, 105.4812 Hectares.
(v) HolroydUrban, 3.2278 Hectares; Rural, 62.9518 Hectares.
(vi) Liverpool--Urban, 621.0338 Hectares; Rural, 7,608.9901 Hectares.
(vii) Penrith-Urban, 114.5177 Hectares; Rural, 2,195.0285 Hectares.
The above mentioned does not include properties owned by authorities exempt from the Lands Acquisition Act; this information is not retained by my Department.
(2) Section 114 of the Constitution exempts the Commonwealth from the payment of rates on land used for Commonwealth purposes, or on vacant land held by the Commonwealth. However, payments in lieu of rates are made to State local authorities where circumstances exist such as the revenue leasing of property, or its exclusive use for domestic purposes.
Payments of this nature are made to the following Councils:

Blacktown
Fairfield Hawkesbury Liverpool
Penrith

$ 1,987.12p.a.
$ 9,968.78p.a. $17,092.l3p.a.
$6,703.20p.a. $12,572.30p.a.

Independent Audit: Department of Transport and Construction
(Question No. 4784)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As a condition of payments in the nature of grants/contributions from my Department, non-government organisations are required to submit periodic financial statements certified by independent auditors who are members of the recognised accountancy bodies.
Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 4820)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In 1981-82 what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr Hodges--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2)
GRANT-IN-AID
Under the Grant-In-Aid Scheme the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs may approve grants to subsidise non-government organisations which promote migrant welfare through the employment of Social Welfare Workers.
Grants are normally for a period of 3 years. Organisations which were grant-holders over 1981-82 period are listed below.
NEW SOUTH WALESAustralian Chinese Community Association (Level 3). Australian Council of Churches (Level 2). Anglican Home Mission Society, Care Force, first grant (Level 2). Anglican Home Mission Society, Care Force (hosting), second grant (Level 2) . Anglican Home Mission Society, Wollongong, third grant (Levell). Australian Jewish Welfare Society (Level 3). Australian Red Cross, NSW Division (Level 3). Canterbury Community Aid (Levell). Centrecare (for Spanish speaking community) (Level I). Centre for Human Services, Marrickville, first grant (Level 2). Centre for Human Services, Marrickville, second grant (Levell).

3160 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Co.As.lt (Italian Assistance Committee), first grant (Level
2). Co.As.1t (Italian Assistance Committee), second grant
(Level 2). Co.As.1t (Italian Assistance Committee), (aged), third
grant (Level 2). Co.As.1t (Italian Assistance Committee), fourth grant
(Levell ). Coptic Orthodox Church (Level 2). Council on the Ageing (Aged) (Level 2). Ethnic Communities Council (Level 3). Fairfield City Council (Level 3). Fairfield Community Aid and Information Centre (Level
2). Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia, first grant
(Levels 3/1), (Split grant). Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia, second grant
(Levell ). Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia, third grant
(Aged) (Level 2). Indo-China Refugee Association (NSW) (Level 2). Indo-China Refugee Association (Australia) (Level 2). Inter-Church Trade and Industry Mission (Level 3). Khmer Community of NSW. La Valette Maltese Social Centre (Level 2). Association of Lao Refugees (Levell). Migrant Resource Centre, Wollongong (Level 2). Migrant Resource Centre, Liverpool (Level 2). Polish Welfare and Information Bureau (Aged) (Levell). Society of St Vincent de Paul, first grant (Level 2). Society of St Vincent de Paul, second grant (for Spanish-
speaking community) (Levell). South Sydney Community Aid (Level 3). Turkish Child Care Co-operative (Level 3). Turkish Welfare Association (Level 2). Uniting Church N.S.W. (hosting) (The Board for Social
Responsibility) (Level 2). Westside Centre (Level 2). Yugoslav Australian Association (Information and Welfare
Centre), first grant (Levels 2/ I), (Split grant) Yugoslav Australian Association (Information and Welfare
Centre), second grant (Levell)
VICTORIAAustralian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU), first grant (Level 3). Australian Council of Trade Unions (Initially used in WA), second grant (Level 2). Australian Croatian Association (Level 2). Australian German Welfare Association (Aged) (Level 3). Australian Greek Welfare Society Block funding (Includes one Aged Grant) ($84,050 p.a.). Australian Jewish Welfare and Relief Society (Level 3). Australian Lebanese Association (Levels 2/1), (Split grant). Australian Yugoslav Welfare Society, first grant (Level 2). Australian Yugoslav Welfare Society, (second grant) (Level 3). Broadmeadows Uniting Church Mission (Level 2). Catholic Dutch Migrant Association (Aged) (Level 3). Catholic Family Welfare Bureau, first grant (Level 4). Catholic Family Welfare Bureau, Dandenong, second grant (Level 2). Catholic Immigration Office (hosting) (Level 3). Co.As.lt. (Italian Assistance Committee) Block funding (Includes one Aged Grant) ($88,000 p.a) Church of All Nations, first grant (Level I) Church of All Nations, second grant (Levell) Ecumenical Migration Centre, first grant (Level 3) Ecumenical Migration Centre, second grant (Level 2) Ecumenical Migration Centre (for Timorese), third grant (Levell) Federation of Chinese Associations (Level 2)

Federation of Polish Associations (aged) (Levell) Indo-Chinese Refugee Association (hosting) (Levels 2/1)
(Split grant) International Association of Migrant Families (AN FE)
(Levell) International Social Service (Level 4) Islamic Council of Victoria, first grant (for Turkish com-
munity) (Level I) Islamic Council of Victoria, second grant (for Muslim com-
munity) (Level 2) Islamic Society of Victoria (Levell) Maltese Community Council of Victoria (Level 2) Ethnic Communities Council, Geelong (Level 3) Migrant Resource Centre, Melbourne (Level 2) Migrant Resource Centres, Preston and Footscray (Levels
2/1) (Split grant) Migrant Resource Centre, Prahran (half grant) (Level 2) Ovens and King Area Committee, Specific one year grant
of $4,000 Spanish Latin American Welfare Committee (Level 2) Springvale Community Aid and Advice Bureau, first grant
(Level 2) Springvale Community Aid and Advice Bureau (hosting)
second grant (Level 2) St Albans Community Health Centre (Level 2)
QUEENSLANDCroation Australian Association (Levell) Finnish Club of Brisbane (Levell) Greek Orthodox Community ofSt George (Level 2) Indo-Chinese Refugee Association (hosting) (Level 3) Italian Welfare Committee (Level 2) Mount Isa Ethnic Community Council (Levell) 'Polonia' Polish Association (aged) (Levell) Society ofSt Vincent de Paul, first grant (Level 2) (a) Society of St Vincent de Paul, second grant, relinquished (Level 2) (b) Ethnic Communities Council ofQld (Level 3) Vietnamese Association, Brisbane (Levell)
SOUTH AUSTRALlACatholic Family Welfare Bureau (Level 2) Co-ordinating Italian Committee Inc. (Level I) Ethnic Communities Council ofS.A. (aged) (Levell) Federation of Polish Organisations (Level 2) Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of South Australia (Levell) Indo-China Refugee Association of S.A. (hosting) (Level 3) Migrant Resource Centre (for Yugoslav community) (Levell) Port Adelaide Central Methodist Mission (Level 2) Whyalla Counselling Service (Level 2)
WESTERN AUSTRALlAAnglican Health and Welfare Services, first grant (Level 3) Anglican Health and Welfare Services, second grant (Level I) The Australian Inland Mission (Level 2) Centacare, first grant (Level 3) Centacare (hosting), second grant (Level 2) Free Vietnamese Fraternity Association, not yet taken up Fremantle Migrant Advisory Association (for Portuguese) (Levell) Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Western Australia (Level 2) Italo-Australian Welfare Centre (Level 3) Western Australian Association of Polish Women (Level I) Western Australian Yugoslav Club (Levell) YWCA of Western Australia (Levell)
TASMANIACatholic Family Welfare Bureau (Level 2)
NORTHERN TERRITORYResource and Settlement Centre (Levell)

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3161

AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORYMigrant Resource Centre (Level I)
LEVELS OF GRANTS-IN-AID FOR 1981-82 WERE: Levell: $14,750 per annum Level 2: $16,000 per annum Level 3: $19,000 per annum Level 4: $20,750 per annum MIGRANT PROJECT SUBSIDY SCHEME GRANTS AWARDED IN 1981-82
Under this Scheme the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs may approve 'once only' grants to assist ethnic or voluntary organisations to meet the cost of projects aimed at introducing new approaches to migrant welfare service delivery or to restructure existing services. In 1981-82 grants of up to $5,000 were made to the following organisations.
NEW SOUTH WALESAddision Road Community Centre ($1,500) Australian Jieh Association ($2,300) Australian Kafarsghab (Lebanese Association) ($2,000) Australian Turkish Child Care Co-operative ($2,000) Canterbury Community Aid Bureau ($3,900) Community Child Care Co-operative (the balance of a
$5,000 grant approved in the 1980-81 financial year). ($3,000)
Ethnic Communities' Council of NSW ($5,000) Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia ($5,000) Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia ($5,000) Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia ($5,000) Filipino Community Centre ($3,000) IIIawarra Ethnic Teachers and Parents Association ($200) International Social Service ($200) Migrant Workers' Committee ($3,400) Tenants' Union of NSW Co-operative ($5,000) Vietnamese Community Services Association ($3,400) Women's Refuges (Canley Heights, Dee Why, Glebe and Marrickville) ($4,800) Total $55,000
VICTORIAAustralian Egyptian Association ($2,500) Co. As. It. ($2,500) Co. As. It. ($5,000) Ethnic Communities' Council of Vic ($1,000) Ethnic Communities' Council of Vic ($5,000) Federated Liquor and Allied Industries Employees Union
($5,000) Federation of Polish Organisations in Victoria ($5,000) Hungarian Youth and Community Centre ($3,000) Khmer Community of Victoria ($2,910) Northern News Group ($700) Parish Pastoral Council ofSt Joseph the Worker ($1,000) St Luke's Elderly Italian Club ($1,500) Victorian Co-operative on Children's Services for Ethnic
Groups (VICSEG) ($3,000) Victorian Mauritian Association ($2,000) Whittlesea Shire Multi-Lingual Directory ($4,500) Total
$44,610
QUEENSLANDGreek Orthodox Parish ($2,500) Macedonian Cultural Community Centre ($2,900) Russian Community Centre ($3,600) Total $9,000
SOUTH AUSTRALIA ANFE ($530) Committee for Hosting Eastern European Refugees
($5,000) Corporation of the Canossian Order Italian Cultural
Centre ($460) Ethnic Disabled Council of Adelaide ($4,900) Indo-Chinese Australian Women's Association ($1,500)

Indo-Chinese Australian Women's Association ($1,100) Lithuanian Women's Association ($800) St Theresa Refugee Resettlement Association ($1,700) Trade Union Postal Courses ($5,000) Total $20,990
WESTERN AUSTRALIA-- Roma Community ($1,300)
Sri Lanka (Ceylon) Association ($4,000)
Rhodesia Association ofWA ($2,000)
Polish Association in Western Australia ($2,000)
Yugoslav Welfare Assn. Mt Hawthorn ($2,600) Total $11,900
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORYMaltese Australia Association ($1,000)
Society of St Vincent de Paul ($5,000)
Lao Association ($1,500) Total $7,500
TASMANIAFiji Australia Association ($1,000) ($1,000) Total
$150,000
COMMITTEE FOR THE ALLOCAnON OF LOAN FUNDS TO REFUGEES IN CENTRES (CALFRIC)
Under the CALFRIC loan scheme, funds from my Department's appropriation are allocated to a fund operated by the Committee for the Allocation of Loan Funds to Refugees in Centres (CALFRIC). This Committee makes small, interestfree loans (up to $600) to refugees, to assist them with the expenses of moving out of migrant centres into the community. Money from repayments on loans is recycled via the CALFRIC fund and lent to other refugees. The Committee comprises representatives of the following voluntary agencies:
The Salvation Army Austcare Indo China Refugee Association (Australia) The Saint Vincent de Paul Society Australian Council of Churches Australian Council of Social Services;
as well as of Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services and of my Department.
In 1981-82, the Government allocated a further $200,000 to the CALFRIC loan fund bringing to $1.213m the total Commonwealth contribution.
My Department also makes payments via the Clothing Reimbursement Scheme to reimburse voluntary agencies for the cost of providing essential clothing and personal requisites to refugees who lack these items when they arrive in Australia. A detailed breakdown of all accounts submitted for payment under this scheme in 1981-82 would require an examination of every single claim, and would make demands of staffing resources which I am not prepared to authorise. The major agencies participating in the scheme were:
Saint Vincent de Paul Society The Salvation Army Red Cross The Smith Family Seventh Day Adventist Church Hobart City Mission.
In addition to those agencies, however, small community groups participating in the Community Refugee Settlement Scheme are eligible to claim reimbursement for clothing provided to refugees who bypass migrant centres and go straight into the community under that scheme; details of those groups are not readily available.
A total of $199,850 was paid to voluntary agencies under this scheme in 1981-82.

3162 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Immigration: Business Migration Category
(Question No. 4840)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article on page 21 of the Sydney Morning Herald of 23 June 1982 concerning Tan Sri Khoo Teck Puat.
(2) How many applications for permanent residence under the Business Migration category have been approved each year since the inception of this scheme.
(3) Was Tan Sri Khoo Teck Puat granted entry to Australia under this scheme.
(4) Can foreign nationals purchase permanent residence under this program by purchasing Australian companies or businesses.
(5) Has his attention been drawn to the inequity of such a scheme.
(6) How many permanent resident visa holders travelled overseas and returned to Australia last year.
(7) What is the minimum period of residence required in Australia each year to return with permanent residence status.
(8) Are some permanent residence visa holders only holidaying in Australia each year to retain their permanent resident status while conducting their normal lives and business in other countries.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Business Migration Program commenced on 19 April 1982. It superseded the previous entrepreneur migration category which had been in operation since November 1976. Arrivals of entrepreneurial migrants and business migrants in the last three financial years are as follows:
1979-80-78 1980-81-- 106 198182-263
(3) Yes. Tan Sri Khoo Teck Puat was approved under the entrepreneur migration category in 1981.
(4) and (5) No. People selected under the former entrepreneurial category and the Business Migration Program are expected to settle in Australia and to satisfy normal migration requirements. The business proposal submitted by the applicant and the likely benefits of the proposal to Australia form important parts of consideration of the application.
(6) During 1981, 221,473 persons with resident status departed. Of these 10,719 were long term residents (i.e. one year or more) and the remaining 212,754 were short term residents (i.e. less than one year).
For the same period, 212,765 persons with resident status returned to Australia. This figure comprised 15,303 long term residents and 197,460 short term residents.
It is not possible to extract from these figures the number of persons who may have departed and returned during the course of the year. The totals would also include persons who may have departed and returned more than once.
Separate statistics are not maintained on resident businessmen who travel in and out of Australia.
(7) Person~ with resident status in Australia under the Migration Program may remain overseas for periods up t9, but not normally exceeding:

three years where the person has lived in Australia for at least 12 months.
one year where the person has lived in Australia for less than 12 months.
(8) Business migrants are expected to settle permanently in Australia. However. some businessmen need to visit other countries in connection with their business affairs. In general, reasons for leaving Australia must be consistent with the principle that there is a genuine intention to settle in Australia.
Review of Migrant Services and Programs
(Question No. 4930)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) Were all 89 recommendations and 55 propositions of the recent evaluation of the Review of Migrant Services and Programs (Galbally Report) by the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs accepted by the Government.
(2) Did the Government reject recommendation 68 relating to an aspect of the Criminal Investigation Bill 1981; if so. Why.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. The Government's response to each recommendation and to the selected proposals which required Government endorsement is contained in a Summary of Government decisions document which has been widely distributed to ethnic organisations, State and Federal bodies, relevant trade unions and all members of this Parliament.
(2) The Criminal Investigation Bill 1981 properly falls within the jurisdiction of the Attorney-General. I am advised that recommendation 68 was considered by the Attorney General as part of an extensive review of the Criminal Investigation Bill 1981 undertaken in the light of a considerable number of submissions on the Bill which he has received. The outcome of this review will be made known as soon as possible.
Adult Migrant Education Service: Employment Conditions of Casual Teachers
(Question No. 4992)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 26 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a statement by the Industrial Commissioner of NSW, issued on 18 August 1982, strongly critical of the conditions under which casual full-time teachers in the Adult Migrant Education Service are employed compared to the 77 permanent teachers in the service.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to a statement by Mr Justice Bauer that (a) the evidence is that the casual fUll-time teachers do the same work and participate in teaching education preparation and developments in the various centres and for all intents and purposes do the same work as if they were permanent employees and (b) it might reasonably be said that the conditions of employment result in the casual, fUll-time teachers subsidising the Adult Migrant Education Scheme.
(3) If so will he respond to the views expressed in the Industrial Commission by releasing the funds necessary to make these casual teaching positions permanent.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3163

Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) I have read the statement of Mr Justice Bauer of the NSW Industrial Commission which refers to the conditions of casual teachers employed for 20 hours per week in the NSW Adult Migrant Education Service.
I have noted that the transcript of the hearing cites instances of casual teachers undertaking activities which extend the time that they spend at the Adult Migrant Education Centre beyond 20 hours per week. The responsibilities of these casual teachers has been compared by Mr Justice Bauer with the permanent teachers who are on duty for 30 hours per week.
To ensure an adequate degree of flexibility in the size and distribution of the Adult Migrant Education Service to match the changing composition and needs of the non-English speaking migrant intake, it is desirable to have a balance of perma. nent and casual teachers. As at 15 September 1982, there were 115 permanent teacher positions in the NSW Adult Migrant Education Service. In response to approaches from the NSW Minister for Education, I have agreed to provide funding for the conversion of an additional 30 positions from casual to permanent.
Within the current appropriations further funds cannot be provided to convert casual positions to permanent ones without reducing the total number of hours of English language instruction available to migrants, or other important services. I have proposed adjustments to the teaching arrangements to make it possible to convert further positions from casual to permanent.
At the same time. I have undertaken to examine closely the basis for future funding of permanent teacher positions with

particular attention to the appropriate proportion of permanent teachers, given the need for a mix of permanent and casual staff. This is a matter which has national implications and I have indicated to the NSW Minister for Education that the Commonwealth will need to take account of these national implications in responding further to approaches from NSW.
Nursing Homes within the Electoral Division of Lowe: Funding
(Question No. 5054)
Mr Maher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 14 September 1982:
(I) What moneys were paid to each nursing home within the Electoral Division of Lowe during 1981-82.
(2) Who is the registered proprietor of each home.
(3) How many approved beds are located within each home.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1 )-(3) During 1981-82 no funds were paid under the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act, administered by my Department, towards nursing home accommodation in the Electoral Division of Lowe.
Details of Commonwealth Nursing Home Benefit paid under the National Health Act, administered by the Commonwealth Department of Health, are shown in the following table:
ELECTORATE-LOWE

Private
Gain
Approval No.

Home

2001
2004 2578 2407
2032 2033 2593 2375
2131 2137
2139 2143 2160 2175 2184 2186 2368 2190 2198 2204 2451 2228 2234 2256 2269

Abbeymere
Ainsley Allara
Ascot Audenburry Austin Concord Crescent Fairlawn Genista
Gladstone House Goondee Helenville
Jesmond Kelby Kent House Koomiealla Kurmala Laureldene Linburn Llewellyn Lodge Meredith House
Montrose Park view Restwell

Bed Capacity
26 beds 31 beds 70 beds 43 beds 39 beds 17 beds 87 beds 39 beds 34 beds 28 beds 24 beds 49 beds 22 beds 53 beds 29 beds 34 beds 25 beds 32 beds 41 beds 74 beds 25 beds 40 beds 21 beds 77 beds 31 beds

Proprietor
Abbeymere PjL Hardzak Holdings PjL Debo PjL Muldoon Hotels Hardzak Holdings PjL Tablan PjL Doncium Investments P jL Sarah Corrigan Holurit PjL Carmela Albanese Irene Patricia Walker Megeta PjL Hebridean PjL Jesmond Hospital PjL Cassie Elizabeth Thornley Kent House PjL Koomiealla Hospital PjL Baday PjL Laureldene Holdings PjL John G. and Olga Halla Knizek Humphrey Cecil Oxenham Medhome Convalescent Hospital PjL Australian Nursing Home Foundation Milan Votrubec MinokasPjL

1981-82 Commonwealth
Nursing Home Benefit paid under the National Health Act
$ 187.621.80 144,692.20 445,569.30 315.164.25 348,256.55 130,674.30 588,623.90 239,334.45 274,152.05 163,956.80 192,010.50 446,570.25 182,744.95 231,372.55 188,547.90 255,377.35 111,405.65 204,668.10 334,067.55 581,066.90 188,091.45 291,251.95 169,871.55 344,771.55 246,342.80

3164 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Private
Gain
Approval No.

Home

Bed Capacity

2410 2086
2276 2287 2560 2243
2300 2313
2330
2350 2351

Romsay Hall
Ronma Rossmoyne Stanton House
Strathdale StAndrew
Sunningdale Tudor House Wavertree
Wynleigh Wynoonga

24 beds 40 beds
37 beds 31 beds 146 beds
23 beds
25 beds 42 beds 39 beds
36 beds 26 beds

Voluntary Non Profit

2096

. Woodstock

40 beds

Non Participating

1486

Our Lady of Loreto

Nursing Home for the

Aged

205 beds

Deficit Financing

2377

Our Lady of Christians

Home

71 beds

Proprietor

Lidara PjL

.....

Surgeon Holdings PjL (closed March)

Rossmoyne PjL

Uniting Church Property Trust (N.S.W.)

Colombia Nursing Homes PjL

Medhome Convalescent Hospital PjL

Rimview PjL

Brian Ashton Baker

Wavertree PjL

Hans Georg and Josephine Lang

FTBZPjL

Christadelphian Homes

. N.S.W. Government . Little Sisters of the Poor

1981-82 Commonwealth
Nursing Home Benefit paid under the National Health Act
188,838.25 211 ,473.20 236,947.10 264,591.95 878,265.45 181,526.10 194,672.90 321,775.10 347,051.45 275,261.30 190,051.05
279,878.20
1,653,807.50
570,742.00

Electricity Tariffs
(Question No. 5080)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) What is the average cost per kilowatt hour of electricity consumed by (a) residential customers, (b) commercial customers and (c) industry in each State and each capital city.
(2) Is the Minister able to say in which States a special tariff applies to large industrial consumers.
(3) Can the Minister also state which industrial consumers are supplied at these special tariffs and what is the average cost per kilowatt hour of power in each case.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The determination of electricity charges is the responsibility of State Governments and the authorities responsible for generation andjor distribution of electricity within each State. Tariff policies vary such that some States have uniform State-wide charges while in other States charges vary between regions. For your information, however, indicative capital city charges are as follows:
(a) For typical domestic consumers using 5000 kilowatt hours per annum and including some off-peak usage where applicable at I October 1982:

¢jkWh

Sydney

5.7

Melbourne

6.4

Brisbane

6.0

Adelaide

5.6

Perth

7.4

Hobart Canberra Darwin

¢jkWh
4.5 5.4 7.6

(b) Unit charges applicable to commercial consumers vary considerably according to the amount of electricity consumed. However, for indicative purposes a
typical commerical consumer has been assumed to use 250000 kilowatt hours per year, i.e. equivalent to the
electricity consumption of an average multi-storey office block. Based on this assumption the average cost to commercial consumers in Australian capital cities at
I October 1982 would be:

¢jkWh

Sydney

12.4

Melbourne

9.5

Brisbane

9.0

Adelaide

7.5

Perth

8.8

Hobart

5.6

Canberra

8.0

Darwin

9.0

(c) Unit charges for industrial consumers also vary considerably according to the level of consumption of the particular industrial consumer. The following are indicative of tariffs charges to small, i.e. 2 million kilowatt hours (GWh) per year, medium (15 GWh) and large (60 GWh) industrial consumers in Australian
capital cities as at I October 1982:

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3165

Sydney Melbourne Brisbane Adelaide Perth Hobart Canberra

2GWh 15GWh 60GWh ¢jkWh ¢jkWh ¢jkWH

7.7

6.7

6.7

5.0

3.7

3.6

5.8

4.7

4.7

5.8

4.3

3.9

7.4

5.8

5.3

4.0

3.4

3.4

6.8

(2) and (3) All States publish tariffs under which large industrial consumers can be charged and in some instances negotiate tariffs with very large consumers (e.g. aluminium smelters). The setting of these tariffs is solely the responsibility of the State Governments concerned and details are not normally disclosed publicly.
Appointments at Australian Universities
(Question No. 5082)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) How many scientists, technologists and engineers employed in private industry ha"e held concurrently appointments at Australian universities or colleges of advanced education in each of the past 5 years.
(2) What was the approximate annual cost to the universities and colleges.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) The appointment of staff by univeristies and colleges of advanced education are matters for the individual institutions and the States. The information sought is therefore not available to my Department.

Welfare Services at Migrant Centres
(Question No. 5094)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) Further to his answer to Question No. 3611 (Hansard page 958. II March 1982) will the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs take over welfare services at migrant centres; if so, when.

(2) Will Welfare Officers be offered jobs by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs; if so, what will be the terms and conditions of employment for Welfare Officers, including (a) permanency, (b) status, (c) rates of pay, (d) position as regards Public Service and (e) redundancy provisions.
if applicable; if not, what arrangements will apply.

Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2) The Government has accepted recommen-

dations of the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs'

Evaluation of Post-Arrival Programs and Services that

"DIEA officers (including those transferred from

CACS)

should provide hostel welfare

services

Detailed arrangements flowing from the Government decision are still being developed. Consideration is being given to the eligibility of employees of Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Limited (CACS) to apply for positions within the Australian Public Service. There have been discussions with unions on staffing matters and further meetings are planned. The new arrangements will seek to provide an effective and efficient service to migrants while recognising the interests of existing staff, both within the Australian Public Service and those employed by CACS.
Appropriation for Free or Concessional Railway Fares and Freight
(Question No. 5128)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
In relation to item 644:3:04 of Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1982-83 concerning free or concessional railway fares or freight, what estimate can be provided of the real change in the provision made for this item in 1982-83 compared to 1981-82 and what are the reasons for the reduction in the real allocation.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
$2.3m was appropriated for free or concessional railway fares and freight for 1981-82 including a once only carry over amount of $0.22m from 1980-81. This carry over was brought about by a change in Australian National Railway Commission's accounting methods since July 1981, from retrospective to current claims.
The actual expenditure for 1981-82 was $2.08m. The allocation for 1982-83 is $2.2m. After applying the Gross Domestic Product Implicit Price Deflator of 10.3 per cent, there is only a 4.1 per cent decrease in real terms from the 1981-82 appropriation. In the light of forecast economic circumstances it was felt that likely travel demand would not be high and that the funds provided would meet the requirement.
Recommendations by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions
(Question No. 5138)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
(I) What are the details of all recommendations made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions which related specifically to the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the details of the implementation of those recommendations to date.
(3) Where a service formerly provided by the Minister's Department is now provided by private interests. what have been the (a) cost savings and (b) cost penalties incurred to date. in each case.
Mr Peacock-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) There are four RCF recommendations which specifically relate to my Department.

3166 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Departmental function Ship Design Ship Building
Advisory Committees . Customs By-Laws System

Government decision
Function to be transferred to the private sector Ship Building Board to be abolished Ship Building assistance functions to be scaled down
Advisory Committees to be rationalised Industries Assistance Commission to investigate improvements to by-law system

Implementation details ------------------
Implemented
Implemented Administration staff reduced. Current administrative level being maintained until commitments under Ship Construction Bounty Act 1975 are met Number reduced from 13 to 9 Government has decided to maintain a Commercial By-law System to be known as Commercial Tariff Concession System

(3) Cost saving on recommendation relating to Ship Design is $66 1,250 at December 1981 salary levels.
Note: Administrative arrangements of May 1982 placed responsibility for two recommendations relating to the former Department of Industry and Commerce and four recommendations relating to the abolished Department of Business and Consumer Affairs respectively, with other departments. These Decisions are:

Function

Department responsible

Australian Government Clothing Factory
Ordnance Factory, Bendigo
Bankruptcy
Consumer Affairs Activities
Policy Advice on Industries Assistance
Prices Justification Tribunal

Defence Support Defence Support Attorney-Genera!'s Attorney-Genera!'s Administrative Services Administrative Services

Residents of the Electoral Diyision of Lowe: Applications For Citizenship
(Question No. 5208)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
Why are some residents of the Electoral Division of Lowe, when applying for citizenship, referred to the departmental office at Parramatta, while other residents are referred to the office in Chifley Square, Sydney.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Applications for Australian citizenship from residents of the Electoral Division of Lowe are normally dealt with at the office of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in Chifley Square, Sydney. However, if the applicant requests that the application be dealt with by the Parramatta office because it is more convenient to his/her workplace, then this is arranged.
Immigration: Visa Applications
(Question No, 5209)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 September 1982:
In each month since I January 1982 what revenue has been received in New South Wales as fees for processing visa applications, permanent residency applications and other related services for which a fee is charged by his Department.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There is no charge for processing visa applications, nor is there a charge for processing sponsorships Or for initial entry permits.
A list of net revenue raised from fees in New South Wales since I January 1982 is attached. This does not include tax revenue.
I believe it would be helpful to include the following brief description of the major fees:
Further Temporary Entry Permits---applies to visitors and temporary residents seeking an extension.
Change of Status-applies to people who entered Australia other than as permanent residents and who are seeking to have their status changed.
Return Endorsement-applies to permanent residents travelling overseas on a foreign passport and permits re-entry.

Translations NAATI Fees Further TEPs Change of Status Return Endorsements Evidence of Resident Status Cables

January February

Nil Nil 51,605 26,035 31,120

Nil Nil 53,105 24,747 34,510

10,395 2,600

9,675 2,700

March 163 295
74,130 36,225 51,794
13,190 3,315

April 156 40
49,065 23,790 40,450
10,225 4,215

May 202 Nil 50,825 26,665 47,470
11,585 4,830

June 636 Nil
47,975 24,300 50,D90
11,045 5,886

July
509 Nil 46,345 26,775 47,580

August September

1,485 Nil
46,370 25,875 39,790

1.196 25
43,620 22,100 35,080

10,325 5,210

10,325 10,395

8.075 4,955

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3167

Recovery of Deportation Costs
Total

January February

182 121,937

124 124,861

March
2,502 181,614

April
5,022 132,963

May
5,963 147,540

June
I, II 0 141,042

July
2,384 139,128

August September

510 134,750

87 II 5, 138

Median Family Income: Increases
(Question No. 5229)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
By what percentage did median family income increase in Australia (a) between 1950 and 1959, (b) between 1960 and 1969, (c) between 1970 and 1979, and (d) from 1980 to date.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Estimates of median family income in Australia are available only in respect of the financial years 1968-69, 1973-74 and 1978-79.
The 1973-74 estimate of median family income was 76 per cent higher than in 1968-69 and the median family income for 1978-79 was 90 per cent higher than in 1973-74.
Persons Employed in Defence Factories
(Question No. 5256)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 13 October 1982:
(I) How many persons are employed under (a) the Public Service Act, (b) the Naval Defence Act and (c) other Acts or

arrangements in each of the 9 factories operated by his Department and in the (i) Garden Island, N.S.W., and (ii) Williamstown, Vic., Naval Dockyards.
(2) What is the total number of employees at each factory or dockyard which his Department operates and how many of these persons are in management positions in each case.
(3) Is he able to say what is the average total employment of Vickers Australia Pty Ltd at the Cockatoo Island Dockyards.
(4) Will he also provide comparable figures to those sought in parts (l) to (3) for each of the last 5 years.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The answer to part I of the honourable member's question is contained in the table at ANNEX A with the answer to part 4 (excluding figures for Vickers Australia Pty Ltd) in ANNEXES B, C & D.
(2) The total number of employees at the factories and dockyards is shown in the answer to part (I) of the question as is the number of persons in 'management' positions. Those positions included in the definition of 'management' positions consist of the Manager in each establishment and those management positions directly reporting to that position.
(3) The information is not available in my Department.

ANNEXA The following table shows the total number of operative employees at factories and dockyards as at September 1982

Establishment

Public Supply and

Service Development

Act

Act

Naval Defence
Act

Number in

Management

Total

Positions

Ammunition Factory, Footscray

314

933

1247

7

Ordnance Factory, Maribyrnong

325

670

995

10

Ordnance Factory, Bendigo

161

439

600

5

Small Arms Factory, Lithgow

244

641

885

7

Munitions Filling Factory, St Marys

216

625

841

7

Explosives Factory, Mulwala

81

147

228

6

Explosives Factory, Maribyrnong

149

254

403

8

Albion Explosives Factory

56

146

202

6

Australian Government Clothing Factory,

Coburg

89

622

711

6

Government Aircraft Factories

1220

I 157

2377

6

Aircraft Engineering Workshop, Pooraka

12

29

41

4

Garden Island Dockyard

1200

2161

3361

9

Williamstown Naval Dockyard

520

1398

1918

8

4587

5663

3559

13809

89

ANNEXB
The following table shows the total number of operative Public Service Act Employees at Factories and Dockyards as at September

Establishment

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Ammunition Factory, Footscray
Ordnance Factory, Maribyrnong Ordnance Factory, Bendigo Small Arms Factory, Lithgow

274

276

395

286

291

264

260

278

288

325

144

137

ISO

164

167

238

232

240

233

245

3168 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Establishment
Munitions Filling Factory, St Marys Explosives Factory, Mulwala Explosives Factory, Maribyrnong Albion Explosives Factory Australian Government Clothing Factory,
Coburg Government Aircraft Factories Aircraft Engineering Workshop, Pooraka Garden Island Dockyard Williamstown Dockyard

1977
153 65 123 35
83 1002
13 n.a. n.a.
2394

1978
143 65 126 30
82 1027
12 1261 *609
4260

1979
143 66 122 30
83 I 118
13 1222 *626
4486

1980
157 69 122 31
88 I 164
13 1210 *642
4467

1981
201 79 154 41
92 1246
13 I 162 *622
4638

* Includes approximately 105 now belonging to Defence as part of the Naval Support Command stores organisation.

ANNEXC
The following table shows the total number of operative Supply and Development Act Employees at Factories and Dockyards as at September. The figures include apprentices

Establishment

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Ammunition Factory, Footscray Ordnance Factory, Maribyrnong
Ordnance Factory, Bendigo Small Arms Factory, Lithgow Munitions Filling Factory, St Marys
Explosives Factory, Mulwala Explosives Factory, Maribyrnong
Albion Explosives Factory Australian Government Clothing Factory,
Coburg Government Aircraft Factories Aircraft Engineering Workshop, Pooraka

830 549 456 666 398 126 193 94
563 1,320
36

922 568 460 682 373 123 191 89
560 1,297
34

952 589 432 698 423 135 187 106
552 1,251
35

992 628 436 716 524 142 214 130
586 1,229
32

972 670 449 744 631 149 275 134
617 1,228
31

5,231

5,299

5,360

5,629

5,900

ANNEXD
The following table shows the total number of Naval Defence Act Employees at Naval Dockyards as at September. The figures include apprentices

Establishment

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Garden Island Dockyard Williamstown Dockyard

2,202

2,161

2,114

2,050

*

1,536

1,526

1,476

1,376

3,738

3,687

3,590

3,426

* Dockyard Staffing Figures not available.

Australian Standard Classification of Occupations
(Question No. 5278)
Mr Hawke asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
(I) What was the level of expenditure on the Australian Standard Classification of Occupations project in the Bureau of Statistics in each year since 1978-79.
(2) How many officers of the Bureau were employed on the project in each year since 1978-79.
Mr Howard~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) and (2) The Australian Standard Classification of Occupations (ASCO) is being developed jointly by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) and the Department of

Employment and Industrial Relations. The ABS component of this work is being undertaken by the Bureau as part of a wider project concerned with statistical classifications and is therefore not separately costed. However, the Australian
Statistician has provided the following estimates:

Year

Costs' Man-years

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

($'000)

20

0.7

42

1.3

47

1.4

219

9.7

* Estimated on basis of cost levels prevailing during year
concerned: includes salaries and other direct and indirect costs, e.g. overtime and travel.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3169

Visual Display Units: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 5315)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
How many visual display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
1972-19740 1975 3 1976-7 1977--32 1978-32

1979-- 64 1980-123 1981--166 1982-180
Visual Display Units: Department of Transport and Construction
(Question No. 5324)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
How many visual display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Department or Authority

Year Ending 30June 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982

Department

10 26 85 94 96 265 285

Australian Shipping Commission

8 104 158 165 180 215

Australian National Railways Co-

mmission

10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 20 20

Snowy Mountains Engineering Corpo-

ration

6

6 II 24 24 24

Total

10 10 10 20 50 205 273 295 489 544

This table shows the number of Visual Display Units in use for each of the last 10 years by the transport and construction elements of my Department, and by relevant statutory authorities.
Visual Display Units: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 5334)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 13 October 1982:
How many visual display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
It is not possible to provide figures for the last 10 years as:
The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Alfairs was officially formed on 22 December 1975.
The Australian Institute of Multicultural Alfairs was created in its present form in 1980.
The figures since the Department and Institute were created are:

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Department
38 42 47 53 53 76

AlMA
NA NA NA NA
3 6

1981-82

Department 144

AlMA 9

The cumulative figures include-ADP terminals, WP terminals (Word Processing), Data entry terminals.

Housing Assistance
(Question No, 5360)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) Was $20m promised by the Government in its March housing assistance package to assist rent and mortgage payers in genuine distress.
(2) Was this decision announced again in the August Budget statement by the Treasurer as the Mortgage and Rent Relief Program; if so, why.
(3) Is it a fact that, at the time this question was submitted, there has been a 7 month delay in implementing the program despite it originally being intended to help people in distress in March 1982.
(4) Is the program dependent on State Government cooperation; if so, what correspondence did the Government enter into with the States immediately after the March announcement to secure co-operation.
(5) What are the details of the correspondence between the Commonwealth and the Queensland Government.
(6) What assurance can he give that mortgage and rent payers in genuine distress in March 1982 have not been forgotten.

3170 REPRESENTATlVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Wilson--The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes, for the purpose of appropriation. Appropriation Bill No.2 shows the sum of $20m as grants by the Commonwealth to the States and Territories for the Mortgage and Rent Relief Scheme.
(3) On 18 March 1982, it was announced that discussions would be held with the States, Northern Territory and ACT on introduction from 1982-83 of a joint Commonwealth and State Mortgage and Rent Relief Scheme. These discussions commenced at the Commonwealth and State Housing Ministers' Conference in Melbourne on 26 March. Commonwealth and State officials then met to discuss the development of the program.
As a result of these discussions a formal proposal for the scheme was developed and this formed the basis of the formal offer made to the States on 27 August 1982.
The States and Territories are responsible for the administration of the scheme, including the form of assistance to be provided and the date of commencement. The scheme is now operating in most States/Territories.
(4) Yes, the former Minister for Housing and Construction, the Hon. D. T. McVeigh, wrote to each State/Territory Housing Minister on 22 March 1982. This letter proposed the commencement of discussions between the Commonwealth and States and Territories at the Commonwealth and State Housing Ministers' meeting in Melbourne on 26 March.
(5) As indicated, the former Minister for Housing and Construction wrote to the Queensland Minister for Works and Housing, the Hon. C. Wharton, MLA, on 22 March 1982 and I wrote to him making a formal offer on the scheme on 27 August 1982.
In his response to the offer on 8 September, Mr Wharton advised that it would be necessary for him to refer the matter to the Queensland Cabinet for consideration before he could formally respond. At the time of preparation of this answer a formal reply had not been received.
(6) As noted above, a formal olTer to the States and Territories has been made, and the scheme is already operating in most States and Territories.
Ministerial Travel: Department of Education
(Question No. 5475)
Mr Morris asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 26 October 1982:
(I) On what occasions has the Minister or members of the Minister's staff travelled abroad since I January 1982 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(2) What places and organisations were visited during the travel abroad and on what dates did the Minister depart from Australia and arrive and depart at each of the places visited during travel abroad, and on what date did the Minister and associated staff return to Australia.
(3) What were the names and classifications of persons associated with the Minister's travel abroad referred to in parts (I) and (2).
(4) What sum was spent for each individual in respect of each visit abroad for (a) travel, (h) accommodation, (c) other associated and incidental expenditure and (d) total expenditure.

Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question.
(I) to (4) Nil.
Ministerial Travel: Department ofImmigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 5486)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 26 October 1982:
(I) On what occasions has the Minister or members of the Minister's staff travelled abroad since I January 1982 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(2) What places and organisations were visited during the travel a')foad and on what dates did the Minister depart from Australia and arrive and depart at each of the places visited during travel abroad, and on what date did the Minister and associated staff return to Australia.
(3) What were the names and classifications of persons associated with the Minister's travel abroad referred to in parts (I) and (2).
(4) What sum was spent for each individual in respect of each visit abroad for (a) travel, (b) accommodation, (c) other associated and incidental expenditure and (d) total expenditure.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Neither I nor my predecessor nor members of our staff made overseas visits from January 1982 to the present time.
(2)-(4) Not applicable.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 5552)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etc., of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3171

Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As stated in the reply to question No. 1997 (Senate Hansard 12 October 1982, page 1308) a check of Departmental equipment and materials has not revealed any items containing PCB's.
I am unable to state that electrical components in general office equipment such as copiers do not contain PCB's due to the lack of identification of the constitutent nature of machine components. However I understand that if PCB's are present in this situation the components are sealed and pose little threat to humans or the environment.
(2) Yes.
(3) (a) None (b) Officers involved in purchasing have been made aware of the dangers of PCB's. The Department does not purchase equipment known to contain PCB's.
(4) Not applicable.
(5) No.
(6) No formal notification as my Department, to its knowledge, does not use PCB's. However a general notice has been included in the Staff Bulletin for information.
Immigration Status
(Question No. 5565)
Mr Coleman asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the article by Mr Phillip Adams in the Bulletin of 21 September, 1982 concerning the immigration status of Mr Michael Friedrich and his family?
(2) If so, have the allegations made in the article been investigated.
(3) What action has been taken on Mr Friedrich's application for permanent resident status?
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) I asked my Department for a detailed report so that I could thoroughly review Mr Friedrich's case.
The facts concerning Mr Friedrich are as follows: Mr Friedrich and his family arrived as visitors on 2 October 1981. Four days later in direct contravention of the undertakings they signed when they applied for their visitors visas, the Friedrich's sought permanent residence.
Mr Friedrich argued that because he had helped people escape from East Germany his life was in danger in his home country of West Germany.
In response to this my Department contacted the Australian Embassy in West Germany; the West German authorities confirmed that Mr Friedrich was an "escape helper' but that he was in no danger while he remained in West Germany.
The fact that Mr Friedrich returned to West Berlin after he had arrived in Australia confirms this.
At the time. I reviewed the case Mr Friedrich had not applied for refugee status in Australia. He subsequently did so through his solicitors. I am mindful of Australia's obligations under the Refugee Convention and the proud record this country has of accepting genuine refugees over past decades. I have asked the Determination of Refugee Status (DORS) Committee to examine his claim to be a refugee and report to me.

Mr Friedrich has been assessed in terms of Section 6A of the Migration Act (refugee status apart) and found not to be eligible for the grant of permanent residence under this provision.
I am satisfied that apart from the question of refugee status, which is soon to be decided. there is no justification for the Friedrich family to remain in Australia. I will advise the honourable member of my final decision once I have the report of the DORS Committee.
United Nations: Kampuchean Credentials
(Question No. 5567)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
In the vote on the credentials of the Kampuchean delegation to the current UN General Assembly is he able to give details of the motion and how each country voted.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
On 6 October 1982 the Credentials Committee of the Thirty-Seventh Session of the United Nations General Assembly reported that it had found the credentials of the delegation of Democratic Kampuchea, amongst other countries. in order, and recommended that the General Assembly adopt the following draft resolution:
The General Assembly Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee.
On 22 October the Lao People's Democratic Republic, together with seven other co-sponsors (Congo, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, Grenada, India, Vietnam) introduced an amendment which would have added to the end of the operative paragraph of the draft resolution the phase "Except with regard to the credentials of Democratic Kampuchea'.
On 25 October the Lao amendment was defeated in the General Assembly by a vote of 29-90-26.
Details of the vote are as follows:
Yes -Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Benin, Bulgaria, Byelorussian SSR, Congo, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Democratic Yemen. Ethiopia, German Democratic Republic, Grenada, Guyana, Hungary, India, Lao PDR, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mongolia, Mozambique. Nicaragua, Poland. Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Syrian Arab Republic, Ukrainian SSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Vietnam.
NoAntigua-Barbuda, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh. Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Botswana, Burundi, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Democratic Kampuchea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, EI Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Germany Federal Republic of, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lesotho, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent-Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United Republic of Cameroon,United States, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zaire.
Abstain-Australia, Austria, Brazil, Cape Verde, Finland, France, Ghana, Guinea Bissau, Iceland, Ireland, Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico, Norway, Panama, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,

3172 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Surinam, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Defence Research Centre, Salisbury, South Australia
(Question No. 5574)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
(I) Has any equipment been installed at the Defence Research Centre at Salisbury, SA, that had previously been in use at Maralinga, SA, at the time of atomic weapons testing.
(2) If so, what is this equipment and how long has it been in operation at Salisbury.
(3) Was the equipment decontaminated before being transported to Salisbury.
(4) What checks for radioactivity were carried out on the equipment before it was used at Salisbury.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) 5 Room Airconditioners in service since 1976; I Radial Drill in service since 1973; I Power Hacksaw in service from 1973 to 1980.
(3) Records cannot be found regarding decontamination at Maralinga or transport to Salisbury.
(4) No record can be found of checks on equipment prior to use at Salisbury. Recent test for radioactivity revealed no detactable gamma or beta radiation.
Australian Bureau of Statistics: Estimates of Unemployment
(Question No. 5586)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
What are the latest estimates of the Australian Bureau of Statistics for levels of unemployment in the following areas: (a) Newcastle and the Hunter Valley, NSW, (b) WollongongPort Kembla, NSW (c) the western suburbs of Sydney, (d) the western suburbs of Melbourne, (e) Geelong, Vic, (f) Whyalla, SA, (g) Adelaide, (h) Tasmania generally and (j) northern Queensland.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Bureau of Statistics compiles and publishes monthly unemployment estimates for States, for State capital cities and for the non-metropolitan area of each State but not for smaller regions. The latest unemployment estimates for Tasmania were published in 'Unemployment, Australia, October 1982Preliminary Estimates' (Catalogue No. 6201.0) on II November 1982. The latest unemployment estimates for Adelaide were published in 'The Labour Force, Australia, September 1982 (Preliminary), (Catalogue No. 6202.0) on 21 October 1982.
Australian Bureau of Statistics: Estimates of Unemployment
(Question No. 5587)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
What are the latest estimates by the Australian Bureau of Statistics for levels of unemployment in each of the States and Territories.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The latest estimates of the levels of unemployment in each of the States and Territories were published in 'U nemployment, Australia, October 1982-Preliminary Estimates' (Catalogue) No. 6201.0) on II November 1982.
Missing Swedish Diplomat, Mr R. Wallenberg
(Question No. 5598)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
(I) Is he able to say whether Raoul Wallenberg was First Secretary of the Swedish Embassy in Budapest from July 1944 to approximately February 1945 and was described as the 'hero of the holocaust' for his work in saving Hungarian Jews during the Nazi occupation.
(2) Is it a fact that he was last seen in Hungary in or about February 1945 when he set off for an appointment with officers of the Red Army.
(3) Is it a fact that reports have been received in Sweden that he was being held in a Soviet prison since that time, that he was last sighted in the late 1970s and that, at the age of 70 years, he may still be alive.
(4) What requests for information has the Government made to the Soviet Government about Wallenberg's fate, and on what dates.
(5) What replies, if any, have been received, and on what dates.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Mr Wallenberg's heroism in saving the lives of large numbers of potential victims of Nazi persecutions in Hungary during World War II is well-known and has been widely acknowledged. It is correct that he performed these deeds while serving at the Swedish Embassy in Budapest.
(2) Yes.
(3) Yes. The Government is aware of reports that Mr Wallenberg is alive and that he has been seen in Soviet prisons. Sweden continues to pursue the Wallenberg case with the Soviet authorities, who so far have done no more than repeat their claim that Mr Wallenberg died in prison in 1947.
(4) and (5) The Australian Government fully supports the efforts of Sweden to have the case re-examined by the Soviet authorities. Because the Australian Government has no direct standing in the matter, however, there has been little opportunity for us to make an effective intervention. The matter is basically the concern of the Swedish and Soviet Governments and for the time being it is felt that Sweden is best placed to press for a more satisfactory response from the Soviet authorities. The Government is keeping in touch with developments, nonetheless, and remains willing to take whatever opportunities may arise, in multilateral forums particularly, to support Sweden's efforts.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5714)
Mr Milton asked the Minister, representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since I January 1978; if so, what are the details.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3173

Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
No.
Proprietary Companies
Mr N. A. Brown-On 23 September 1982 (Hansard, page 178) Mr Moore asked me, as the Acting Attorney-General, the following question without notice:
1 address my qu~stion to the Acting Attorney-General. He is no doubt aware that an enormous amount of commerce in Australia is carried out in proprietary companies. He would be aware also that to form a proprietary company it is necessary to have $2, two directors and two shareholders. In view of the wide-ranging use of proprietary companies, would he and the Government give consideration to ensuring that the capitalisation of these companies is such as to bear their responsibilities and that to do that may require some gearing within the companies' structure? Also, having determined that, would he like to pursue that matter with the ministerial council, where I am sure he would find some welcoming ears?
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities, at a meeting held in Sydney on 12 February 1982, considered a proposal that the Companies Act 1981 should require all companies to raise and maintain a prescribed minimum nominal and paid-up capital. At that meeting the Ministerial Council agreed that this proposal should be considered in the context of the proposed Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1984. I expect that this Bill will be made available for public comment in the second half of 1983.
Review of National Health and Medical
Research Council
(Question No, 4430)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) When did his predecessor agree that an independent review of the functions, committee structure and operations of the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC) should be undertaken.
(2) Who made the submission to his predecessor for the establishment of this Review Committee.
(3) Was that submission made orally or in writing.
(4) If it was a written submission, will he now provide that submission to the Parliament: if not, why not.
(5) On what date was that submission made.
(6) Did the submission result from the recommendation of the Australian Science and Technology Council (ASTEC) to the Prime Minister in November 1981 that the NH and MRC be abolished and replaced by a Medical Research Council (Australia) (to be established on a statutory basis) and a National Health Council (to have responsibility for matters relating to public health and health-care services).
(7) On what basis did his predecessor make the decision to establish the Review Committee, and on what date was that decision made.
(8) On what daters) were the members of the Review Committee (a) chosen and (b) appointed.

(9) Was Professor Sir Keith Hancock invited to be a member of the Review Committee: if so, did he accept at first and then later decline: if so, what were the reasons.
(10) On what date in April 1982, did Dr B. J. Shea, OBE, Director of the Mental Health Authority of South Australia and Chairman of the NH and MRC Review Committee leave Australia and on what date did he or will he return.
(II) What is the reason for the early closing date for submissions to a broad ranging inquiry of this kind.
(12) What organisations, institutions and individuals were invited to make submissions to this inquiry, and on what dates were those invitations dispatched.
(13) Why was no public announcement made about this InqUIry.
(14) How many staff are on the Review Committee's Secretariat.
(15) Where were those staff recruited from.
(16) What is Dr D. DeSouza's current substantive position within the Department and what are his duties.
(17) Was Dr DeSouza a member of the working party established by ASTEC to prepare a draft report for that body On medical research and development in Australia.
(18) Who are the current members of the NH and MRC.
(19) How are the members elected or appointed and what are their terms of office.
(20) What are the (a) objectives ~rd (b) functions of the NH and MRC.
(21) How is the NH and MRC currently constituted.
(22) Who are the members of the NH and MRCs (a) 3 standing advisory committees, (b) sub-committees of those standing advisory committees, (c) committees, (d) subcommittees of those committees and (e) working parties.
(23) What are the terms of reference for each of the bodies mentioned in part (22) and when was each of those bodies established.
(24) Are there any other committees of the NH and MRC which are not mentioned in the ASTEC Report 'Medical Research in Australia', Part I: if so, what are the details.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The decision to undertake an independent review of the functions, structure and operation of the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC) was made by the Government in July 1981.
(3) and (5) The decision was taken in the context of the Government's budgetary considerations of operating costs of the NH and MRC. As such, it is inappropriate for the document to be tabled in Parliament.
(6) No. However, as the ASTEC Report on Medical Research in Australia would have been an important source document, the implementation of the review was deferred until the report was available.
(7) See (I) to (5) above.
(8) Dr B. J. Shea, OBE. (a) 22 January 1982: (b) 8 March 1982. Dr. J. P. Coghlan (a) 12 January 1982: (b) 3 March 1982.
(9) No.
(10) Dr Shea left Australia on 18 April 1982 and returned On 5 May 1982. This commitment was known prior to his appointment to the Review Committee, and did not affect the preparation and presentation of the Review Committee's report.

3174 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(II) The Review Committee had, as part of its Terms of Reference, a requirement to report to the Minister for Health by 30 May 1982. The Committee considered that a closing date for submissions of 19 April 1982 was desirable to allow evaluation of the material provided. The Committee did, however, continue to receive submissions lodged after the formal closing date.
(12) The following organisations, institutes and individuals were invited, on the dates indicated, to make a submission to the Review Committee:
Heads of all State and Territory Health Departments and authorities --16 March 1982
Professional bodies and organisations represented on Council--16 March 1982
Directors of Medical Research Institutes---16 March 1982
Each of the NH and MRC's three (Standing) Advisory Committees 16 March 1932
The Austra lian Society for Medical Research-16 March 1982
ANZSERCH (The Australian and New Zealand Society for Epidemiology and Research in Community Health) 16 March 1982
Professors Dohertv, Simmonds and Cobbold for coordination of sUbmiss"ions from researchers in Queensland, Western Australia and Tasmania respectively -16 March 1982
Confederation of Australian Industry -24 March :982
Royal Australian College of Ophthalmologists 24 March 1982
Australian Optometrical Association -- 2 April 1982
The Menzies Foundation 4 April 1982
Association of University Clinical Professors of Australia-8 April 1982
Australian Society for Psychiatric Research - 8 April 1982
(13) The NH and MRC is a body which provides professional and scientific advice to Governments. A wide cross section of relevant bodies affected by the NH and MRC's activities were invited to lodge submissions. Therefore, a public announcement about the review was considered unnecessary.
(14) and (15) The Secretariat comprises one officer seconded from my Department.
( 16) Dr D. de Souza is the First Assistant Director General, NH and MRC Division. He is also the Secretary to the NH and MRC and is responsible for the administrative management and the provision of technical and secretariat support for the NH and MRC and its related committees and subcommittees.
(17) Yes.
(18) to (21) The NH and MRC is constituted under an Order-in-Council dated 21 December 1981 and published in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette No. G2, dated 12 January 1982. The Order sets out the membership of the NH and MRC, how members are appointed, their terms of office, and the functions of the NH and MRC. Currently the members of Council are:
Dr Gwyn Howells, C.B., Director-General of Health, Canberra (Chairman)
Dr C. P. Evans, OBE., representing the Department of Health
Dr W. A. Langsford, OBE., C.SU, representing the Department of Health

Dr D. de Souza, First Assistant Director-General, NH and MRC Division, Department of Health (Secretary)
Dr N. J. McCarthy, representing the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission
Dr R. G. McEwin, Chairman, Health Commission of New South Wales
Dr G. Trevah, Chairman, Health Commission of Victoria
Dr P. G. Livingstone, Director-General of Health and Medical Services, Queensland
Dr K. J. Wilson, Principal Health Commission Officer, South Australian Health Commission
Dr. J. C. McNulty, Commissioner of Public Health, Western Australia
Dr G. Mackay-Smith, Director-General of Health Services, Tasmania
Dr K. J. A. Fleming, Secretary, Department of Health, Northern Territory
Dr R. W. Beal, nominee of the Federal Council of the Australian Medical Association
Dr N. L. Davis, nominee of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons
Professor J. P. Chalmers, nominee of the Royal Australasian College of Physicians
Dr. J. H. Evans, nominee of the Royal Australian College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists
Professor C. Bridges-Webb, nominee of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners
Professor E. S. Finckh, nominee of the Royal College of Pathologists of Australia
Dr R. Harris, A.M., M.B.E., nominee of the Australian Dental Association
Dr H. A. Kilham, nominee of the Australian College of Paediatrics
Dr B. Kynaston, nominee of the Royal Australasian College of Radiologists
Dr B. J. Shea, OBE., O.SU, nominee of the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists
Professor R. H. Thorp, nominee of the Australian Federation of Consumer Organisations, Inc.
Professor D. G. Penington, nominee of the universities in Australia that have medical schools
Miss J. Porter, nominee of the College of Nursing, Australia
Professor R. Porter, nominee of the Australian Academy of Science
Mr R. H. Kronborg, M.B.E., an eminent layman appointed by the Minister
Mrs M. E. Grant, an eminent laywoman appointed by the Minister
(22) to (24) Details of the membership and terms of reference of the NH and MRC's-
(a) three standing advisory committees;
(b) subcommittees'of those standing advisory committees;
(c) committees;
(d) subcommittees of those committees; and
(e) working parties,
have been placed in the Parliamentary Library.
Other working parties may be established from time to time as a particular need arises.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3175

The ASTEC Report on Medical Research in Australia, Part I, mentions ',ery few of the above mentioned bodies, which comprise the total structure of the NH and MRC at the present time.
Animal Quarantine Station, Abbotsford Point, New South Wales
(Question No. 4581)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) Who made representations, and on what date, concerning public access [0 the former Animal Quarantine Station, Abbotsford Point, New South Wales, since I January 1970.
(2) Why did the legal work involved become so protracted following agreement on 19 February 1981 to transfer the Quarantine Station to the New South Wales Government.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) My Department's records show that the following representations have been received:

Representations by:

Year

Mr J. Abel, the then Member for Evans on behalf of

Municipality of Drummoyne

.....

The Rt Hon. Sir William McMahon, G.C.M.G.,

C.H., M.P., the then Member for Lowe on behalf

of the Drummoyne Environmental Group

Drummoyne Municipal Council

Senator J. A. Mulvihill

The Hon. T. Uren, M.P., Member for Reid

Ms Margaret Robertson

The Rt Hon. Sir William McMahon, G.C.M.G.,

C.H., M.P., the then Member for Lowe

Macquarie's NSW Parramatta Committee

Mr M. Maher, M.P., the then N.S.W. State Member

for Drummoyne . . .

Mrs S. Riley

Mr M. Maher, M.P., Member for Lowe, on behalf of

Mrs S. Riley

1977
1978 1979 1979 1980 1980
1980 1980
1981 1982
1982

(2) The conveyancing for the transfer of this property on behalf of the Commonwealth was undertaken by the Attorney-General's Department. There was a need for con-
sultation between the legal representatives oflhe two Governments before the transfer could be finalised.

Discrimination on Grounds of Sex
(Question No. 4588)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister, in h;s policy statement on 30 September 1980, promise to introduce legislation in the Australian Capital Territory to proscribe discrimination on grounds of sex in areas such as employment, land, housing, accommodation and the provision of goods and services, and to establish procedures for the confidential conciliation of all complaints about discrimination and provide for court proceedings if conciliation fails.
(2) If so, when was this promise implemented and in what form.
Mr N. A. BrownThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.

(2) A first draft of the Ordinance has recently been completed and is being studied by relevant Departments.
Commonwealth Offices: Rented Accommodation
(Question No. 4693)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
What is the estimated accommodation cost per public servant in rented office accommodation in (a) the central business district of Sydney, (b) Parramatta, (c) Liverpool, and (d) North Sydney.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The estimated accommodation cost per Commonwealth pl'blic servant in rented accommodaiion at the locations listed
IS:

Location

Cost per officer per annum

(a) SydneyCBD (b) Parramatta (c) Liverpool (d) North Sydney

$
1,245 1.290 1,200 1,193

These figures are based on (i) average rentals currently being paid by the Commonwealth in these locations. and (ii) an average space allocation of 15 square metres per public servant. The figures do not take account of fitout costs, electricity charges, rates and taxes, cleaning, after hours use of air conditioning Or restoration costs.
Chemical Warfare Sprays: Testing
(Question No. 4712)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to allegations made by Mr Ray Jones. M.L.A., on page I of the newspaper Cairnsweek, of 13 June 1982, that a number of Queensland Railways workmen had been used as human guinea pigs to test the effects of chemical warfare sprays in far north Queensland during the I960s, and further, that a number of those workmen are now either dead, or suffering cancer or other illnesses.
(2) Has he, his Department, or any organisation under his control made any investigation of any aspect of this matter; if so, what are the details of any investigations.
(3) Is he able to confirm that these railway workmen (a) took part in these tests and (b) have suffered, or are suffering, the conditions alleged by Mr Jones.
(4) Docs the Commonwealth now accept any liability in this matter; if so, what is the extent of that liabHity; if not, why not.
Mr Carlton--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No.
(3) A search of Departmental files has failed to indicate that my Department was involved in the testing of chemical sprays in North Queensland during the 1960s. Accordingly, I have no information to offer on the allegations made by Mr Ray Jones, M.L.A. I would refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister representing the Minister for Defence to a similar question by Senator Colston (Question

3176 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

No. 169, pages 65-66,24 February 1981, Senate Hansard). I also understand from a Press Release issued on 3 June 1982 by a spokesman for the Minister for Science and Technology that the Minister has been informed by the Minister for Veterans' Affairs that personnel engaged in the experiments were medically examined and that no evidence was found of any adverse effects.
(4) Since my Department was not involved in this matter it would be inappropriate for me to comment on this part of the question.
Sodium in Drinking Water
(Question No, 4717)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Further to his answer to Question No. 4584 (Hansard, 18 August 1982, page 606-7) relating to the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC) Working Party on Sodium in the Australian Diet, (a) who are the members of the Working Party, (b) how often has it met since its inception, (c) when did it provide its report to the NH and MRC secretariat and (d) when will its report be considered by NH and MRC Committees and the full Council.
(2) What is the source of the estimates of levels for mean total dissolved solids and sodium in capital city water supplies which were provided in answer to part (3) of Question No. 4584.
(3) Are there differences in the figures supplied in part (3) of Question No. 4584 and answers provided earlier to this Parliament, to part (2) of Question No. 2415 (Hansard, 20 February 1979, page 101); if so, what are the reasons for those differences in each case.
(4) Did the Working Party make any specific recommendations regarding (a) an acceptable level for sodium in drinking water, (b) the need to reduce sodium levels in drinking water consumed by (i) persons with cardiac diseases, and/or (ii) children younger than 5 years of age and (c) the need to reduce the levels of (i) total dissolved solids and (ii) sodium, for (AI Sydney, (B) Brisbane, (C) Adelaide and (D) Perth.
(5) If the answer to part (4) is in the affirmative, will he now provide the Parliament with those recommendations; if not, why not.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Professor Trefor O. Morgan, Senior Specialist-inCharge (Medicine), Repatriation General Hospital, Heidelberg, Victoria (Chairman). Miss Maxine Hosking, DeputyChief Dietitian, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney. Dr Bruce A. Scoggins, Principal Research Fellow, Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, Melbourne. Professor A. Stewart Truswell, Boden Professor of Human Nutrition, University of Sydney. Mrs Maureen Cornish, Nutritionist, Commonwealth Department of Health (Secretary /Convener).
(b) Four times.
(c) and (d) The Working Party has completed its report. As yet, the report has not been submitted to the secretariat of the National Health and Medical Research Council, but is with the Council's Public Health Advisory Committee (PHAC). The PHAC has arranged for it to be reviewed by relevant expert committees of the N Hand M RC, following which it will be presented to the Council.
(2) -

Capital City

Authority

Sydney
Melbourne
Brisbane
Adelaide
Perth
Hobart Darwin Canberra

Metropolitan Water, Sewerage and Drainage Board;
Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works;
Queensland Water Resources Commission;
Engineering and Water Supply Department;
Metropolitan Water Supply Sewerage and Drainage Board;
Rivers and Water Supply Commission;
Department of Transport and Works;
Department of Housing and Construction (now Department of Transport and Construction)

(3) Yes. Reasons for these specific variations have not been identified. However the levels of dissolved solids and sodium can vary with the sources of supply and with local weather patterns, and changes over a 3, year period (the interval between the answers) are not unexpected. By way of example, in the A.CT. since early 1979, water from the Googong Dam has been used to augment supplies from dams on the Cotter River. Because water from the Googong Dam has levels of total dissolved solids and sodium marginally higher than water from the dams in the Colter catchment, A.CT. water now has a range of values (see answer to Question No. 4584).
Questions seeking additional information on particular supplies are best directed to the appropriate water authority.
(4) and (5) I am advised that the aspects mentioned were considered. However, all malters in the report must be considered by all the other relevant expert committees and their reports, in turn, examined by the Council before any recommendations are made by the NH and MRC
Major Airport Needs of Sydney Inquiry
(Question No. 4733)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) What financial contribution has been made by the Commonwealth Government to the inquiry into the Major Airport Needs of Sydney in each year since its establishment.
(2) Is he able to say whether any similar inquiries have been conducted in any other State during the last 10 years.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Major Airport Needs of Sydney (MANS) Study has involved work by a large number of bodies, both Commonwealth and State. Because of the shared nature of this work it is difficult to estimate the financial contribution made by the Commonwealth Government, but I can assure the honourable member that it has been significant both in terms of manpower resources and costs. Indeed, the Commonwealth has also employed a number of Consultants to undertake specialist tasks during the Study.
(2) There have been several inquiries concluded by joint Commonwealth-State committees in other States including the Port Phillip Airport Needs Study, the Joint Government Advisory Committee on Adelaide's Airline Airport Requirements and the Commonwealth/State Advisory Committee to study Western Australia's Airport Requirements. I should also point out that the new Brisbane Airport is the outcome of findings from a joint Commonwealth/State Advisory Committee set up in 1969 to advise on Brisbane's Airport needs.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3177

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Transport and Construction

(Question No. 4810)

Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

(1) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government or-
ganisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.

(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.

Mr Hunt~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(l) and (2) In the 1981-82 financial year the following
non-government organisations received grants/payments from the Department in the amounts shown:

$m

Australian Road Research Board Australian Railway Research and Development
Organisation Australian Fire Protection Association Australian Shipper's Council Chartered Institute of Transport

1.909
770 .030 .184 .020

United States Planes and Vessels Carrying Nuclear Weapons: B52 Aircraft Using Darwin
(Question No. 4880)
Mr Beazley asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to remarks by United States Deputy Secretary of State. Walter Stoessel, at a press conference after the ANZUS Council meeting in which he said (a) on the question of United States planes and vessels carrying nuclear weapons he recalled that the basic policy on information concerning nuclear weapons, whether in ships or aeroplanes, is neither to confirm nOr deny their presence and (b) on the question of consulting the Prime Minister On the question of nuclear weapons on ships that the US. would be prepared to consult with him on a very frank and very confidential basis, as appropriate between allies.
(2) Did he inform the House of 12 March 1981 that if the surveillance mission of B52 aircraft using Darwin were to be changed he or the Minister for Defence would advise the House at the time.
(3) Has he the guarantee of the US. administration that the very confidential basis of the information provided him on whether or not visiting warships carry nuclear weapons is not the basis on which he will be advised of changes in B52 missions.
(4) Is he to be informed of B52 mission changes on a very confidential basis; if so, is his pledge of 12 March 1981 to inform Parliament still operable.
Mr Malcolm Fraser~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) As the Minister for Foreign Affairs said on 12 March 1981 (Hansard, page 704) the Australian Government has the assurance of the United States Administration that the B52 aircraft will be unarmed and carry no bombs. No changes in B52 missions have taken place since that time, nor have any discussions between the Australian and United States Governments been held on this matter.

(4) See (3) above. As I informed Parliament on 12 March 1981 (Hansard, page 703), lor the relevant Minister would advise the House if the Government's agreement were sought and given for any category of operations additional to sea surveillance and navigation training.
Immigration: On-arrival Education Program Courses
(Question No. 4896)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic affairs, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Is a living allowance paid to new arrivals to Australia who are not in employment while they attend On-Arrival Education Program courses.
(2) Are those attending part-time courses subject to an income test.
(3) Are full-time course participants not subject to an income test; if not, why not.
(4) Are some full-time course participants the spouse or close family relation of a wealthy person and therefore not in need of a living allowance.
(5) What is the individual weekly payment for living allowance and for what period is it paid.
(6) What was the cost of these living allowances in 1981-82.
Mr Hodges~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A living allowance is payable to students undertaking full-time on-arrival courses conducted through the Adult Migrant Education Program. Following the Government's acceptance of the recommendations of the recent Evaluation of Post Arrival Programs and Services conducted by the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs, the payment of educational living allowances is being extended to migrants undertaking part-time on-arrival courses.
(2) The new allowance for those taking part-time onarrival courses will be subject to an income test.
(3) No. The future arrangements to apply to full-time courses are at present under review.
(4) Information is not collected about the inccme and assets of spouses or close family relatives of full-time course participants.
(5) The present education living allowance rates are as follows:

Category

Weekly rates

Single person under 18 years Single person over 18 years without dependent Married person with dependent spouse Single person with dependent child Each dependent child

$
36.00 58.10 123.60 84.15 10.00

Report on Australian Defence Procurement: Inter-departmental Committee
(Question No. 4963)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) When was the inter-departmental Committee, referred to in the Government's response to the report of the Joint

3178 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence on Australian Defence Procurement, set up.
(2) What is the composition of the Committee.
(3) Who (a) are the members of the Committee at present and (b) have been members of the Committee since its inception.
(4) On what dates, and for what periods, has the Committee met since its inception.
(5) What is the brief, or terms of reference, of the Committee.
(6) Has the brief, or terms of reference, been varied since the inception of the Committee; if so, what are the details.
(7) When is it intended that the Committee will complete its task.
(8) Will the report of the Committee be released when it is complete.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The inter-departmental Committee was established in 1978.
(2) The inter-departmental Committee is made up of representatives from the following departments: Administrative Services; Defence; Finance; Communications; Transport and Construction; Aviation; Defence Support.
(3) (a) As (2); (b) Administrative Services; Defence; Finance.
(4) The Committee met for a preliminary discussion on 14.11.1978 after which work was advanced by an informal working party. The Committee met again formally on 16.11.1979 and met thereafter on the following occasions: 25.1.1980, 30.5.1980, 16.9.1980, 14.10.1981, 2.11.1981, 16.11.1981, 19.11.1981, 11.3.1982, 25.3.1982, 21.4.1982, 6.5.1982, 20.5.1982, 28.5.1982, 24.6.1982, 21.7.1982, 15.10.1982,29. 10.1982, 5.11 .1982.
(5) The Terms of Reference of the Committee are to identify the circumstances in which selective tendering would be an appropriate approach to Commonwealth procurement and to determine what changes if any would be required to Finance Regulations to accommodate selective tendering procedures.

The Committee has had under particular consideration the following matters:
the feasibility of undertaking large scale projects (such as the design and construction in Australia of Naval combatant ships) or of acquiring specialist equipments of a technologically advanced or innovative character under the present (Finance) Regulations and any necessary changes to facilitate such activity;
the effects of present Procurement Regulations on the maintenance or development of defence support capabilities and the desirability of adopting a selective approach to the procurement of specialist defence equipment;
the extent to which the present Finance Regulations provide for selective tendering under a Certificate of Exemption, and the extent to which the issue of Certificates of Exemption is based on uniform principles across the Service;
the question whether a system of direct invitation of tenders (based on maintenance of a registered tenderers list) is more efficient for modern procurement conditions than the invitation of tenders by press advertisement.
(6) No.
(7) Early 1983.
(8) This will be a matter for Government decision.
Health Insurance Funds: Restriction of Membership
(Question No. 4964)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the names of the registered health insurance funds which restrict membership to particular classes of people and their families.
(2) What is the membership of each fund.
(3) Is he able to say what is the potential membership of each fund.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2)

Organization
Medical and Hospital Funds
A.M.A. Health Fund Limited A.M.W.S.U. Health Care Limited Army Health Benefits Society Associated Pulp and Paper Makers' Council Medical
and Hospital Benefits Funds Cheetham Hospital Benefits Fund Coats Patons Employees' Mutual Benefit Society and
Hospital and Medical Benefit Association The Commercial Banking Company Health Society Commonwealth Bank Health Society c.P.S. Health Benefits Society Government Employees Medical and Hospital Club The Lysaght Hospital and Medical Club M.I.M. Employees Health Society Naval Health Benefits Society New South Wales Teachers' Federation Health
Society . . . . . . .

State or Territory in respect of which organization is registered
NSW All States and NT All States and NT
Vic., Qld and Tas. Vic.
NSW, Vic., Qld and Tas. All States and NT All States and NT Qld NSW All States and NT Qld All States and NT
NSW

Membership as at 31 March 1982

Hospital Fund

Medical Fund

3490
27 173
3350 257
808 8083 33 185 3017 35773 6740 5671 10562
45803

3369
*
26941
3351 257
776 7978 33213 3281 34311 6425 5741 10 513
44694

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3179

Organization

State or Territory in respect of which organization is registered

Membership as at 31 March 1982

Hospital Fund

Medical Fund

The Phoenix Welfare Association Limited Professional and Technical Officers Health Society Queensland Teachers' Union Health Society Reserve Bank Health Society Tramways Benefit Society
Hospital Funds only
The Advertiser Provident Society N.S.W. Railway and Transport Employees' Hospital
Fund S.A. Police Department Employees' Hospital Fund SA Public Service Association Health Benefits Fund The Sydney Morning Herald Hospital Fund

All States and NT Qld Qld All States and NT Vic.
SA
NSW SA SA NSW

8234 1437 13528 4267 4927
1572
25932 4216 10892 2480

7418 1634 13816 4283 4564
n.a.
n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.

- Registration approved on 15 August 1982.
(3) No. However, the upper limit of potential membership of each restricted organization is determined by the number of persons eligible to join under its approved rules. Since most of the restricted organizations have been in operation for a number of years it is likely that, in the ordinary course of events, further increases in their membership would be minimal. In the case of the recently approved A.M.W.S.U. Health Care Limited, it has been stated by the Public Officer of the fund that the A.M. W .S. U. has a membership of about 180,000.

Dumping of High Level Nuclear Waste in the Pacific
(Question No. 4979)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to any proposals by the United States of America Environmental Protection Agency and Department of State to commence experimental dumping of high level nuclear waste in the Pacific Ocean in 1984; if so, can he say (a) what is the nature of high level wastes to be dumped, (b) what is their origin and (c) what is the proposed dumping site.
(2) Can he say whether the proposed dumping site is the same as that designated by the Japanese Government for the dumping of low level waste.
(3) What attitude has the Australian Government expressed to the United States Government concerning any such nuclear waste dumping proposals.
(4) Can he guarantee that Australian uranium exported to the United States will not be dumped in the Pacific Ocean as nuclear wastes derived from spent nuclear fuel.
Mr Street~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am advised that no consideration is being given by any regulatory agency in the United States of America for dumping high-level waste in the Pacific Ocean. Sea-dumping of high-level waste is prohibited by the United States Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act of 1972. In addition, the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter of 1972, to which the United States is a signatory, declares highlevel radioactive wastes as unsuitable for dumping at sea.
(3) The Australian Government has drawn to the attention of the United States resolutions of the South Pacific Forum, of which Australia is a member, expressing opposition to the dumping of nuclear wastes in the Pacific Ocean. These resolutions reflect the deep concern felt by the South Pacific countries about the dumping of radioactive waste in the Pacific.

(4) The question of the disposal of their nuclear waste is a domestic responsibility of individual countries as a part of the management of their nuclear power industries. However, in the light of the answers given to (I), (2) and (3) above Australia has no expectation that the United States will dump high-level nuclear wastes or other nuclear wastes unsuitable for dumping at sea in the Pacific Ocean, irrespective of whether or not such wastes are derived from Australian origin uranium or other nuclear materials.
Relationship between Ministers for Defence and Defence Support
(Question No. 5031)
Mr Scholes asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(I) Did the interim report of the Defence Review Committee recommend (a) the issue of a Ministerial Directive to clarify the relationship between the Ministers for Defence and Defence Support and their Departments, and (b) variations in the Administrative Arrangements Order to cover the changes proposed in the report.
(2) Has such a Ministerial Directive been issued; if so, does it depart in any way from the form recommended in Attachment A of the interim report; and (a) what are the details and (b) reasons for the variation.
(3) Has the Administrative Arrangements Order been amended in the terms recommended in Attachment B of the interim report; if not, (a) what terms have been amended and (b) what are the reasons for the variation.
Mr Malcolm Fraser~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) Although the Ministerial Directive as issued incorporates a considerable number of editorial and stylistic changes, there are no substantive differences between it and that proposed in Attachment A to the interim report. For ease of reference, the Ministerial Directive as issued is here reproduced in full:

3180 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

DIRECTIVE FROM THE PRIME MINISTER IN RESPECT OF THE MINISTER AND DEPARTMENT
OF DEFENCE SUPPORT
Roles
I. The Minister for Defence has overall responsibility for the nation's defence policies. This is to include responsibility for policy development in respect of defence-related activities administered by the Minister for Defence Support. The Minister for Defence is to keep the Minister for Defence Support informed of policy developments affecting the defence-related activities administered by the latter and is to consult with him as appropriate.
2. The Minister for Defence Support is responsible for administering the following defence-related activities within the defence policies approved by the Minister for Defence:
the naval dockyards but not including fleet base activities at Garden Island Dockyard
the defence production factories
the defence research and development establishments
that part of defence purchasing that up until now has been under the control of the Minister for Administrative Services
defence industry development
marketing activities associated with the above together with related administrative functions.
3. In keeping with the intention that the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Defence Support should work closely together, the Minister for Defence Support is also to occupy the position of Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence.
4. The Department of Defence Support is to participate in the policy development and the financial planning and programming processes of the Department of Defence in so far as they affect activities administered by the Minister for Defence Support.
Funding
5. The funding of the Department of Defence Support is to be decided as part of the Defence Outlay. Proposals for expenditure for the Department of Defence Support are to be subject to the same processes and to the same degree of scrutiny within the Department of Defence as other elements of defence expenditure. For this purpose the Department of Defence Support will make available to the Department of Defence all relevant information and documentation and the Department of Defence Support is to participate fully in the financial planning, programming and budget control processes of the Department of Defence. The form and content of the Appropriations for the Department of Defence Support shall be determined by the Departments of Defence, Defence Support and Finance.
Committees
6. The Minister for Defence Support and the Secretary to the Department of Defence Support are to be members of the Council of Defence.
7. The Secretary to the Department of Defence Support is to be a co-opted member of the Defence Committee when matters related to the activities administered by the Minister for Defence Support are to be considered.
8. In keeping with the requirements set out above concerning the relationship of the Department of Defence and the Department of Defence Support in respect of policy development processes and financial planning, programming and budget control processes, each department is to participate in the deliberations of the boards and committees of the other to

an extent, and at a level to be agreed by the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Defence Support.
Interdepartmental Access
9. The Department of Defence Support is to be responsive to appropriately endorsed requirements of the Defence Force. There is to be free access between the Department of Defence Support and the Service Offices in matters of a purely single Service nature. Involvement of Service personnel in activities administered by the Department of Defence Support is to be facilitated in the same way as it is in the Department of Defence.
10. In order effectively to discharge his responsibilities as set out in the Directive from the Minister of Defence to the Secretary to the Department of Defence regarding the position of the Chief Defence Scientist, the Chief Defence Scientist is to have free access to the research and development Laboratories which form part of the Department of Defence Support.
Annual Review
II. In keeping with the intention that the Secretary to the Department of Defence and the Secretary to the Department of Defence Support should work closely together, the Secretaries, together with the Chief of Defence Force Staff, are to meet regularly to review matters of common concern. In addition, in order to assess the effectiveness of the Defence Support organisation, a group of senior officers representing the Secretary to the Department of Defence, the Chief of Defence Force Staff and the Secretary to the Department of Defence Support, is to review annually the activities of the Department of Defence Support in respect of:
(a) defence production and dockyard support
(b) defence research and development
(c) defence purchasing
(d) defence industry development
(e) marketing of defence equipment and services.
12. The results of the annual review are to be presented by the Secretaries to the Departments of Defence and Defence Support to the Ministers for Defence and Defence Support and are to be included in the Annual Defence Report which is tabled in Parliament.
(2) (b) The various changes were introduced to improve clarity, to rectify minor omissions, to delete unnecessary repetition, to reflect present administrative practice more accurately and to allow for flexibility should administrative arrangements change in the future.
(3) (a) and (b) The Administrative Arrangements Order of 7 May 1982 for the Department of Defence Support is substantially the same as that proposed in Attachment B to the interim report. Some editorial changes have been made to the 'matters dealt with' column. The 'enactments administered' column includes additional legislation related to the Minister's functional responsibilities.
Eligibility for Inclusion on the Vietnam Roll of Honour
(Question No. 5105)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
(I) How many names were on the Australian War Memorial Roll of Honour for Vietnam service for each of the three Services on (a) 30 August 1972, (b) 30 August 1977 and (c) 30 August 1982.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3181

(2) What are the criteria for determining the eligibility of servicemen or servicewomen for inclusion on the Roll of Honour.
(3) What is the period of time covered by the Vietnam Roll of Honour.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There were no names on the Roll of Honour relating to Vietnam on 30 August 1972; by 30 August 1977, the Roll had been erected containing 517 names (8 RAN, 15 RAAF and 494 Army); on 30 August 1982 the figure was still 517 names.
(2) The broad criteria used in determining the eligibility of servicemen and servicewomen for inclusion on the Roll of Honour are that they must have been attested members of Australia's armed forces, their deaths must have been designated by the repatriation authorities as 'due to war service', and their deaths must have occurred within a specified period.
(3) The time period covered by the Vietnam part of the Roll of Honour is 3 August 1962 to I January 1973.
Selection of Conductors for ABC Orchestras
(Question No. 5118)
Mr Free asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 21 September:
(I) What are the procedures followed in the selection of conductors for ABC orchestras.
(2) What person or group is responsible for interviewing and auditioning applicants.
(3) What procedures exist for reviewing selection decisions.
(4) How many people currently hold positions as conductors of ABC orchestras.
(5) How many are Australian-born.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on information supplied by the Australian Broadcasting Commission, is as follows:
(I) Conductors are selected by various methods.
(i) Chief or Principal conductors of the six symphony orchestras are selected by the Artists' Tours Committee (ATC), after extensive discussion and evaluation of their work. Any musician offered a Chief or Principal conductorship has normally undertaken at least one successful ABC concert tour, comprising concerts with several orchestras.
(ii) A certain number of longtime resident conductors, with proven ability, may be offered several concert engagements each year, after agreement by the Director of Music and the Federal Director of Concerts.
(iii) Individuals including visiting composer-conductors from overseas and returning Australian conductors often approach Music or Concert Department officers seeking engagements. Such conductors may be offered opportunities in line with their experience and particular areas of expertise.
(iv) Resident musicians with previous conducting experience outside the ABC may be invited to undertake an audition with one of the orchestras before a committee comprising principal players of the orchestra, the Chief or Principal conductor or a suitable alternative musician, and representatives of the Federal and State Music Departments. Full reports are provided after

each audition. Successful auditionees are offered studio recording work and minor concerts to evaluate their abilities.
(2) The Artists' Tours Committee comprising senior officers of the ABC's Music and Concert Departments and chaired by the Assistant General Manager (Radio), or the Director of Music and Federal Director of Concerts.
(3) Visiting conductors who do not meet ABC, audience or critical expectations are not invited to undertake further tours.
Resident conductors who do not maintain their performance standards, who are unable to develop orchestra standards or whose appeal to audiences is perceived to be insufficiently positive are gradually phased out and replaced by younger or alternative residents. These decisions are made by the selection committee.
(4) Eight-- the ABC administers six symphony orchestras, a training orchestra for young musicians (ABC Sinfonia) and employs a full-time Conductor-in-Residence.
(5) Three.
Australian National Railways Commission: Potential Public Service Obligations
(Question No. 5124)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
(I) How many potential public service obligations has the Australian National Railways Commission identified for the Government for possible funding by revenue supplements under section 44 of the Australian National Railways Act.
(2) How many of the obligations have been accepted by the Government and for wbat reasons.
(3) What steps has the Government taken to accelerate the Commission's review of potential obligations.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian National Railways Commission has currently identified one potential public service obligation for possible funding by a revenue supplement under Section 44 of the Australian National Railways Act.
(2) There has only been one specific request by the Commission under Section 44 of the Australian National Railways Act and this was accepted as a public service obligation while the future of tbe service was determined by arbitration.
(3) The Government considers that explicit funding of public service obligations is desirable in principle. Indeed, the new Australian National Railways Commission Bill makes specific provision for reimbursement of costs of complying with Government directions. It must be recognised, however, that the benefits of separate funding of PSOs are highly dependent upon the availability of accurate cost data.
The Government notes that the Commission is in the process of implementing its new computerised cost information sytstem and believes it would be more appropriate to defer explicit funding of public service obligations until that system is properly operational, and decisions can then be based on accurate cost data.

3182 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

PriYate Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of Department of Defence
(Question No, 5170)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officer> in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange li'le telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing exchange line telephones.
(5) What was the cost of (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a :elephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Three.
(2) Minister, Secretary, Deputy Director of Security (Civil).
(3) Yes.
(4) Should the Russell PABX fail for any reason and to provide an additional calling facility when the PABX line is in us'!.
(5) (a) $585; (b) $1,078.03; (c) None.
(6) NG.
PriYate Exchange Lini! Telephones: Officers of Department of Transport and Construction
(Question No_ 5182)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 23 September i 982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statut"ry aUthorities withi'l the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the disignations of these officers.
(3) do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected toa PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is tbe rationale for providing private exchange line telephones.
(5) What was the cost of (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose.
Mr Hunt--The answer to the honourable member's que&tion is as follows:
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT AND CONSTRUCTION
(I)h
(2) Secretary; two Deputy Secretaries; Chief Materials Scientist; Firsl Assistant Secretary, Road Safety; Travel Clerk; A,sistant Director, Brisbane, Sydney and Adelaide; Director, South Australia/Northern Territory Region; Controller of Works, Northern Territory; Executive Officer,

Northern Territory; Project Manager, Australian Capital Territory; Senior Marine Surveyor, Western Australia; Area Supply Manager, Nowra; District Managers, Richmond and Garden Island; District Supply Officer, Richmond and Garden Island; Area Managers, Bathurst and Moorebank; Engineer, Bathurst; Works Supervisor, Bathurst; Area Administrative Officer, Bathurst; Senior District Clerk, Garden Island.
(3) Yes.
(4) Confidentiality, e.g. commercial-in-confidence subjects; emergency calls--natural disaster co-ordination; charging of costs direct to project funds; facilities in case of PABX breakdowns; lack of PABX capacity; STD access where PABX incapable of selective STD barring; urgent contact with Defence Force staff; out-of-hours telephone calls when manual switchboard is unmanned.
(5) (a) $4,615; (b) $23,404; (c) $5,174.
(6) Some direct exchange lines have been installed because of the lack of PABX capacity. These lines will be replaced on PABX upgrade. In all other cases the answer is no.
SNOWY MOUNTAINS ENGINEERING CORPORA nON
(I) I.
(2) Director.
(3) Yes.
(4) Emergency use in case of PABX failure.
(5) (a), (b) and (c) nil. This is a new installation and an account has not been received to date.
(6) No.
AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING COMMISSION
(I) 23.
(2) Chairman (Melhourne and Sydney); General Manager; Executive Director Commercial; Directors (2); interstate Branch M~.nagers (3); Commercial/Trade Centre Managers (10); Operational Centre Managers (5).
(3) Yes.
(4) International/interstate trading and operations emergencies, especially after hours and in event of switchboard failures; maximum possible commercial confidentiality; monitoring of costs and identification of cost centres.
(5) (a) $2,569; (b) $40,821; (e) $2,000. These costs include telephone lines provided to Sydney and Melbourne representatives of the Japanese shipping company 'K' Line. This is a reciprocal arrangement with ANL staff in Japan.
(6) No.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS COMMISSION
(I) 12.
(2) Chairman; General Manager; Trucks Officer; Central Region Mechanical Engineer; Assistant General Manager; Administration Officer; Northern Region Mechanical Engineer; District Engineer; Area Manager; Northern Region Supply Manager; Area Accounting Officer; Retail Manager.
(3) Yes.
(4) Lack of PABX capacity; maximum confidentiality; transferred from South Australian Railways; emergency purposes e.specialiy after hours when switchboard unmanned; congestion of PABX Enes between Adelaide and Port Augusta; STD access where PABX incapable of selective STD barring.
(5) (ai $1,254; (b) $7,716; (c) $160.
(6) No.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3183

PriYate Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 5190)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange line telephones.
(5) What was the cost of (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PM BX serve the same purpose.
Mr WilsonThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 66---- Department of Aboriginal Affairs, 55-- Aboriginal Development Commission, II.
(2) Department of Aboriginal Affairs.
Central Office-Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Assistant Secretary, Director (Public Relations);
Northern Region --Regional Director. Executive Officer, Assistant Director (3), Manager (Aboriginals Benefit Trust Account), Personnel Officer, Area Officer (2).
South Australia---Regional Director.
Queensland-Regional Director, Assistant Director (4), Area Officer (6), Journalist.
Western AustraliaRegional Director, Senior Assistant Director, Assistant Director (3), Area Officer (5), Administrative Officer.
Victoria-Regional Director, Assistant Director.
New South Wales-Regional Director, Senior Assistant Director, Assistant Director (3). Journalist, Principal Project Officer (2), Supervisor, Area Officer (7).
Aboriginal Development Commission
Central Office--Chairman, Administrator, Assistant Administrator (3), Personal Assistant to the Chairman, Branch Manager, Assistant Branch Manager (3), Investigation Officer.
(3) Yes-in all except 3 cases.
(4) To provide confidentiality and security and for afterhours contact when the office is served by a PMBX.
(5) Department of Aboriginal Affairs. (a) $8,780.70; (b) $80,575.81; (c) $1,162.48. Aboriginal Development Commission. (a) $1,171.56; (b) $17,823.25; (e) $564.26.
(6) No.
Uranium Export Concentrate Duty
(Question No. 5211)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
What revenue is expected to be received in 1982-83 from the uranium export concentrate duty.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I refer the honourable member to Table 5, Item 17, on page 19 of Budget Paper No.5 'Estimates of Receipts and Summary of Estimated Expenditure for the year ending 30 June 1983'.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs: Estimated Expenditure on Uranium Mining
(Question No. 5217)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
What is the estimated total expenditure in 1982-83 for the activities of his Department associated with uranium mining in the Northern Territory, including salaries, allowances, travel, administrative and other expenses.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
A number of officers in the Department's Central Office and the Northern Territory spend varying proportions of their time handling matters associated with uranium mining in the Northern Territory. The estimated expenditure in 1982-83 on salaries and allowances for officers involved with uranium mining activities in the Northern Territory is $126,000. The expenditure On travel, administrative and other items in 1982-83 cannot be separately estimated because this expenditure is included in the overall Departmental expenditure on these items and is not readily quantifiable.
The above figure does not include payments to the Northern Land Council resulting from the conclusion of an agreement between it and the Commonwealth in respect of the Ranger uranium mine at Jabiru or payments to the Aboriginals Benefit Trust Account pursuant to Section 63 of the Aboriginal Land Rights (NT) Act in respect of the Ranger and Nabarlek uranium mines in the Northern Territory.
Minister for Ayiation: Attention to Chit Ayiation Matters
(Question No. 5220)
Mr Morris asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
Is it a fact that the Minister for Aviation is also Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House, and is currently Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce; if so, how does he propose to ensure that the Minister gives his undivided ministerial attention to civil aviation matters as the Prime Minister stated.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The practice of asking a Minister in charge of one portfolio to assist another Minister with his duties is more than 40 years old and has been followed by both Liberal/National Party Governments and Labor Governments. It is a sensible arrangement which relieves Ministers of some of the pressures cf their work load and helps government administration generally.
The Minister for Aviation ceased acting as Minister for Industry and Commerce on II October 1982.

3184 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

National Library: Funds for Purchase of Modern Sound Recordings
(Question No. 5234)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
(I) What sum does the National Library of Australia spend on the purchase of (a) books and (b) sound recordings.
(2) Are insufficient funds provided for the purchase of modern sound recordings.
(3) Is it a fact that the Library receives Australian books by legal deposit but that no legal compulsion exists for the deposit of sound recordings; if so, why.
(4) Is half of the Library's collection of 500000 sound recordings stored at the old Government Printing Office building at Kingston, A.C.T., which has no temperature or humidity control and is a breeding ground for vermin; if so, are the extremes of dampness and heat at this location contributing to the physical deterioration of these fragile historical documents.
(5) Are any of the national collection of discs, cylinders and tapes catalogued; if not, why not in view of the demand from all sections of the community for access to this archive.
(6) Is this collection the only section of the Library that does not have the services of a librarian; if so, why.
(7) Are any listening or copying services provided in the Sound Recording Collection and Services Section of the Library.
(8) Are there currently only 4 full-time officers in this section, and can he say whether this number is less than the staff of an average suburban record shop.
(9) Is there a need for permanent subject specialists in this section of the Library; if so, when will the Library ipcrease the staffing of this section to enable it to provide an effective copying and listening service.
(10) Is it a fact that some of the Library's most significant sound recordings, in terms of social and historic importance, are acetate recordings which fall to pieces in the same manner as old nitrate films; if so, is an important part of the history of Australia being lost as a result of the disintegration of these fragile tapes, because the Library has not provided funds for a scheme to copy these unique sounds to archival tape.
(II) Is the Library responsible for the only major public source of audio information in Australia, whereas users of print information are serviced by a long-established and well funded library network.
(12) Has the Library downgraded the priority of sound archives: if so, why.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b) In 1981-82 the National Library spent $2,492,000 on the purchase of books, $24,600 on the purchase of sound recordings and $18,600 on the oral history recording program. In 1982-83 it plans to spend $3,012,000 on the book collection, $46,000 on the purchase of sound recordings and $25,000 on the oral history program.
(2) The Library is not able to acquire the full range of any type of library material as defined in the Library's published Selection Policy. In spending the sound recordings budget, which is a responsibility of the Sound Archivist, priority has been given to the purchase of retrospective materials, since these may come on the market only once.
(3) The legal deposit provisions of the Copyright Act 1968, under which books and other printed materials are deposited

in the Library, do not extend to sound recordings or other non-print materials. However in May this year the members
of the Australian Record Industry Association (ARIA) agreed to deposit voluntarily in the Library one pressing of all
records manufactured in Australia by them from the beginning of 1982. The Attorney-Genera!'s Department is
presently reviewing audio-visual copyright law. In a submission to that Department, the Library has recommended
the extension of the deposit provisions to include sound recordings and other materials.

(4) About 200,000 recordings, approximately half of the

Library's recording collection, are stored at the old Govern-

ment Printing Office at Kingston A.C.T. While this accom-

modation is not considered to provide satisfactory conditions

of storage, considerable resources have been devoted during

1982 to improving this environment. A recent Library conser-

vation condition report states that "the provision of sisalation

which covers all windows prevents light from coming into the

building

the floor is clean, while the building is not

dust free, dust is now controlled

there is no evi-

dence of vermin

in short the storage condition of

records has dramatically improved. All 12 inch records have

been sleeved and the sleeving of IO inch records is well under-

way." The risk of damage to those parts of the Library's col-

lections which cannot be stored in the Library building, was

recognised by the Government when it authorised the con-

struction of a 7,000 sq. m. extension to the building in the

1982-83 Budget.

(5) The sound recording collection is not yet adequately documented or catalogued. Because of the rapid growth of the collection since its establishment in 1971 to 416,000 records at
30 June 1982, priority has been given to organising it prior to cataloguing. Considerable progress has been made in the or-
ganisation of the collection.

Since January 1981 a task force, originally of 3 and now of 6 part-time staff, has been engaged in the organisation of the recordings. In that time more than 60,000 broadcast discs
have been organised so that any identified discs can be
retrieved immediately. More than 40,000 LP discs have also been organised to allow retrieval of an identified disc and organisation of the considerable 78 collection is well underway.

(6) At present no librarian works in the Sound Recording Section. This is one of the specialist areas of the Library where administrative, rather than Librarian designations, have been
adopted at least for the present. The Head of the Section, the Sound Archivist, is recognised as one of the leaders of his profession in Australia. It is planned to allocate a Librarian to the
Section in 1982-83 to proceed with a cataloguing program.

(7) One full-time member of staff is engaged in copying sound recordings. Generally these recordings have been lent to the Library for the purpose of obtaining copies for the
sound recordings collection. From time to time the Sound Archivist also allocates resources to the copying of material
for broadcast. In the past limited facilities existed for listening. It has been necessary to curtail the listening service in 1982 due to limited resources.

(8) There are presently 4 full-time members of staff, in ad-
dition to 6 part-time officers who each work 30 hours per week in sorting and organising the recordings. Between December 1981 and September 1982 the Section had the additional services of a Technical Assistant, dedicated exclus-
ively to copying sound material. A replacement for this officer will shortly be appointed. No relevant comment can be offered about the staff of an average suburban record shop.

(9) All special collections in the Library would benefit from
the injection of subject specialists. However, in determining the resources it should allocate in meeting its obligation to preserve and develop the national collections and to make them available for use, the Library must take into account the

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3185

need to respond to demands for the development of all services. Since 1973 the permanent establishment of the Sound Recording Section has been increased from 2 to 4 with appropriate upward reclassification. In addition, since 1981 a total of 6 part-time positions have been assigned to the Section. This increase in staff has taken place over a period (since 1979) in which the National Library's overall ceiling has actually fallen by 9 per cent.
(10) The Sound Recording Section, as elsewhere within the Library, must determine an order of priorities in utilising its resources. Because of more pressing commitments, only a very small proportion of acetate material has been copied. However, such material is stored in environmentally controlled conditions which inhibit further deterioration.
( II) The establishment of the sound recording collection and services was a pioneering initiative by the Library. The Library is currently the major public source of audio information, both through its sound recording collection and services and oral history unit.
(12) No. The Library has enhanced the resources available for its sound archives since January 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits
(Question No. 5243)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
(I) For how many years has the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation, and its direct predecessors, been the only statutory organisation selling dried vine fruits on international markets.
(2) Are there now 2 Australian growers' organisations selling on international markets.
(3) Which of the following packers sells through the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation (a) Mildura Fruit Cooperative, (b) Irymple Packing Company, (c) Robinvale Cooperative and (d) other packing organisations in South Australia.
(4) What percentage of the crop is packed by each of the organisations referred to in part (3).
(5) If there are 2 growers' organisations selling on international markets, what percentage of the market does each hold and in what markets do they sell.
(6) What evidence is there of the 2 organisations competing in the same market and thereby reducing net returns to producers.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Neither the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation nor its predecessor has sold dried vine fruits on international markets. The Corporation's powers are generally to promote and control the export of dried vine fruit from Australia and its powers to trade in dried fruit placed under its control have not been used to date. A consortium of packing houses formed a private company for marketing purposes during the I920s. Today this company is known as Australian Dried Fruits Sales Pty Ltd (ADFS) and the honourable member may have confused this company with the statutory organisation.
(2) The meaning of the term "growers' organisations" is not clear. There are 57 persons, organisations or companies that have been granted licences to export dried vine fruit in 1982 but only four are significant in volume of sales on international markets. The main industry organisation for example, known as Australian Dried Fruits Association (ADFA), is composed of packers and marketing firms as well as growers but it does not engage in the selling of fruit.

Members of the ADFA control about 95 per cent of Australian dried vine fruit production; the remaining 5 per cent is packed by two independent companies in South Australia. For several years all fruit produced by ADFA members was marketed through ADFS. In late 1981, however, the Robinvale Producers Co-operative Co. Ltd, the Barmera Cooperative Packing Co. Ltd, and Berri Co-operative Packing Union Ltd-all members of ADFA--appointed G. Wood Son and Co. Pty Ltd as their marketing agent for the domestic and export markets.
(3) None. See (I) above. However, I understand that the Mildura Co-operative Fruit Company Ltd and Irymple Packing Pty Ltd sell fruit through ADFS. The two South Australian independent packers arrange their own sales.
(4) The approximate percentages of the dried vine fruit crop packed by the various groups of packers are:
Mildura Co-operative Fruit Company Ltd, approximately 39 per cent.
Irymple Packing Pty Ltd, Aurora Packing Pty Ltd, Coomealla Packing Pty Ltd, Sarnia Packing Pty Ltd, approximately 42 per cent.
Rivergrowers Co-operative Ltd, Waikerie Co-operative Producers Ltd, Anganston Fruit growers Co-operative Ltd, Swan Settlers Co-operative Association. Ltd, approximately 4 per cent (sold through ADFS).
Robinvale Producers Co-operative Co. Ltd, Barmera Cooperative Packing Co. Ltd, BeTTi Co-operative Packing Union Ltd, approximately 10 per cent.
Angas Park Fruit Company Pty Ltd, Robern (Overseas) Pty Ltd, approximately 5 per cent
(5) There are at present two dried fruit sellers exporting on behalf of their packer principals. The two South Australian independent packers conduct their own export operations. The quantities exported are those permitted by the corporation to be exported generally or to specific markets. The Corporation endeavours to ensure, as far as it is practicable to so do, that each exporter's share of each export market or region is proportionate to his annual handling of dried vine fruits.
(6) The United Kingdon is the only major international market affected by the recent changes in Australian selling arrangements. All four main Australian sellers export to the UK. In recent years there has been no competition between them in that market, as they have been required to sell through the one agent approved by the Corporation to sell Australian dried vine fruit there. The Corporation also lays down minimum prices, and certain terms and conditions, for sales to export markets.
In 1982, after representations by a significant sector of the Australian industry, the Corporation approved three agents in the UK market as part of an investigation to help it decide on future agency arrangements. Each seller now conducts his trade with the UK through a particular one of the three agents. No evidence is yet available to indicate that the new agency arrangements in 1982 have reduced returns to producers. The main competition in that market in 1982 has been from cheap Turkish fruits.
Export Marketing of Dried Vine Fruits
(Question No. 5244)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
(1) Have the members of the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation recently been appointed; ifso, who are the members.
(2) Did Mr C. Lloyd-Bostock replace Mr M. Lucey as a member of the Corporation; if so, what were the reasons for this.

3186 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) Is Mr Lucey the General Manager of Mildura Fruit Cooperative, the largest packer of dried fruit in Australia.
(4) Can he say whether the attitude of the Corporation to multiple agencies for export marketing changed with the appointment of the new members.
(5) Have dual agencies in export markets resulted in increased administrative costs.
(6) Is the dual agency decision opposed by the majority of dried vine fruit producers.
(7) What consultation did he have with the new Chairman of the Corporation in relation to the Chairman's decision to exercise his casting vote to introduce dual export marketing.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Apart from the Chairman, Mr E. W. Barr, who was appointed in February 1982, all current members of the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation were appointed in January 1982. Their names are:
Mr V. L. Byrnes, Mr A. R. Mead, Mr H. M. Tankard, Mr W. M. Whiting, Mr E L. Jenkins, Mr J. C. Harrison, OBE, DFC, and Mr C. Lloyd-Bostock.
(2) Mr M. MeN. Lucey was one of the members of the Corporation whose term expired on 31 December 1981. He had been one of the two members appointed to the Corporation in 1979 as persons specially qualified by reason of marketing or selling dried vine fruits, or having other experience in commerce, finance, economics, science or industrial matters. Mr C. Lloyd-Bostock is one of the three new members and was appointed as having such qualifications.
(3) Mr Lucey is the General Manager of the largest cooperative packing house, Mildura Co-operative Fruit Co Ltd, but the Irymple Group of proprietary companies packs a larger volume of dried fruit.
(4) The Australian Dried Fruits Corporation has power to approve arrangements necessary or convenient to control export of dried fruits from Australia, and to control the sale and distribution after export, of Australian dried fruits. This power includes requiring that a purchaser, agent or representative to or through whom the dried fruits are shipped be approved by the Corporation. The arrangements approved, which vary from market to market, are reviewed from time to time in the light of changing circumstances in Australia and overseas. Since the appointment of Corporation members early in 1982, two additional import agencies have been approved for the United Kingdom market.
(5) No significant increase has occurred in the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation's administrative costs following appointment of the two additional agents.
(6)There is no definitive evidence whether the dual agency arrangements in the UK are favoured or opposed by a majority of dried vine fruit producers. The Corporation of course has power to act without seeking such ~vidence.
(7) The Corporation has full authority to vary agency arrangements. The Chairman was not required to consult me as to the exercise of his voting rights, nor did he.
Seychelles
(Question No, 5246)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 13 October 1982:

(I) Has his attention been drawn to reports that a proportion of the militia of President Rene of the Seychelles mutinied in August 1982.
(2) Has the Government received any information to verify these reports and associated reports that some 70 Seychellois were slain in action involving Tanzanian soldiers; if so, what are the details.
Mr Street-The answers to the honourable member's question are as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Government has received reports confirming that some members of the Seychelles army mutinied in August. The rebels complained of mistreatment and demanded the dismissal of several senior officers. The mutiny collapsed after 36 hours when troops supporting the Rene Administration captured key installations. The press reported that five mutineers, one loyalist soldier and two civilians were killed and that Tanzanian troops were involved in an unsuccessful attempt to retake the radio station. Other reports suggest that a large number of Seychellois were killed, but the Government is not able to verify this. The Government has not seen any reports connecting the deaths of Seychellois with action by Tanzanian troops.
Australian National Gallery: Admission Fee
(Question No. 5271)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the British Government does not charge the public an entrance fee to visit the British National Collection in London contained in the National Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the Tate Gallery, the British Museum, the London Museum, the National Maritime Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Natural History Museum.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the fact that the United States Government does not charge the public an entrance fee to visit the United States National Collection in Washington contained in the National Art Gallery, the Smithsonian Institute, the Museum of History and Technology, the National Air and Space Museum and the Natural History Museum.
(3) Has his attention been further drawn to the fact that the Canadian Government does not charge an entrance fee to visit the Canadian National Collection in Ottawa contained in the National Gallery of Canada, the National Museum of Man, the National Museum of Natural Sciences and the National Museum of Science and Technology.
(4) Is it a fact the the Australian National Collection is contained in several buildings including the Australian War Memorial, the National Library, Parliament House, the High Court and others, as well as in the new National Gallery; if so, will entrance fees also be charged for viewing the National Collection contained in these other buildings.
(5) Will he insist on departing from established practice on the national capitals of Australia's closest allies amongst the Western democracies and proceed with restricting access to the Australian National Gallery only to those who can afford to pay.
(6) Who has paid for the Australian National Collection and the National Gallery.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3187

(I), (2) and (3) Yes. However I understand that throughout Europe many major galleries and art museums such as the Louvre, charge for admission.
(4) Yes. There are works of art and other items of importance to the nation's heritage which are displayed in Commonwealth institutions and buildings as mentioned by the honourable member. These works do not, however, come within the meaning of National Collection as defined in the National Gallery Act 1975 as being all works of art that are owned by the Gallery from time to time. Charges are levied for entry to the Australian National Gallery only.
(5) An extensive range of exemptions applies in relation to charges for admission to the Australian National Gallery as follows:
children under 15;
full-time students;
persons in receipt of pensions, benefits and allowances under the Social Security Act 1947 and the Repatriation Act 1920 and their dependants; and
members of the Australian National Gallery Association.
It is anticipated that over 50 per cent of visitors to the gallery will be admitted free in this way.
The honourable member may be aware that the Gallery recently announced that, by arrangement with ESSO Australia Ltd, the Gallery will be open to the public free of charge, for a three hour period from 5.00pm to 8.00pm on Thursday evenings during the daylight saving period to 10 March 1983.
(6) Works of art and other material of importance to the nation's heritage which are displayed in Commonwealth institutions and buildings, including the collection owned by the National Gallery, and the Gallery building itself, have been funded principally from annual appropriations made by Parliament. From time to time these collections have been supplemented by specific donations from individuals. Some are also enhanced by surplus material from Government departments and authorities. For example, some Government aircraft have become part of the collection of the Australian War Memorial in this way.
Visual Display Units: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 5309)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
How many visual display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Mr Malcolm Fraser~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The number of visual display units in use by my Department and statutory authorities for each of the last 10 years was-
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet 1973-1977-nil 1978-2 1979-5 1980--9 1981 II 1982--14
Public Service Board 1973-1975-nil 1976-37 1977-122 1978-129 1979-139

1980-131 1981-120 198255
Auditor-General's Office 1973-1978-nil 1979-1 IQ80-3 1981-4 1982 --10
Advisory Council for Inter-Government Relations 1973-1981-nil 1982--1
Visual Display Units: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 5316)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
How many display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Mr Nixon~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
1973 (nil), 1974 (1),1975 (I), 1976 (15),1977 (18), 1978 (43),1979 (60), 1980 (99),1981 (146),1982 (188).
National War Cemetery in Canberra
(Question No. 5335)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) What representations has the Government received concerning the construction of a National War Cemetery in Canberra.
(2) What was the response given to those representations.
(3) Does the Government propose to construct a National War Cemetery in Canberra to which all Australian Defence personnel who are killed in overseas service may be returned should their relatives not wish them to be buried elsewhere.
Mr Thomson~ The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (3) I am unaware of any such representations. On 19 January 1982 I wrote to the Prime Minister suggesting that it would be opportune to consider the establishment of a National Cemetery in association with the Australian Bicentenary year. The Prime Minister has referred the suggestion to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment to examine the general issue of commemorating national historic events and distinguished persons.
Franklin River Power Scheme: Letters from Queenslanders
(Question No. 5336)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) How many letters has he received from Queenslanders concerning the Franklin River Power Scheme since the Tasmanian Government's decision to go ahead with the dam.
(2) How many of these letters were (a) in favour of and (b) against the proposed scheme.

3188 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) To how many of these letters has he sent replies.
(4) What is the form of these replies.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) Since the current Tasmanian Government was elected in June 1982, 552 representations, all against the Franklin River Power Scheme, have been received.
The Government has the matter under close consideration.
Export Permits for Minerals Mined on Moreton Island: Letters from Queenslanders
(Question No. 5337)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(1) How many letters has he received from Queenslanders concerning the Commonwealth's grant of export permits for minerals mined on Moreton Island, Qld.
(2) How many of these letters were (a) in favour of and (b) against the granting of export permits.
(3) To how many of these letters has he sent replies.
(4) What is the form of these replies.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) Representations continue to be received from Queenslanders concerning the possible granting of export licences for proposed sand mining operations on Moreton Island. At 9 November 1982 there had been received (a) one in favour and (b) 580 against the granting of export permits. The Government has this matter under consideration.
Port Augusta, South Australia: Diversion of Freight Trains
(Question No. 5370)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(1) Were approaches made to him by the City of Port Augusta Corporation, South Australia, seeking to have Australian National freight trains diverted around Port Augusta instead of the present practice of taking these trains through Port Augusta.
(2) Was concern expressed that many of the freight wagons carry highly inflammable and dangerous materials.
(3) Has he given any consideration to the approaches from the Port Augusta Corporation; if so, when will a decision be taken.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) 1 replied to the Port Augusta Corporation on 7 September 1982 in the following terms:
The level of rail traffic in flammable liquids through Port Augusta is not considered a significant safety hazard. The quantities of petrol and LPG carried by rail through Port Augusta are 180 tonnes per week and 20 tonnes per week, respectively. These quantities are relatively small and much less than that carried every day through many Australian Communities. It is generally acknowledged that rail transport of these goods is considerably safer than road

transport. Within the town limits, safe operating procedures ensure that the risk of accidents with these fuels is minimised.
The conditions for transporting of flammable liquids by the Australian National Railways Commission are regulated by the provisions of the Australian Code for the Transport of Dangerous Goods by Road and Rail, which ensures the safest possible conditions of carriage.
The Commission has, in the interests of effective town planning, indicated that it sees a long term need for a by-pass route around Port Augusta. Current indications suggest that the bypass will not be required for quite some time.

Heritage Preservation: Register of the National Estate
(Question No. 5410)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(1) What has been the appropriation for heritage preservation through (a) the National Estate Program (b) the Australian Heritage Commission and (c) voluntary conservation groups for each year since 1974-75.
(2) How many (a) Queensland and (b) Australian sites has the Australian Heritage Commission entered on the Register of the National Estate for each month since January 1976.
(3) How many (a) Queensland and (b) Australian nominations for the Register were received during this period.
Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) (a) The National Estate Program.

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83

$8.1m $5.12m $1.35m (no new projects-funds
provided to meet commitments) $2.6m
$2.6m $2.0m $2.2m $2.2m $2.2m

(1) (b) The Australian Heritage Commission.

1974-75
1975-76 1976-77 197778 197879 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83

Nil-The Commission was not es-
tablished until 1976 $250,000
$291,000 $445,000 $496,000
$519,000 $639,000 $719,000
$714,000

(1) (c) Voluntary conservation bodies.

1974-75 1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

National Trusts
$
205,000 240,000 240,000 250,000 260,000 260,000

Other
$
353,000 390,000 400,000 400,000 350,000 350,000

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3189

1980-81 1981-82 1982-83

National Trusts
$ 260,000 260,000 260,000

Other
$ 350,000 350,000 350,000

(2) The Australian Heritage Commission has published six register lists since its inception.

Gazette
G36 13.9.77 GIl 21.3.78 G27 8.7.80 G42 21.10.80 G34 25.8.81 G39 28.9.82

Queensland
I 257
216 13 37
525

Australia
4,855 3
1,828 77 368
7,132

(3) (a) 880; (b) 11,362.
Commitments Made at Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting
(Question No. 5416)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
Did he make any commitment to nations attending the recent Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting in Fiji regarding Australia's funding of similar meetings in future; if so, what was the (a) reason for that commitment and (b) extent of that commitment, in terms of both the money involved and the period for which that commitment is valid.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No. However, I believe that any Government in Australia must accept some responsibility for assisting governments of some of the smaller countries in the region in the holding of important regional meetings such as CHOGRM, where this assistance is clearly needed and where it has been requested of us.

Answers to Questions on Notice: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 5421)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
When may I expect an answer to Question Nos 4563 and 4564 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 5 May 1982.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The answers to both questions appeared in the House of Representatives Hansard for 28 October 1982 (pages 2841 and 2842).

Defence Force: Overseas Recruitment
(Question No. 5436)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
How many (a) RAN, (b) RAAF and (c) Australian Regular Army officers currently serving were recruited from outside Australia.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The information requested is not readily available within the Services. Collection of the information would involve a time-consuming manual search of several thousand files by staff who would have to be diverted from other priority tasks.
Defence Force: Recruitment
(Question No. 5437)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(I) How many teams or recruiting officers have been sent overseas by the (a) Army, (b) RAAF and (c) RAN in the last 5 years.
(2) What was the cost of this exercise in each case.
(3) How many (a) officers and (b) other ranks were recruited in each case.
(4) Why was recruitment within Australia not successful.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No teams or recruiting officers have been sent overseas by the Defence Force Recruiting Organisation in the last five years. However, in June 1977, a team comprising two Naval Police Warrant Officers and a Naval Police Constable visited the United Kingdom on behalf of Navy Office. The team was tasked to recruit fifty ex-Royal Navy jRoyal Marine non-commissioned personnel for service as members of the Naval Police Branch of the RAN.
(2) The cost is not known. However, the team travelled by Service transport as part of a RAN fleet visit to UK at that time.
(3) (a) No officers were recruited, (b) Forty-eight non-commissioned personnel were entered.
(4) Naval Police are recruited entirely from serving and exserving sailors and the normal recruiting efforts within Australia failed to attract sufficient numbers of applications at that time.
Aborigines: Electoral Enrolment
(Question No. 5444)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 21 October 1982:
(I) Further to his answer to Question No. 4591 (Hansard, 23 September 1982, page 1885), on what date did the Council for Aboriginal Development recommend to the Government that voluntary electoral enrolment for Aborigines should be changed to compulsory enrolment.
(2) When did the Australian Electoral Office commence a program of electoral education for Aborigines in (a) South Australia, (b) Western Australia and (c) the Northern Territory.
(3) When will the program commence in Queensland.
(4) Has the Government sought the co-operation of the Queensland Government to include information about State

3190 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

electoral procedures in the program as was indicated in the answer to Question No. 3623 in 1979 (Hansard, I May 1979, pages 1716-7).

(5) What has been the outcome of the discussions with Queensland, which on 31 March 1980 (Hansard, page 1491, Question No. 5628 part (5» his predecessor said were at an
advanced stage, for the Australian Electoral Office to maintain joint Federal-State electoral rolls.

(6) How many more persons are enrolled for State elec-
tions than for Federal elections in (a) New South Wales and
(b) Victoria, where the Australian Electoral Office maintains joint Federal-State electoral rolls and where Aborigines are compelled to enrol under State electoral laws.

(7) Does the Australian Electoral Office still take no special measures to secure the enrolment of Aborigines for State purposes in New South Wales and Victoria as stated in
answer to Question No. 5628 part 3 (Hansard, 31 March
1980, page 1492).

(8) What is calculated to be the remaining duration of voluntary electoral enrolment for Aborigines, which in October
1961 the Select Committee on Voting Rights of Aborigines
considered a temporary provision (Committee Report, paragraph 80).

Mr Newman--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) On 6 June 1979 the then Chairman of the Council for Aboriginal Development, Mr W. F. Bird, wrote to the then Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Senator Chaney, conveying the Council's decision to recommend the 'removal of the optional electoral enrolment provision in respect of Aborigi-
nals'. He also set out the Council's rider to that recommendation-

The Council further decided that

the amend-

ment should be delayed until after a program of electoral

education had been undertaken and completed. This delay

is intended to allow a program of electoral education to run

for some time so that Aboriginals currently unenrolled may

be given the opportunity of learning about elections, enrol-

ment and voting before they are required by law to enrol. A

delay of a period of between 2-4 years for this purpose is

envisaged by Council'.

(2) The Aboriginal Electoral Education Program Teams commenced in Western Australia and South Australia in June
1979. A third team began operating in January 1981 when the program was extended to the Northern Territory.

(3) There is no proposal to extend the program to other States during 1982-83. The program will be extended as and when financial and staff resources permit.

(4) No, not at this stage. However, any extension of the program to Queensland or other States would, of course, be made in consultation with the State Governments.

(5) Subsequent to March 1980 the Queensland Govern-
ment decided, for what I understand to be reasons of State electoral administration, not to enter into joint roll arrange-
ments with the Commonwealth. It must be remembered, however, that the conduct of State elections and the maintenance of electoral rolls for State purposes are matters for the State Governments concerned. Discussions are proceeding on the
possible introduction of dual Commonwealth-State electoral claim cards.

(6) As at II November 1982, enrolment for both Common-
wealth and State purposes in New South Wales was identical; and, in Victoria 243 more electors were enrolled for Commonwealth purposes than for State purposes. This difference in Victoria results from the different residential requirements of Commonwealth and State Legislation-the Commonwealth

legislation requires one months residence in a Subdivision before an enrolment entitlement is established, whereas the Victorian legislation requires three months residence.
In New South Wales and Victoria the State electoral legislation does not differentiate between Aboriginals, naturalborn or naturalized subjects and therefore there are no separate details regarding the enrolment of Aboriginals.
(7) As was stated in the answer to Question No. 5628 part 3 (Hansard, 31 March 1990, page 1492), in those States where it is compulsory for Aboriginals to enrol, the enforcement of the compulsory provisions is the responsibility of State authorities.
(8) The Government has made a commitment to introduce compulsory enrolment for Aboriginals. That commitment still stands. The timing of the necessary amending legislation is a matter for the Government.
National Highway System: Sealing of Roads in South Australia and Northern Territory
(Question No. 5487)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 26 October 1982:
(I) What are the anticipated completion dates for the sealing of those sections of the national highway system from (a) Adelaide to the Northern Territory border and (b) the South Australian border to Darwin.
(2) What is the estimated (a) total cost of the works (b) costs already expended and (c) additional costs still to be incurred to completion.
(3) What works in relation to these sections have (a) already been performed and (b) are yet to be performed.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The Commonwealth Government and the Government of South Australia have a joint commitment to complete the reconstruction and sealing of the Stuart Highway in South Australia between Port Augusta and the Northern Territory border by 1987.
Because of the size of this project, and the difficulties of constructing roads in harsh, remote locations, it is not possible to predict accurately at this stage when it will be completed. However, at the present construction rate, it is anticipated the highway will be sealed to the border by late 1986 ahead of the 1987 commitment.
Sealing of the road between Port Augusta and Pimba was completed in March 1981 when reconstruction and sealing of the 50 kilometres between Bookaloo and Mount Gunson was finished. Of the remaining 757 kilometres of the highway between Pimba and the Northern Territory border, it is expected that sealing as far as Gosses will be completed by the end of November this year, bringing to 334 kilometres the total length of sealed road north of Port Augusta.
(b) Sealing of the Stuart Highway from the South Australin border to Darwin was completed in March 1976.
(2) (a) The estimated total cost of reconstructing and sealing the Stuart Highway in South Australia between Pimba and the Northern Territory border is $ 102m in 1982/83 prices.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3191

(b) To date, approximately $26m has been spent on construction works on the Stuart Highway in South Australia, including some $4.7 million to complete the 50 km Bookaloo to Mount Gunson section between Port Augusta and Pimba.
(c) On the basis of recent cost estimates, approximately $80m (in 1982/83 prices) remains to be expended to complete the Stuart Highway project in South Australia.
(3) (a) To date, the following sections have been completed:
50 km between Bookaloo/Mount Gunson
50 km between GlendambojGosses
(b) The remaining sections to be completed consist of:
115 km section between Pimba and Glendambo (expected to be completed later this year)
86 km between Gosses and Mirikata (currently under construction)
94 km between Mirikata and Coober Pedy South
113 km between Coober Pedy South and Pootnoura Creek (currentiy under construction)
59 km between Pootnoura Creek and Mount Willoughby
83 km between Mount Willoughby and Marla
79 km between Marla and De Rose Hill
77 km between De Rose Hill and Northern Territory border

Adult Migrant Education Service: Funding
(Question No. 5493)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
What sum has been allocated to the Adult Migrant Education Service for 1982-83 and what have been the allocations in each of the last lOYears.
Mr Hodges--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The total national allocation for the Adult Migrant Education Program for 1982-83 is $34.2m. Operational expenditure on the Adult Migrant Education Program from 1971-72 to 1981-82 was as follows:

Year
1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981--82

$'000
2,974 3,002 4,260 5,973 8,189 8,869 12,420 17,990 23,342 28,773 32,242

Adult Migrant Education Service
(Question No, 5492)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
What are the means employed by the Government to make migrants aware of the services of the Adult Migrant Education Service.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Information about the services provided under the Adult Migrant Education Program is disseminated through numerous channels. General information on courses is provided in printed information material distributed to prospective migrants overseas. Such information is also encompassed in group and individual counselling provided before departure for Australia.
Those migrants accommodated in migrant centres are able to attend courses at those centres and receive information about avaiiable courses on their arrival.
For migrants in the community, information is disseminated through radio, newpapers and community information channels. Ethnic community organisations, in particular. play an important part in spreading information about English language learning opportunities.
Following the discussion at the first meeting of the new Joint Commonwealth/State Committee on the Adult Migrant Education Program on 26-27 October, increased promotion of the program is to be undertaken by the State Adult Migrant Education Services to ensure that those needing to improve their English language ability are aware of the available opportunities.

Adult Migrant Education Service: Funding
(Question No. 5495)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
Is it a fact that the Commonwealth Government has refused to allocate additional funding to enable the New South Wales Government to rectify the situation in which 150 to 200 teachers are being employed in the Adult Migrant Education Service on a full time casual basis but with none of the benefits of their permanent colleagues; if so, what is the reason.
Mr Hodges--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commonwealth Government has allocated additional funding to enable the New South Wales Government to increase the number of permanent teachers by 30 positions in 1982-83. It has also proposed arrangements which would enable the conversion of some 10 further positions from casual to permanent.
I have had discussions with the New South Wales Minister for Education and consultations are continuing. I have indicated to the New South Wales Minister for Education that I need to consider the national implications of an increase in the proportion of permanent teachers within the Adult Migrant Education Service in New South Wales for funding the Adult Migrant Education Program. My Department's review of the arrangements in other States indicates a situation which differs markedly from State to State in terms of remuneration and in terms of leave benefits and tenure for non-permanent teachers.
There are also some issues relating to the structure of the adult migrant education arrangements in New South Wales and the effect on arrangements of the recent Evaluation of

3192 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Post Arrival Programs and Services which need to be taken into account.
Further consideration of the Teachers Federation claim is dependant on the resolution of these issues by the New South Wales authorities.
Adult Migrant Education Service
(Question No. 5496)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
Has the Commonwealth Government disregarded the findings of Justice Bauer in the New South Wales Industrial Commission in which he states that full time casual teachers are subsidising the Adult Migrant Education Service; if not, why has the Government not yet made permanent the 200 teachers employed in the Service on a full time casual basis.
Mr Hodges~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As indicated in my reply to Question No. 5495, the Commonwealth has provided funds for additional permanent positions in New South Wales and is discussing with New South Wales the need for further permanent positions.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 5528)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items became redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etc., of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr Anthony~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) None.
(2) Yes.
(3) None.
(4) Not applicapable.
(5) No.
(6) No. Such action is not considered necessary, given the response to (I) above.

Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of Finance
(Question No, 5535)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etc of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control, if so, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr Howard~The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (6) See Senate Hansard of 12 October 1982, page 1308, for the answer provided by the Minister for Home Affairs and the Environment to Question Nos. 1990 to 2015.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 5544)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etc., of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3193

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (4) I refer the honourable member to the answer to Senate Question Nos. 1990-2015, Hansard 12 October 1982.
(3) My Department does not have any statutory responsibilities for any of the activities listed. Officers of my Department and of the bodies under my control comply with all advisory conditions of the environmental authorities and equipment suppliers.
(5) My attention has not been drawn to any case of environment contamination arising from the use of PCBs by my Department or any other body under my control.
(6) Officers of my Department and official bodies under my control who use equipment containing PCBs are fully conversant with the hazards involved.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 5550)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etc, of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; ifso, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) See the answer to Senate Question No. 2015 and others in Senate Hansard of 12 October 1982. The situation in my Department has not changed since that reply was provided.
(2) See (I) above.
(3) No specific conditions exist for my Department.
(4) See ( I) above.
(5) No.
(6) In view of the lack of material containing PCB in my Department, no steps have been taken or are proposed to inform employees of the dangers of PCBs.
Nufarm Chemicals Pty Ltd: Industrial Accident
(Question No. 5555)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:

Following the industrial accident which occurred at the Nufarm Chemicals Pty Ltd plant at Laverton, Victoria, at about 3 a.m. on II July 1978, did:
(a) the Minister or the Minister's predecessors
(b) the Minister's Department or any body under the Minister's control and
(c) any other body; if so, which ones, make any investigation of
(i) allegations of dimethoate contamination of meat destined for export which was being processed and packed at the meat processing factory in the immediate vicinity of the Nufarm factory, and further allegations that an export licence was refused following testing which demonstrated the dimethoate levels in the meat were in breach of export requirements, and
(ii) allegations that the contaminated meat was later sold on the domestic market; if not, will the Minister now undertake to make investigation of those allegations; if the Minister will not do so, why not.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) (i) and
(ii) No.
(b) (i) and
(ii) No.
(c) (i) and
(ii) I am not aware of these allegations being investigated by any other body.
Should the honourable member be able to assist by supplying specific details of relevance to these allegations, including the identity of the meat processing factory cited in his question, I will arrange for departmental officers to conduct an investigation and to advise you directly of any findings. However, I am not optimistic that any significant findings will be possible in view of the time which has elapsed since the industrial accident occurred.
Repatriation Claims: Uniformity of Judgments
(Question No. 5648)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
(I) Can the Minister state what measures have been taken by (a) Repatriation Boards, (b) the Repatriation Commission and (c) Repatriation Review Tribunals to ensure reasonable uniformity of judgments made on claims which are essentially similar either because of circumstances surrounding the claims, or the conditions for which the claims are made, or both.
(2) When were those steps taken and what changes to practice resulted.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) For some time the Repartiation Commission has been taking steps to improve the uniformity of decision making within the Repatriation determining system, particularly since the handing down of the High Court decision in the case of Mrs Nancy Law.
Since that time regular meetings of Repatriation Board Chairmen and delegates of the Repatriation Commission have

3194 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

been held to discuss decisions of the Courts and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and other matters of common interest, with a view to ensuring consistency in decision making as far as practicable.
The re-organisation of the top structure of the Department is being implemented. As part of the restructuring of the Department it is proposed to locate in Canberra all Commission delegates who handle appeals against decisions of Repatriation Boards. This shoulf,l enhance the consistency of decision making at this level. In addition, a Legal Services Division has been established. Among other things, it will advise on the functions, structure and operation of the determining system.
One of the priority tasks of the new Legal Services Division will be the development of a system of reference documentation for distribution to all Repatriation Boards and Commission delegates. This documentation will include copies of identified significant decisions of the Courts and the Repatriation Review Tribunal as they become available. The Legal Division is responsible for developing a consistent approach to the consideration of claims and appeals and identifying training requirements for those engaged in the determination system. Some training courses have already been run. This Division is also responsible for monitoring the decisions of the various determining bodies to check that they are consistent and correct in law.
These matters are still in the developing stage. While it is hoped that they will result in more effective decision-making, it is too early to assess any effects.
The Repatriation Review Tribunal has commenced collecting copies of its decisions reasons in a form to make them more readily accessible and in this exercise the Tribunal is seeking to identify more significant decisions.
I also understand that the Tribunal has been convening meetings of Deputy Presidents to discuss the various decisions of the Courts and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in the Repatriation area.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5724)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since I January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
No.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5726)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 10 November:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since I January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.

National Anthem
Mr Newman-On 9 November 1982 (Hansard, page 2854) Mr Ian Cameron asked me the following question, without notice:
Whether the Government will initiate a program throughout Australia to educate us in the words of our new anthem. 'Advance Australia Fair'.
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
'Advance Australia Fair' was chosen as the National Tune by a large majority of voters at a national poll in 1'977. It was particularly noted at the time that the choice was for a tune and not a song and that 'God Save The Queen' would remain the National Anthem.
The original words of 'Advance Australia Fair', composed by Peter Dodds McCormick in 1878. were written for an earlier period in our history and are not officially recognised for use today. Earlier this year the Government considered whether it should take formal steps concerning words for a National Song. It was felt that words that would find general acceptance would evolve in time.
The Government does not therefore propose to make any change at present to existing arrangements.
Questions on Use of Toxic Chemicals in Vietnam: Prime Minister
(Question No. 4850)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) How many (a) questions without notice and (b) questions on notice, has he, or his predecessors, received since I January 1978 on any matters related to or arising out of United States, Australian. and allied forces use of toxic chemicals in Vietnam during hostilities there.
(2) Who was the member or senator asking the question, and what is the full Hansard reference in each case.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the Notice Papers and the indexes to the Hansard of both Houses.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Vice-President of the Executive Council
(Question No. 4940)
Mr Holding asked the Vice-President of the Executive Council, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3195

(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Sir James Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) By arrangement with the Prime Minister, officers of his Department, in consultation with my Departmental Liaison Officer, provide assistance to me in the preparation of answers to Questions on Notice. When cleared departmentally, the draft answer is submitted to me through the Departmental Liason Officer. When approved, the answer is sent to the Questions Officer of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet who arranges printing and forwarding to the Table Office.
(2) to (5) In the period 7 May 1982 (the date of my appointment) to 24 August 1982, I was asked 18 questions on notice. The answer to one of these questions was provided before 24 August, and was answered 15 days after being asked. All of the remaining questions have since been answered.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Transport and Construction
(Question No. 4947)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice. from senators and members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Parliamentary Questions Officer in my Department directs questions to the appropriate Divisions of the Central Office of the Department. Draft responses are approved by the Division head and my approval is sought.
(2) On the date of my appointment as Minister for Transport and Construction, there were 34 outstanding questions on notice that became my responsibility. As at II November 1982, a further 66 questions on notice have been asked of me, as Minister for Transport and Construction.
(3) lOl days, being the time between asking and the date the answer appeared in Hansard.
(4) (a) 23; (b) 26; (c) 5; (d) 2; (e) nil.
(5) 44, none of which has been on the Notice Paper for 12 months or more.

Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Communications
(Question No. 4951)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper for 12 months or more.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) When Parliament is sitting, the Notice Papers are examined for questions by the Parliamentary Questions Officer in my Department. Relevant questions are forwarded on the same day to departmental officers and statutory authorities with a request for a response within two weeks.
Draft replies are then cleared by the responsible Division Head and the Secretary before being forwarded to my Senior Private Secretary for my final approval.
(2) I was asked 430 questions on notice between 25 November 1980 and 25 August 1982. Answers to 378 of these questions have been printed in Hansard.
(3) The majority of questions were tabled within 3 months of being placed on notice.
(4) (a) 237, (b) 137, (c) 4, (d) Nil, (e) Nil.
(5) There were 18 questions on notice on 18 November 1982. None were more than 12 months old.
Telecom Television Commercials: Cost
(Question No. 5049)
Mrs Child asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(1) What was the cost of production of the Telecom Australia 'Beepa' television commercials advertising off-peak STD rates.
(2) How many times have these advertisements been telecast and what has been the cost of them.
(3) What is the amount of additional revenue from STD calls generated by these advertisements.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Telecommunications Commission, is as follows:
(I) $213,000.
(2) Approximately 2,300 (since November 1979) at a cost of$2.96m.

3196 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) There are a number of factors which can result in increased revenue including tariff changes, more customers, economic conditions and advertising initiatives. STD revenue since 1979-80 has been as follows: 1979-80 $723.54m, 1980-81 $847.23m, 1981-82 $991.11 m.
I am advised that advertising had a significant impact on the growth in revenue.
Defence Force Personnel: Duties at Nareen, Victoria
(Question No. 5061)
Mr Scholes asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 14 September 1982:
Are a number of Defence Force personnel being utilised in works and other duties at the Prime Minister's property at Nareen, Victoria; if so, (a) how many persons have been or are allocated to these duties, (b) what are the duties requiring use of Defence personnel, (c) could any of these duties have been carried out by local tradesmen or contractors, (d) what is the cost to the Defence Budget of these services and (e) are these costs recovered from the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The honourable member would appreciate the need for a Prime Minister to have communications available at all times, including when at home. He would also understand, in view of the national security classification applying to much of those communications, that it is essential that an appropriate level of security protection is provided.
To that end, Defence equipment is used for communications between Nareen and Canberra, and other centres. Defence Force personnel, having an appropriate level of security clearance, service that equipment.
The equipment servicing generally involves visits to 'Nareen' by maintenance teams of up to four men at approximately three-monthly intervals. Special visits are made if and

when equipment malfunctions require or when major cyclical maintenance is due. Defence Force personnel also service similar equipment installed in my offices in Sydney and Melbourne and in my Department in Canberra.
Defence personnel servicing communication equipment at 'Nareen' also service a Government-owned standby generator which is an alternative power source for communications and security equipment in emergencies. These personnel have no other functions at 'Nareen '.
In 1982-83 cost of Defence personnel servicing equipment at 'Nareen' is expected to be approximately $9,000. Such costs are not recovered from my Department.
Recommendations by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions: Department of Education
(Question No, 5147)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
(I) What are the details of all recommendations made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions which related specifically to the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the details of the implementation of those recommendations to date.
(3) Where a service formerly provided by the Minister's Department is now provided by private interests, what have been the (a) cost savings and (b) cost penalties incurred to date, in each case.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question.
(I) to (3) As follows:

Activity Adult Secondary Education As-
sistance Scheme Schools Commission
School building costs
Curriculum Development Centre

Decision
Eligibility to be restricted to those needing qualifications for employment
Direct involvement of Schools Commission in program administration in the States and information collection to be reduced
State Offices to be scaled down accordingly
Buildings Unit in Central Office to be abolished
Subsidies for school buildings and other capital facilities to be based on an amount equal to the mean of average costs for each sector (e.g. government school and non-government, primary and secondary)
Commonwealth funding will not be available for government school buildings in States which exceed this average cost level in the building of new facilities
Centre to be abolished (unless the States agree to contribute 50 per cent of operating costs)
In future, only curriculum projects requested by the Australian Education Council and cost shared 50:50 by the States to be undertaken

Status Implemented Implemented
Implemented Implemented Being implemented in the context of the
government's guidelines of June 1982 and the Australian Education Council's investigation of current school building costs
Centre has been wound down. No funds appropriated in 1982-83
Specific projects for joint involvement being discussed with States at present.

Answers to Questions
Activity Research activities International education Student loans
Eligibility for TEAS
Tertiary Tuition Fees

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3197

Decision
Special support for educational research to be terminated

Status Implemented

Education Research and Development Implemented Committee to be abolished

In-house and contracted research activities of the Department of Education to be scaled down

Implemented

Participation in international education activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD, to be scaled down

Implemented

A loan scheme, administered by tertiary institutions, to be introduced from the beginning of 1982 as a supplement to TEAS
Changes to TEAS rates to be considered in the light of this additional form of assistance

It is intended that the Tertiary Student Loans Scheme be introduced early in 1983. The Scheme will be administered
by the Department of Education in conjunction with the banks and tertiary in-
stitutions. The necessary legislation (the Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Bill 1982) was referred by
the Senate to the Senate Committee on Education and the Arts for inquiry and report. The Committee has reported to
the Senate and supports introduction of
the Scheme TEAS is to continue, with changes to al-
lowances determined in the 1982
Budget context. For 1983, allowances have been increased significantly and the means test has been liberalised

Eligibility for living away from home al-
lowance for those 21 to 25 to be restricted to those required to live away from home by reason of geography or home
conditions

Implemented

De facto relationships no longer to be an acceptable qualification for indepen-
dent status

Implemented

Periods of registration for employment, with or without receipt of Unemploy-
ment Benefits, to be taken into account in determining the 2 year qualifying period for independent status

Implemented

Tuition fees to be introduced in universi-
ties and CAEs for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification, except for
recognised double degree or diploma combinations Fees to apply to new enrolments from
1982 The scale of fees to be announced in the
Budget context Postgraduate students receiving Common-
wealth Government Postgraduate Awards to be exempted from fees Grants to universities and colleges to be offset to take account of fee income

The legislation to provide for the limited introduction of tuition fees for second and higher qualifications in universities and CAEs, was rejected by the Senate
for the second time on 19 May 1982. This means that tuition fees will not be
charged in 1983

3198 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Activity

Decision

Status

Rationalisation of Colleges of Advanced Education
Proposed University in the Northern Territory
ACT Education
Education Program for Unemployed Youth

Consideration to be given to funding activities of single-purpose CAEs where they have been amalgamated with or into larger institutions to the satisfaction of the Commonwealth Government by the end of 1981.
Commonwealth funding for thirty singlepurpose CAEs to cease as singlepurpose institutions from the end of 1981.
The consolidation of institutions is to result in genuine amalgamations with one governing body and a real saving of resources.
The States to be given the option of t.aking over affected colleges after 1981 on the basis that they provide the full funding involved.
An amount of $5m to be earmarked within total funds made available for universities and colleges in 1982 and 1983 to facilitate this rationalisation of activities through expansion of technological and business studies.
The engineering schools at Preston and Bendigo CAEs and at Deakin University to be run down wit.h no new students accepted after 1981.
The future of the engineering school at Caulfield CAE to be examined.
Funding for the University of Western Australia and Murdoch University to be based on a geater sharing of resources and collaboration.
Commonwealth funding not to be provided for the establishment of a University in the Northern Territory in the 1982/84 triennium.
The Commonwealth Teaching Service Commissioner to be abolished and the functions to be absorbed by the Public Service Board, the ACT Schools Authority and the Department of Education.
The ACT Schools Authority to be restructured.
Use of ACT school buildings to be significantly rationalised.
Administration of program to be transferred to the School to Work Transition Program

By end of 1981 all but 7 of these institutions had amalgamated. Special arrangements were made for funding these 7 for 1982. Four institutions have not yet entered into acceptable arrangements. These are under active consideration by States and institutions concerned. The Government's position is that the arrangements will be finalised by the end of 1982.
No State has taken up the option.
These amounts have been allocated for 1982 and 1983.
Engineering schools are being phased out--no new students in 1982. In the case of Bendigo CAE, a transitional agreement has been entered into whereby engineering will continue to be taught under contractual arrangement with Ballarat CAE in 1983.
This is still a matter for consideration by the CTEC during the 1982/84 triennium.
In recommending funds for the University of WA and Murdoch University for 1982/84, the CTEC had regard to the requirement of RCF.
Implemented.
Implemented. Refer to Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981, Part vii Sections 158 to 176. Assented to i8 June 1981.
Following a review of the structure of the ACT Schools Authority, the Government decided that the structure of the Authority remain unchanged, but that some minor amendments be made to the ACT Schools Authority Ordinance.
In 1981, guidelines developed by the ACT Schools Authority were approved for the management of space in schools. These allow for consultation with local school communities and assessment of operations of schools with declining enrolments, preliminary to decisions by the Authority on the future of sllch schools. Consideration is now being given to the rationalisation of space in relation to a number of schools. Two schools, at Curtin North and Curtin South, will amalgamate on a voluntary basis in 1983.
Implemented

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3199

Gold Owned by Australian Government
(Question No. 5230)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
(I) What is the total value of gold owned by the Australian Government.
(2) In what countries is this gold held, and what are the values of this gold held in each country.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Reserve Bank of Australia holds Australia's official gold and foreign exchange reserves. At end-October 1982 the value of gold held totalled $3575m. Gold is valued at the average London gold price for the month, converted to Australian dollars at the market rate of exchange applying on the last day of the month.
(2) The bulk of this gold is held in Australia; the remainder is held in the United Kingdom and United States of America. I understand that for reasons of security, it is not the practice of the Reserve Bank to disclose the value of gold it holds at specific locations.
Sanctions Against South Africa and the Soviet Union
(Question No. 5272)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
(I) What is Australia's declared attitude towards the United Nations International Year of Mobilisation for Sanctions against South Africa.
(2) Does the UN Charter provide for the Security Council alone to impose sanctions.
(3) Is Australia's approach towards sanctions against the Soviet Union consistent with his answers to parts (I) and (2); if not, why not?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The International Year of Mobilisation for Sanctions against South Africa was proposed by the International Conference on Sanctions against South Africa, which was held in Paris from 20-27 May 1981. Australia attended the Paris Conference as an observer, but did not participate in its deliberations and does not adhere to the Paris Declaration.
In November 1981 the United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution (36/172 B) which endorsed the report of the Paris Conference and proclaimed the year 1982 International Year of Mobilisation for Sanctions against South Africa. Australia abstained on this resolution.
Australia's approach is based on the Government's belief that the subject of mandatory sanctions is within the exclusive competence of the Security Council. However should the Security Council decide to impose sanctions against South Africa, Australia would abide by its decision.
(2) Yes.
(3) Australia has adopted a number of measures, which could be regarded as sanctions in the broadest sense of the term, against both the Soviet Union and South Africa. These measures are designed to curtail the range of our bilaterial relations with those countries and are an expression of the Government's condemnation of the policies and actions of the governments of those countries.

There is no inconsistency between the measures adopted in the cases of South Africa and the Soviet Union.

Uranium Production
(Question No. 5281)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to an article entitled 'AAEC Nuclear Power projections' on pages 11-14 of Atomic Energy in Australia, Vol. 24, Numbers 3 and 4.
(2) If so, has the Minister noted the so called 'best' estimates for 1985 and 1990.
(3) In order to achieve these estimates what would be the annual requirement of uranium for (a) Western Europe, (b) the Western World and (c) Comecon countries, as defined in the article.
(4) What is the current annual production of uranium in each of the uranium producing countries.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) Yes.
(3) (a), (b) and (c) Future annual requirements for uranium necessary to achieve the estimates contained in the article referred to by the honourable member would be as follows:
('000 tonnes uranium)

1985

1990

Western Europe Western World
Comecon

17.2

19.6

40.1

50.1

8.0

15.1

(4) Current estimates of 1981 production in major uranium producing countries of the western world are:

(tonnes uranium)

USA Canada South Africa Niger Namibia Australia France Gabon Spain Others

14,801 7,746 6,135 4,360 3,969 2,860 2,553 1,022
274 300

Total Figures for Comecon countries are not available.

44,020

Advertising of 'Barclay' Cigarettes
(Question No. 5282)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
(I) Is it a fact that, in response to questions asked in Parliament regarding the accuracy of advertising relating to the tar content of the cigarette brand 'Barclay', investigations into the matter were undertaken by his Department.
(2) If so, what progress has been made in these investigations.

3200 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) Will he advise the House of the results of these investigations and indicate what action he will take in regard to the matter.
Mr CarltonThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. I am advised that investigations into the 'Barclay' brand of cigarettes commenced before questions were asked in the Parliament concerning claims about the delivery of tar and nicotine by this brand and possible implications for the testing methodology currently in use. The investigations followed an informal expression of concern by representatives of an Australian cigarette manufacturer in April 1982 regarding the validity and comparability of tar and nicotine yield test results for the 'Barclay' brand of cigarettes. My Department and the Australian Government Analytical Laboratories (AGAL) investigated technical aspects of the type of filter used and of the implications as regards the testing methodology used in accordance with the Voluntary Code in Respect of CPM (,Tar') and Nicotine Labelling on Cigarette Packaging.
(2) and (3) Based on the results of the investigations referred to in (I) and the evidence available to my Department and AGAL, including the results of research conducted overseas, there appears to be no scientific case for any change in the current industry/ AGAL agreed collaborative testing methodology for determining tar and nicotine yields of cigarettes.
Manufacturers and importers of cigarettes in Australia are responsible for ensuring that there are no breaches of the Voluntary Code. The operation of the Code will continue to be monitored by my Department.

Visual Display Units: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 5313)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:

How many visual display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fell within the
jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years?

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following
answer to the honourable member's question:

1973

I

1974

5

1975

7

1976

15

1977

33

1978

50

1979

74

1980

131

1981

181

1982

225

Visual Display Units: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 5319)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:

How many visual display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the
jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years?

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The number of units in use as at 30 June each year were:

1973

Nil

1974

Nil

1975

2

1976

2

1977

IO

1978

IO

1979

14

1980

28

1981

39

1982

100

Tax Concessions: Questions on Notice

(Question No. 5342)

Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:

(I) How many questions on notice seeking details on the cost of tax concessions has he received since assuming his
portfolio.

(2) How many of those questions have not been answered.

(3) Of those that were answered, how many replies were to the effect that costing was not possible.

(4) When will the Government respond to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure's Re-
port on Taxation Expenditures.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2) A check of the records indicated that I have received 95 such questions, of which 17 have yet to be answered.

(3) 29.

(4) In accordance with the Prime Minister's Ministerial
Statement of 25 May 1978 it is usual practice for the responsible Minister to make a statement in the Parliament outlining
the action the Government proposes to take in relation to a Parliamentary Committee Report within six months of the tabling of the Report. It is expected that the usual procedure
will be followed in respect of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure Report on Taxation Expenditures.

Popular Theatre Troupe, Brisbane
(Question No. 5365)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) Was the Popular Theatre Troupe of Brisbane given a grant of $75,000 for 1982 by the Theatre Board of the Australia Council.
(2) If so, what were the particular reasons for the Troupe's success in attracting this grant.
(3) Has the Theatre Board decided not to give any grant to the Troupe in 1983.
(4) Is he aware that the Popular Theatre Troupe presents material containing controversial social issues and that some of it consists of political satire aimed at the Queensland Government.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3201

(5) Is he also aware the Queensland Government recently prevented the Troupe from presenting a political satire to State schools in Queensland.
(6) Has he received any representations from the Queensland Government, either formal or informal, concerning the Popular Theatre Troupe; if so, what was the nature of those representations and were they taken into account when the decision was made to cut off funds for 1983.
(7) What were the particular reasons for the decision not to fund the Troupe in 1983.
(8) Was one of those reasons the insufficient artistic development of the Troupe; if so, what does this mean.
(9) Would the Troupe be better placed to continue receiving Commonwealth funds if it did not present political satires.
(10) Is he able to say whether the Queensland Government subsidises the Troupe; if it is not subsidised in this way, was this taken into account in the decision to cut off Commonwealth funds to the Troupe and in what way did it influence the decision.
(11) What is the usual guideline for deciding funding levels for theatre groups when there is no State Government subsidy.
(12) Will he review the decision to cut off Commonwealth funds to the Troupe in 1983 in view of the important role the Troupe plays in presenting an alternative view on various social issues in a State where such action is actively discouraged by the State Government.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australia Council has advised me as follows:
(I) Grants made by the Theatre Board to the Popular Theatre Troupe in 1982 were:
General grant towards activities--$75,000 Supplementary grant-$4,000 Challenge grant-$4,000
(2) Theatre Board funding for the Troupe over recent years has reflected the Board's concern to assist the development of a diversity of theatre experiences. The Popular Theatre Troupe has been an innovative force in drama in Queensland in terms of its approach to drama and its commitment to presenting theatre in community venues such as shopping centres, schools and factories.
In approving the grant towards the Troupe's activities in 1982, the Board took into account the Troupe's record of presenting innovative productions and the lack of similar theatre experiences available in Brisbane.
(3) The Theatre Board has decided not to provide financial assistance to the Troupe in 1983.
(4) The material contained in productions of the Popular Theatre Troupe has related to controversial social issues and on some occasions has contained satirical material aimed at the Queensland Government.
(5) Two productions of the Troupe-Crook Shop and The Stale We're In (1982) have not been approved for performance in State high schools. This is a matter for the Queensland Arts Council and the Education Department in Queensland.
(6) No representations concerning the Popular Theatre Troupe have been received by the Australia Council from the Queensland Government.
(7) The Board considered other applicants had stronger claims for assistance from the limited funds at its disposal. The Board's decision also took into account the following factors affecting the Troupe's operations:

the precarious financial position of the company, including its continuing failure to attract significant funding from sources other than the Australia Council;
concern about the artistic development of the company; frequent turnover of actors and staff which has resulted in the discontinuity of the Troupe's activities and a failure to develop professional skills; at a meeting with the Theatre Board in Brisbane on 24 September 1982, members of the Company could not indicate to the Board that they would continue with the Troupe in 1983.
(8) Concern about the artistic development of the Troupe was a factor which influenced the Board's decision to withdraw its support. The term 'artistic development' refers to the ability of the Troupe to maintain its operations on a sound basis and to continue to present stimulating drama productions of high quality. The Board considers the following factors inhibit the Troupe's artistic development:
the Troupe is without an artistic director; there is frequent turnover of members of the Troupe, most members serving for 12 months only; there has been a frequent turnover of administrators for the Troupe;
the Troupe lacks long term artistic plans.
(9) No. Council decisions to fund the Troupe have not been influenced by the content of the Troupe's productions. Nor was the content of the Troupe's productions considered in relation to the Board's decision to withdraw funding in 1983.
(10) The Queensland Government has never funded the Troupe. The Theatre Board has always been aware of the refusal of the Queensland Government to fund the Troupe and it was not a consideration in the Board's decision to withdraw funding.
(II) No fixed guidelines have been developed to cover situations where State funding is not available for theatre groups. The Theatre Board considers applications against its policies as set out in its policy booklet, the artistic merit of projects proposed, and funds available.
(12) The Theatre Board will, on request from the Troupe, review its decision.
Electoral Division of Lilley: Funding of Non-government Schools
(Question No. 5408)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(1) What moneys were paid to each non-government school within the Electoral Division of Lilley during (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) How were these schools ranked in terms of need for the purpose of determining their eligibility for Commonwealth grants.
(3) What was the change in resource standards for each school over this two-year period.
(4) Which schools (a) slipped down and (b) moved up the needs scale in 1981-82 when compared with 1980-81.
(5) What is the total enrolment of all the non-government schools in the Electoral Division of Lilley.
(6) What proportion of students (a) in the Electoral Division of Lilley and (b) in Australia overall attended schools in the most needy category as determined by the Schools Commission in (i) 1980-81 and (ii) 1981-82.

3202 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) See Schedule 1-5.
(2) See Schedule I.
Note that between 1981 and 1982, the six-level subsidy scheme structure was compressed to three levels as follows:

1981 level
(I) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)

1982 level
2 3

Level 6 in 1981 and level 3 in 1982 represent the highest level of assistance; in both years, level I represents the lowest level of assistance.
(3) A school's total recurrent resource use comprises, of course, private input, State Government grants and Commonwealth Government Recurrent grants. In accordance with a long standing undertaking to schools that information collected will be treated as confidential, the Commission does not make detailed information on the resource use of individual schools publicly available. Thus, it is not possible to give information on changes in resource use which did not result in a change in funding level. However, as indicated in Schedule I only one school (Clayfield College) had a reduction in its level of resource use which resulted in a change of funding level.
(4) See schedule I. Only one school, Clayfield College, moved to a higher needs category in the period.
(5) Total enrolment 6983; Level 3 enrolment 5551.
(6) per cent in Group 3 in Lilley = 79.5 per cent in Group 3 in Australia = 78.9. This information has only been collected in 1981.

Schedule I GENERAL RECURRENT GRANTS
Electorate = 75 Lilley

Location
Albion
Ascot Banyo Boondall Bracken Ridge Bracken Ridge Brighton Clayfield Brisbane Clayfield Clayfield Hendra Northgate Nundah Nundah Sandgate Shorncliffe Wooloowin Zillmere

Name
St Col urn ban 's Christian Brothers College
St Margaret's School St Pius' Primary School St Joseph's College St John Fisher College St Joseph's Catholic Primary School St Kieran's School Clay field College St Agatha's Primary School St Rita's College Our Lady Help of Christians School St John's School Corpus Christi College St Joseph's School Sacred Heart Primary School St Patrick's College Holy Cross School St Flannan's Parish Convent School

Enrolments General recurrent

Funding level 1982

grants

1981 1982 Prim. Sec.

1981 1982 (a)

6

191 553 465,470 593,971

I 204 605 296,180 350,784

6

3 227

110,406 122,983

6

664 455,829 606,232

6

227 224,793 314,012

6

3 272

111,129 153,567

6

151

87,020 106,165

2 183 440 211,345 398,492

6

3 253

89,225 125,182

6

613 445,651 559,669

6

163

94,208 116,077

6

3 96

49,533 58,544

6

3

405 290,800 369,765

6

3 268

90,820 124,892

6

3 293

149,613 171,313

6

3 150 273 230,775 333,549

6

198

107,525 124,356

6

3 524

264,380 321,768

(a) A further, supplementary, payment of general recurrent grants is to be made in late November or early December this year, representing about 5.9 per cent of payments made to date.
Schedule 2 CAPITAL GRANTS Electorate = 75 Lilley

Location
Ascot Bracken Ridge Bracken Ridge Clayfield Brisbane

Name
St Margaret's School St John Fisher College St Joseph's Catholic Primary School Clay field College

Payable in

1981

1982

87,713 271,356 182,523
7,053

44,000 100,000

1983 78,000

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3203

Schedule 3 LIBRARY GRANTS Electorate = 75 Lilley

Location

Name

Albion

St Columban's Christian Brothers College

Ascot

St Margaret's School

Banyo

St Pius' Primary School

Boon da II

St Joseph's College

Bracken Ridge St John Fisher College

Bracken Ridge St Joseph's Catholic Primary School

Brighton

St Kieran's School

Clay field Brisbane Clayfield College

Clayfield

St Agatha's Primary School

Clayfield

St Rita's College

Hendra

Our Lady Help of Christians School

Northgate

St John's School

Nundah

Corpus Chris ti Co liege

Nundah

St Joseph's School

Sandgate

Sacred Heart Primary School

ShornC\iffe

St Patrick's College

Wooloowin

Holy Cross School

Zillmere

St Flannan's Parish Convent School

1981 1982 2,406 2,160

2,670 890
2,000 930
2,820

1,000 1,060
1,000 7,9io

550 1,000 1,870 2,040
860

Schedule 4
MIGRANT EDUCATION 1980, 1981/ESL PROGRAM 1982, ETHNIC SCHOOLS PROGRAM 1981 AND 1982
The attached schedule shows details of Commonwealth funding to non-government schools under the above programs for the Electoral Division of Lilley for 1980, 1981 and 1982. In the case of Catholic Schools Migrant Education and ESL program funds are paid to the Catholic Education Office of Queensland. The amounts shown for each school represent the dollar equivalent of services provided to students at the school. They do not imply that schools received cash funds for these amounts. Similarly funds under the ethnic schools program are paid to the ethnic group initiating insertion classes at the school.

2,160 1,000 560 1,010

MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION PROGRAM 1981,

2,140 5,000
850 1,230

2,140 1,000 1,000

1982
In 1981, $498,500 was provided for multicultural education activities in government and non-government schools in Queensland. In 1982 $605,000 will be provided. These funds

3,340 1,550 800 1,000
5,000 4,850

are distributed by the State Multicultural Education Coordinating Committee. The Commission does not have records of this distribution.

ELECTORATE OF LILLEY

Schedule 4 Attachment

School (non-government schools)
St Columban's Christian Brothers College, Albion St Margaret's School, Ascot St Pius' Primary School, Banyo St Joseph's College, Brisbane Boondall St John Fisher College, Bracken Ridge St Joseph's Catholic Primary School, Bracken Ridge St Kieran's School, Brighton Clayfield College, Clay field St Agatha's Primary School, Clayfield St Rita's College, Clayfield Our Lady Help of Christians School, Hendra St John's School, Northgate Corpus Christi College, Nundah St Joseph's School, Nundah Sacred Heart Primary School, Sandgate St Patrick's College, ShornC\iffe Holy Cross School, Wooloowin St Flannan's Parish Convent School, Zillmere

Migrant education program

1980

1981

$

$

5,334

900 7,403

New school

Ethnic ESL education program

1982

1981

1982

$

$

$

2,400 8,700

5,333

3,701

4,200

8,700

9,250

11,104 9,253

29,491 13,024

3,060

2,730

3204 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Schedule 5

SPECIAL EDUCATION

Integration Grants -
Holy Cross School, Wooloowin (The grant is made through the Catholic Education Office, Queensland)
St Joseph's Catholic Primary School, Bracken Ridge
Disadvantaged Schools ProgramSt John's Primary School, Northgate
St Kiernan's Primary School, Brighton

$ 52,553
3,500
3,000 3,264 4,800 6,781 6,780

(1982)
(1982)
(1980) (1981 ) (1982) (1981 ) (1982)

Uranium Enrichment Plant: Feasibility Study
(Question No. 5431)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(I) What size of enrichment plant is under investigation in the uranium enrichment feasibility study being conducted by the Uranium Enrichment Group of Australia.
(2) What would be the anticipated workforce during (a) each year of plant construction and (b) the production phase of such a plant.
(3) What would be the estimated cost of a plant of this kind.
(4) If the study referred to in part (I) is also investigating the establishment of a uranium conversion plant, what is the estimated (a) size, (b) workforce and (c) cost of the conversion plant.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy, who has responsibility for the uranium enrichment feasibility study, has provided me with the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Uranium Enrichment Group of Australia is basing its investigations on a plant size of I million SWU /per annum; however, to be economic, the capacity of the enrichment plant would need to grow from 200,000 SWU /year in the early 1990's to approximately I million SWU /year over a period of five to six years. The UEGA anticipates that the plant would eventually reach a capacity of 3 million SWU /year, twelve to fifteen years after start-up.
2(a) It is not possible to estimate the construction workforce on a yearly basis as construction of gas centrifuge enrichment plants is characterised by the continued addition of production units as demands grows. It is estimated, however, that the construction workforce could amount to some four hundred people on average, who may be able to enjoy semipermanency, possibly for more than 10 years depending on the rate of growth of the enterprise.
(b) It is estimated that the operational labour force would grow from some two hundred people to about five hundred.
(3) The capital cost of the plant when at I million SWU /year capacity would be in the region of $600m in 1982 dollars rising to $1.5 billion at a capacity of 3 million SWU/year.
4(a), (b), (c) The UEGA has not studied in detail the establishment of a uranium conversion plant, however this would be necessary if a full-scale feasibility study is undertaken and if it is apparent that no other organisation is interested in establishing a conversion plant.

A feasibility study of a uranium conversion plant at Pt. Pirie is being conducted by the Uranium Conversion Joint Venture comprising Broken Hill Associated Smelters Pty Ltd, Roxby Management Services Pty Ltd, British Nuclear Fuels Limited, and the South Australian Government.
It is estimated that an Australian uranium conversion plant should ideally have an initial capacity of around 1,000 tonnes U /year, rising to a maximum of 4,500 tonnes U /year by the time enrichment capacity reaches 3 million SWU /year (early in the 2000's).
The capital cost of such a plant would vary with capacity and the technology chosen, in the range of $60m-$120m (in 1982 dollars). Likewise, direct employment in normal operation would range from 100 to 300 people with probably around 500 during construction.
Australian Army: Promotion and Recruitment of Personnel
(Question No. 5440)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(I) How many non-commissioned personnel of the Australian Regular Army were promoted to officer level in each of the last 5 years.
(2) How many Army officers were recruited outside Australia in each of the last 5 years.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 1977-78-85, 1978-79-103, 1979-80-49, 1980-81-121,1981-82-131.
(2) This information is not kept in readily retrievable form. The Army has not actively recruited overseas during the last five years. A number of overseas people seek enlistment and a small number are offered appointment provided they meet certain requirements. For example, they must possess specialist skills in demand, immigrate at their own expense, gain residential status and apply for Australian citizenship.
Royal Australian Air Force: Promotion and Recruitment of Personnel
(Question No. 5441)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(I) How many non-commissioned RAAF personnel were promoted to officer level in each of the last 5 years.
(2) How many RAAF officers were recruited outside Australia in each of the last 5 years.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Non-Commissioned RAAF Personnel Promoted to Officer Level-

Financial Year
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

Number
50 40 37 40 90

(2) (a) RAAF Officers Recruited from Overseas--

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 3205

Financial Year
1977-78 1978-82

Number
2 Nil

(b) While former citizens of other nations resident in Australia have been appointed as RAAF officers during the past four years, the RAAF has not recruited officers from overseas sources since 1978.
National Library of Australia: Anti-apartheid Films
(Question No. 5450)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 21 October 1982:
Further to his answer to question No. 4976 (Hansard, 23 September 1982, page 1894) in which he stated that the National Library also tries to ensure, as far as possible, that mUltiple viewpoints on major issues are represented, what films have been circulated as an alternative viewpoint to films defending apartheid provided by the South African Embassy.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The National Library of Australia has advised me that the National Film Lending Collection includes several films which express views opposing apartheid and/or which attempt to objectively analyse apartheid. These films, which are available for loan, are:
Report on South Africa's Race Policy' (1978, 48 mins) which chronicles the position of blacks in South Africa and which, though it attempts to be objective, leaves the viewer with an understanding of injustice done to the black population.
South Africa: The White Laager (1977, 59 mins) which explains the collective psychology and history of the Afrikaaners and how these have resulted in apartheid. The film analyses their separatist attitude and shows the factors which caused the evolution of racism in South Africa.
Katutjuta (1974, 37 mins) is an African word meaning 'total insecurity'. This film shows what it means to blacks to have no voice in Parliament, no free choice in the work they do or where they live but, nevertheless to be required to contribute to South Africa's economic prosperity.
A further film, Generations of Resistence (1979-80, 52 mins) which documents the three hundred years struggle of native South Africans against the white influence in all aspects of their society, is on order for the Collection.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of the Vice-President of the ExecutiYe Council
(Question No. 5534)
Mr Holding asked the Vice-President of the Executive Council, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(1) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to control polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport

and disposal of PCBs and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etc., of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Sir James Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) None.
(2) Yes.
(3-6) See (1).
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of Defence Support
(Question No_ 5543)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 27 O,-ober 1982:
(1) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, et cetera, of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) PCBs exist in varying quantitites in all of the Department's munitions, aircraft, research and dockyard establishments. They are contained within a wide range of equipment including electrical transformers, heat exchangers et cetera.
(2) Yes.
(3) (a) There are not Commonwealth statutory requirements for control over PCBs. Varying requirements exist within the States under relevant antipollution legislation.
(b) It is departmental policy to abide by relevant State legislation where this is not inconsistent with Commonwealth requirements.

3206 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(4) Establishments are required to identify, isolate and retain waste PCBs and contaminated equipment pending establishment of safe methods of disposal. Arrangements are currently being made to have certain PCB wastes collected for incineration at sea by the vessel Vu/canlls during January 1983.
(5) No. There are no known cases where PCBs under the control of my Department have contaminated the environment.
(6) The Department has issued a Code of Practice for the safe handling, storage and disposal of PCB spillages and wastes. This document draws attention to the dangers of PCBs.
United Kingdom Atomic Tests Program
(Question No. 5618)
!\Ir Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 November 1982:
(I) Is it a fact that during October 1982 letters were sent to those persons who took part in the United Kingdom Atomic Tests Program at Monte Bello, WA., and Emu Clay Pan and Maralinga, S.A., in the I 950s and early I 960s.
(2) II" so, how many letters were sent and how many replies have been received.
(3) Of those who replied, how many stated that they (a) were involved in the tests and (b) had had their health affected through their participation in the tests.
(4) What were the reasons for sending the letter and the questionnaire.
(5) What assistance does the Government intend giving those persons suffering ill effects from the tests.
Mr Anthony~The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) In October 1982 over 8,000 questionnaires were sent to Australians who may have been associated with the British atomic tests in the 1950s or with minor trials which continued into the I 960s. By 17 November nearly 5,000 returns had been received and follow-up contact had yet to be made with non-respondents.
(3) to (5) Replies will not be examined until completion of follow-up action. As stated in the media release dated 20 October 1982, the questionnaires are being issued as part of a study to identify any connection, if it exists, between the atomic tests and the subsequent state of health of Australians who were associated with them. The results will be published and the Government will then consider what further action, if any, is required.
Manufactured Products: Imports
(Question No. 5697)
Mr Kent asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Did he say on 8 November 1982, at the opening of Melbourne's World Trade Centre, that the Australian Government believes it must take measures to liberalise trade, not restrict it; if so, will he assure the House and the tens of thousands of workers in Australian manufacturing industry who are facing unemployment because of the high volume of cheap foreign imports, that the Government does not intend to ease imports of manufactured products from overseas while Australian workers are faced with mass unemployment.

Mr Anthony~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In my address at the official opening of the International Trade Development Centre in Melbourne on 8 November 1982, I said that the Australian Government has put forward a package of proposals for consideration at the GATT Ministerial Meeting being held in late November. I indicated that the proposals covered areas such as protectionism, subsidies, safeguards, agriculture and dispute settlement and, in particular, involved a standstill on all industry assistance measures which have a trade distorting effect, to be followed by a windback of these measures. I pointed out, moreover, that the latter proposal is designed to break the vicious circle of protectionism and develop momentum for sustained economic recovery and growth. I said that such an approach was essential if the present economic malaise is to be overcome and the 'beggar thy neighbour' policies which we saw leading up to the economic chaos of the 1930s are to be avoided. A copy of my address is available from the Parliamentary Library. As has been stated on many occasions, the Australian initiative relating to protectionism concerns international protectionismthat is, a commitment by the major trading nations to reverse the trend of recent years towards increased protectionism. In this context, there has been no suggestion that Australia would act unilaterally. What I said in effect on 8 November was that the Australian Government believes that the major trading nations of the world must take measures to liberalise trade, not restrict it. The Government considers that a meaningful and lasting commitment of this type is necessary to facilitate an early return to sustained growth in world trade coupled with brighter prospects for economic recovery.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5705)
Mr Milton asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5710)
Mr Milton asked the Vice-President of the Executive Council, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since I January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Sir James Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5711)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since I January 1978; if so what are the details.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3207

Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
No.
Concatenated Order uf Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5718)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Ministe. attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since 1 January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No. I have no knowledge of or association with such a group.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5719)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since I January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I have attended no functions organised by the Concatenated order of Hoo-Hoo since 1 January 1978.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Prime Minister
(Question No. 4932)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(1) What arc the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice, from Senators and Members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr Malcolm Fraser--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) As Prime Minister I take a close personal interest in the answers given to any questions on notice asked by members of parliament. The arrangements within my Office or wlthlO the Department for providing information for the preparatIon of

answers may vary from time to time, and in any case would depend upon the nature of the question.
(2) to (4) In the period 25 November 1980 to 24 August 1982, 298 questions on notice were asked of the Prime Minister, the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister arld the Minister representing the Prime Minister in the Senate.
The answers to most of these questions appeared in Hansard and information as to the time that answers may have taken to prepare is available to the honourable member from study of the relevant issues of Hansard. Some of the questions have been quite detailed and necessarily the answers have taken time to prepare. Answers are however given as soon as the information is assembled, and I take this opportunity, with respect to Question No. 1972, to remind the honourable member of what the then Minister for Defence said in answer to the honourable member for Banks on 6 May 1932 (House of Representatives Hansard, pages 2327-8) about an exalT'ination. not yet completed, of a large number of documents relating to Australian defence force operations in Vietnam.
(5) As at 28 October 1982 37 questions asked before 25 August 1982 remained on the Notice Paper to be answered. All questions will be answered without avoidable delay.
Australian Military Operations and Civic Actions in Vietnam
(Question No. 4201)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 17 March 1982:
When can I expect an answer to Question No. 1972 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 28 April 1981.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 4932.
Vietnam: Answer to Question
(Question No. 4432)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(1) When may I expect an answer to Question No. 420 I which in turn sought an answer to Question No. 1972 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 28 April 1981.
(2) What are the reasons for the approximate delay of 12 months in answering question No. 1972.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 4932.
Vietnam: Answer to Question
(Question No. 4560)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
When may I expect an answer to Question No. 4432.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-j refer the honourable member t.o my answer to Question No. 4932.
Vietnam: Answer to Question
(Question No. 4707)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
When may I expect an answer to Question No. 4560.

3208 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Malcolm Fraser-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 4932.
Vietnam: Answer to Question
(Question No. 4958)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) When may I expect an answer to Question No. 4707.
(2) What are the reasons for the delay of approximately 16 months in answering Question No. 1972.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 4932.
Vietnam: Answer to Question
(Question No. 5102)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
In view of the fact that Question No. 1972 has been on notice since 28 April 1981 and there are a further 5 questions on notice all seeking an answer to Question No. 1972, will he now state whether he intends to provide an answer before this Parliament is prorogued or dissolved for the next election; if not, why not.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 4932.
Vietnam: Answer to Question
(Question No. 5158)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
When may I expect an answer to Question No. 5102.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 4932.
Vietnam: Answer to Question
(Question No. 5249)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on I 3 October 1982:
When may I expect an answer to Question No. 5158 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 22 September 1982.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 4932.
Vietnam: Answer to Question
(Question No.5419)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
When may I expect an answer to Question No. 5249 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 13 October 1982.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 4932.
Vietnam: Answer to Question
(Question No. 5636)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:

(I) When may I expect an answer to Question No. 5419 which first appeared on the Notice Paper on 20 October 1982.

(2) What are the reasons for the delay of over 18 months in answering Question No. 1972.

Mr Malcolm Fraser-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 4932.

Tax Evasion

Mr Howard-On 23 September 1982, (Hansard, page 1778) Mr Bowen asked the
Treasurer the following question, without notice:

I refer to the Supreme Court Action involving McCabe-

Lafranchi and Commercial Securities (Vic.) Pty Ltd before

Mr Justice Jenkinson. A judgment was delivered as far back as

14 June 1979. I refer to the fact that in His Honor's judgment

he said:

. one of the inspectors gave evidence that

the attention of officers of the Income Tax Department had

been directed. at the inspector's suggestion, by an officer of the

Corporate Affairs Office to a very large pile of documents

then standing in an enclosed but uncovered yard

Those documents were collected by officers of the Australian Taxation Office. They related to corporations engaged
in tax evasion. Is it a fact that no investigations were undertaken into these companies and the promoters of tax evasion schemes. even after the Australian Taxation Office had come
into possession of the documents? This occurred three years prior to the publication of the McCabe-Lafranchi report. Is it also a fact that nO investigations have been carried out with re-
spect to these companies and promoters since the publication of the McCabe-Lafranchi report"

The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commissioner of Taxation has confirmed that a large volume of documents and financial records were obtained by his officers in May 1979 from an open area where the records had been, for some time. subjected to the prevailing weather conditions.

As a result of this exposure to the elements some of the
material was so badly damaged that it had to be destroyed. In addition, examination of the remaining documents and
records indicated that in most instances the documents and records of the companies were incomplete. Taxation officers were able to obtain better information regarding the profits and sales of shares in the companies from other sources. As is
evident from my comments of 27 June 1982 on the McCabeLafranchi report, taxation investigations of stripped companies were conducted on a test case basis, that is. action
in regard to the bulk of companies awaited the outcome of attempted proceedings in representative cases. Legal advice had been sought in respect of such cases as early as 1974.

A special prosecutor has recently been appointed with the specific task of prosecuting persons responsible for stripping companies with pre-tax profits. Charges have already been laid against several persons. Other cases are under
investigation.

It should not be overlooked that the recently-introduced Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Bill will apply to many of the companies for which records are held. The proposed legislation will require the former owners of
companies that were stripped of pre-tax profits and promoters of those arrangements to effect recoupment of the evaded tax.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3209

Importation of Spanish Aircraft
Mr Howard~On 15 September 1982 (Hansard, page 1447) Mr Cunningham asked the Treasurer, without notice:
I asked on 24 August in relation to the importation of a Spanish aircraft by a Melbourne aviation company. At that time. I asked:
Did the Australian Taxation Office give a clearance to the importers to declare the aircraft to be new? Was the Taxation Office aware that the aircraft was declared at Customs as a demonstration aircraft? Is it a fact that the aircraft first flew in 1978? Is it a fact the aircraft was originally an armed forces aircraft in Spain? What criteria did the Taxation Office refer to in declaring the aircraft to be new"
The Treasurer said:
I am not in a position to answer that question today; I hope to be so tomorrow.
Is the Treasurer in a position to answer the question now? If not, why not?
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As I indicated in answer to the question without notice on 15 September 1982, the Commissioner of Taxation has advised me that the provisions of section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act preclude him from divulging information in relation to the particular aviation company.
The Commissioner was able to say, however, that it is a feature of the investment allowance concession that it applies only to new property. The income tax law defines new to mean not having previously been either used by any person or acquired or held by any person for use by that person. Reconditioned or wholly or mainly reconstructed property does not qualify as new property. Whether property that has, before acquisition, been a demonstration model would qualify as new property would depend upon the degree of use to which the property had been put for demonstration purposes.
Indexation of Personal Income Tax
(Question No. 3783)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
(I) Can he provide details on the proposed operation of full indexation of personal income tax based on movements in the Consumer Price Index and without any discounting in each year since 1975-76, and indicate in particular what (a) sum would constitute the tax free threshold given the operation of full indexation of personal income tax in each year since 1975-76, and (b) is the estimated number of taxpayers whose taxable income in 198 I-82 will be between $4, I95 and the threshold level calculated in (a) for 1982-82.
(2) What is the estimated amount of tax which will be paid by (a) those taxpayers identified in (I) (b). and (b) other individual taxpayers on their taxable income which falls within that range.
Mr Howard~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) If the income tax rate scales had been adjusted each year in line with movements in the average of the Consumer Price Index (All Groups) for the four quarters ended March of each year preceding the year of income, and without any

discounting, the tax-free thresholds which would have applied in each year since 1975-76 income year are as follows:

1976-77
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80
1980-81 1981-82

$
2,872 3,264 4,159 4,488 4.923 5,410

(b) The number of individuals who had taxable incomes in the range $4, I96 to $5,4 lOin the 198 I-82 year of income is estimated at 485,000.

(2) (a) The estimated amount of income tax payable for
the 198 I-82 income year by taxpayers referred to in part (I) (b) is about $90m.

(b) The estimated amount of income tax payable for the
198 I-82 income year on taxable income in the range $4, I96 to $5,410 by taxpayers other than those referred to in Part (I) (b) is about $2,300m.

Tax AYoidance Schemes
(Question No. 3784)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
What was the estimated loss to taxation revenue as a result of the successful operation of tax avoidance schemes and arrangements which have been the subject of specific anti-tax avoidance legislation since 1975-76, from the time the schemes commenced to operate or were discovered until the time the legislation took effect.
Mr Howard~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
It is not possible to estimate the loss to taxation revenue that may result from the tax avoidance schemes referred to in the honourable member's question. The Commissioner of Taxation does not accept that the vast majority of schemes which were entered into in the period referred to by the honourable member have achieved the result of avoiding tax. However, taxpayers involved in the schemes which the Commissioner contends are ineffective have generally exercised their rights of objection and appeal. The resulting disputes will probably ultimately have to be resolved in the courts. As the Commissioner indicated in the 60th Report to Parliament, the matter of bringing before the courts cases representative of the various schemes is a long drawn out process which is frequently prolonged by unco-operative scheme promoters. This remains true notwithstanding that, as stated in the 6 Ist Report, cases representative of 28 kinds of scheme were heard or awaited hearing during 198 I-82.
Until the efficacy of the various schemes has been determined by the courts, it is not possible to say how much tax has in fact been avoided. Recent decisions of the courts which have upheld the Commissioner's rejection of some schemes indicates that other schemes are also likely to be held to be ineffective. To safeguard the revenue against the possibility of the courts ultimately finding in favour of the taxpayers, action has been taken to outlaw the various schemes as soon as full details have been obtained.
Accordingly, although there was an amount of $I,035m unpaid and further substantial amounts paid against disputed liability in respect of all identified tax avoidance schemes (other than those involving companies that have been stripped of their pre-tax profits) as at 8 October 1982, it is confidently expected that, when the judicial processes available to taxpayers involved in those schemes have been exhausted, the amount of revenue actually lost as a result of

3210 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

the schemes will be substantially less than the figure mentioned. It is also relevant that legislation has been introduced that will increase from 10 per cent per annum to 20 per cent per annum the penalty for late payment of income tax.
Tax Deductibility: Local Government Rates and Water Rates
(Question No. 4168)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on II March 1982:
What would be the cost of introducing full tax deductibility in respect of (a) local government rates. and (b) water rates.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The estimated loss of income tax revenue that would have resulted if full tax deductibility had been allowed in respect of (a) local government rates (i.e. general and sewerage rates and (b) basic water rates (excluding excess water rates) for the 1981-82 income year are $320m and $75m respectively.
In arriving at the above estimates it has been assumed that local government rates and taxes up to $300 would cease to form part of concessional expenditures the excess of which over $1,590 at present entitles a taxpayer to a rebate.
Sales Tax
(Question No. 4666)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Did the Taxation Review Committee, which consisted of a number of this country's foremost tax experts, state on pages 19 and 20 of its report that the sales tax is a broad based tax.
(2) Did he recently state publicly that sales taxes are not regressive because higher rates of tax are imposed on luxury items than on necessities; if so, is he able to present statistical or other factual evidence to support this claim.
(3) Did he also state publicly that a broad based tax is regressive since the proportion of consumption to income normally falls as income increased.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. On page 19 of its Report the Taxation Review Committee stated:
'A distinction must be made here between "narrowbased" taxes falling upon only a few consumption goods and services (even though they be ones that absorb quite a significant proportion of total expenditure) and "broad based" taxes levied on very large ranges of goods and services even if not quite all consumption. The Australian sales and excise taxes are an obvious example of the former category; the British and Continental value-added taxes belong to the latter.'
(2) and (3) I have publicly stated that many commentators in asserting that the Australian sales tax is regressive overlook some significant features of the tax which offset the usually regressive impact of such taxes.
In the first place the rate structure is an important feature often overlooked. There are three rate classes, with rates of 7t, 20 and 32+ per cent. The 32t per cent class includes goods such as cameras, jewellery, television sets and record playing equipment. Items like household furniture and floor coverings, refrigerators, crockery and cutlery are only taxed at 7+ percent.
Even more significant, food, rent and power, on which the major proportion of lower incomes are spent, are not taxed nor has the Government proposed they be taxed. The sales tax is accordingly structured to offset regressive effects.
Taxation incidence studies rely upon family or household expenditure surveys for their basic data. Findings from such studies need to be treated with caution because of shortcomings in the surveys themselves, the absence of up-to-date information-the last household survey in Australia was in 1975-76 -and the need to make a number of broad assumptions (for example about the effect of the tax on consumption patterns) in deriving estimates of taxation incidence.
Subject to this important reservation, I am informed that a Treasury study, based on the 1975-76 ABS Household Expenditure Survey, found that a 2t per cent increase in tax on all goods subject to sales tax in the planned 1981-82 Budget would have had the following effects:

Proportion of gross income paid in tax

Average Weekly Household Income 1975-76

$080 $80-140 $140-200 $200-260 $260340

%

%

%

%

%

1.2

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.8

$340
% 0.7

The apparent regressive effect at the lowest income level has to be heavily qualified because there are statistical problems with the lowest income group. 12.2 per cent of households in this group received income as a result of selfemployment and many of those surveyed in 1975-76 had a significant, though temporary, reduction in income. Consumption for self-employed persons in this group was 3 times their income and probably reflects more closely income expectations or prior experience. If average income over a longer time period were taken into consideration these households would be placed in a higher income group. Mr Neil Warren of the University of NSW in fact stated in his study on incidence, the figures from which are often quoted by the Opposition, that 'it is therefore necessary to be guarded in the conclusions one reaches in respect of incidence estimates for the two lowest income groups'.

If the lowest income group were omitted it could be said that the changes to the sales tax arrangements proposed in the 1981-82 Budget would have had a roughly proportional effect on the bulk of taxpayers.
In a comprehensive incidence study it is not only necessary to examine how the tax was raised but also where the revenue was spent. The Asprey Taxation Review Committee suggested that the method generally used to calculate incidence, including the one used to calculate the above figures, overstate the regressive effect at low incomes. Income in the Household Expenditure Survey includes transfer payments received from the Government sector (for example by way of pension). The Asprey Committee suggested, however, that taxation incidence should be calculated by tax payments less transfer payments as a proportion of original income. This method of presentation reveals a significant redistribution in favour of the lowest income groups.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3211

A recent OECD study has also indicated that general consumption taxes in member countries (given the way they operate in those countries) are not regressive but tend to be more or less proportional.
Royal Commission into the Builders Labourers' Federation
(Question No. 4692)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) When was the Royal Commission into the Builders Labourers' Federation established.
(2) What (a) have been the payments to date and (b) are the amounts outstanding to (i) the Royal Commissioner Mr Justice Winneke, Q.c., (ii) counsel assisting, Mr P. O'Callaghan, Q.c. and (iii) other counsel.
(3) What is the total estimated cost of the Royal Commission and related court cases (a) to date and (b) in the foreseeable future.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 20 August 1981.
(2) The State of Victoria was responsible for the payments referred to, pursuant to arrangements between it and the Commonwealth.
(3) The cost of the Royal Commission was borne by Victoria. Related court cases which involved expenditure by the Commonwealth are the proceedings instituted by the BLF against Mr Winneke, the State of Victoria and the Commonwealth and a number of criminal prosecutions against officials of the BLF for breaches of the Royal Commissions Act 1902. The breaches were substantially in relation to refusals to answer questions at hearings of the Royal Commission in Canberra and Perth. Payments to Counsel in respect of the first mentioned proceedings totalled $20,545. Accounts have not yet been received from Counsel conducting the criminal prosecutions. Total Counsel's fees in respect of all the prosecutions are estimated to be $25,000.
Bankcard Charges
(Question No. 4700)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Is it a fact that Bankcard charges up to 5t per cent on every transaction purchase with Bankcard, and this charge is levied from the retail outlets and others who accept the card for purchases so that, if a cardholder buys something worth $100, the bank takes up to $5.50 and only pays the retailer $94.50.
(2) Is it also a fact that many bankcard holders pay off their debts within a month, or at the most 2 months, of buying the goods or services on their card so that the period of credit actually given to the cardholder in these cases is only I or perhaps 2 months.
(3) If so, is it a fact that (a) the bank can then advance the credit to someone else and again collect up to 5t per cent on the next transaction, (b) the same credit may be turned over up to 10 or 12 times in a year and the corresponding fees, of up to 5t per cent, charged every time or on every transaction, and (c) the true rate of return to Bankcard can therefore be as high as 66 per cent per annum on the $100 committed, that is $5.50 x 12 turnovers.
(4) Will the Government (a) take action against the banks to prevent them making these disguised profits at will and (b)

initiate a thorough investigation into Bankcard and other credit card systems, such as has been conducted in New Zealand recently, to assess the true profits made under these schemes and to evaluate the impact of the credit card revolution on our monetary system.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that Bankcard banks levy a merchant service fee on the sellers of goods and services where sales have been financed by Bankcard. The fee is a service charge designed to cover, inter alia, the administrative costs incurred by the Bankcard organisation in processing transactions and the administrative and other costs (including provision for bad debts) incurred by participating banks in relation to Bankcard. The size of the charge to individual merchants is a matter for each bank to determine in negotiation with its customers. However, I am advised that the charges commonly fall in the range of It per cent to 5t per cent of the merchant's total Bankcard turnover, depending on his monthly volume of Bankcard sales and the average value of his Bankcard transactions.
(2) I am advised that it is not uncommon for Bankcard users to repay their outstanding balance within their period of charge free credit, which, depending on the juxtaposition of the date of purchase and the monthly billing date, may extend to nearly two months. However, many Bankcard users do not repay as promptly as this; the available data for amounts financed and advances outstanding under Bankcard (including cash advances) suggest that, on average, balances remain outstanding for around five months.
(3) It is possible for the set of transactions hypothesised in the question to occur under certain very restrictive assumptions about dates of purchase, dates of payment and details of the merchant Bankcard transactions. The resulting hypothetical fee income of $66 per annum for each $100 of revolving credit would represent revenue earned.
Profits to the Banks concerned would be substantially less than the revenue figures cited because, as noted in (I), the merchant service fee is a charge for services rendered and the cost of providing those services needs to be taken into account.
(4) The authorities carefully examined the operations of the Bankcard scheme prior to its introduction in 1974. Also, in July 1980 the Trade Practices Commission completed a detailed study of the operation of the Bankcard scheme. As a result, a number of anti-competitive elements in the agreements between member banks in the scheme were amended, including to provide that each bank must take its own decision on charges it makes to merchants and cardholders and on the period of free credit it allows cardholders. Restrictive conditions on the participation to the Bankcard scheme were also removed.
Tax Avoidance and Evasion
(Question No. 4702)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the revelations of the McCabe-Lafranchi report recently tabled in the Victorian Parliament and a statement by the Prime Minister that there needs to be amendments to the Companies Act to minimise tax abuse; if so, will the Attorney General urgently review the need to strengthen the Companies Act if both corporate and tax abuse are to be minimised.

3212 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) Are there gaps in the Companies Act which lend themselves to tax abuse.
(3) In the light of the McCabe-Lafranchi report does the answer to Question No. 2866 (Hansard, 16 February 1982, pages 109-112) still apply.
(4) Would the provisions referred to in Question No. 2866 do much to strengthen the armoury in the battle against tax avoidance and evasion.
(5) Will the Attorney-General give urgent consideration to inserting in the Companies Act, as in force on I July 1982, the important and productive provisions set out in the Second Directive 68/151 on Co-ordination of Safeguards of the Council of the European Communities, which has recently been implemented and which has the force of law in the United Kingdom; if so, would the implementation of the undermentioned provisions be critically important if the Companies Act is to play an important role in the battle against tax avoidance: 6 (minimum capital); 7 (non-cash consideration); 10 (non-cash consideration-valuing assets); II (promoters); 15 (payment of dividends); 17 (serious loss of capital); 25 (authorisation of new share issues); 27 (non-cash consideration); 29 (pre-emptive rights to new shares issues), and 35 (maintenance of capital).
(6) Has the Attorney-Genera]'s attention also been drawn to my repeated representations to the former Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs asking for a number of amendments to the Companies Act and the elimination of obvious errors; if so, will the Attorney-General re-consider the matters referred to in parts (7) to (16) of this question as the basis for possible amendment to the Act.
(7) Does section 81 of the Companies Act apply to a contract made by a person as agent or trustee for a company which the person wrongly believes to be incorporated; if so, why.
(8) Does sub-section 81 (II) apply to contracts within sub-section (I) which are not ratified; if so, is the effect of subsection 81 (II) to exclude quasi-contractual remedies as well as contractual remedies.
(9) Does sub-section 81 (2) permit a company to ratify a contract notwithstanding that the parties to the contract have previously withdrawn from it or cancelled it.
(10) Bearing in mind sub-section 72 (I), can a class rights provision in a company memorandum be altered under subsections 125 (2), 126 (2) or 127 (2).
(II) If a company can alter a class rights clause in a memorandum, how can this be done, that is, by special or ordinary resolution.
(12) Once the class content has been obtained for a variation of rights contained in the (a) memorandum and (b) articles, does the company in general meeting then have to pass a resolution to alter the memorandum or the articles; if so, which sections of the Act require this to be done and what type of resolution, that is special or ordinary, is required to alter the (i) memorandum and (ii) articles.
(13) In sub-paragraph 129 (10) (h) (ii) should the reference to sub-section (9) be a reference to sub-section (12).
(14) Should sub-section 453 (I) and sub-section 453 (2) contain a provision similar to sub-paragraph 230 (I) (a) (iv).
(15) With respect to sections 33 to 37, should the Act include a requirement for all companies to raise and maintain a prescribed minimum nominal and paid-Up capital; if not, why not.
(16) Has action been taken to remedy the defects in section 117 referred to in parts (12) to (16) of Question No. 3213; if not, why not and will urgent action now be taken.

(17) Is it a fact that if the provisions referred to in parts (7) to (16) remain as structured they constitute an open invitation to the corporate manipulator to make transactions to the detriment of a company and its creditors.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) While I am aware of the McCabe-Lafranchi report, I am not aware of any statement by the Prime Minister indicating a need for amendments to the Companies Act.
(3) to (5) I have directed my Department to undertake further work on the provisions referred to by the honourable member so that I can discuss the matter at an appropriate time in the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities. The provisions referred to in item (5) of this question are the same as the articles set out in the answer to Question No. 2886. These provisions are also relevant to work that my Department will be doing to give effect to a decision by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities that the reforms made by the United Kingdom Companies Act 1980 in relation to maintenance of a company's capital, the issue of share capital, class rights and payment for share capital should be examined further in the context of an exposure draft of the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill for enactment in 1984 or subsequent years. I have, however, noted the matters raised by the honourable member in questions 2866, 3212 and 4075. I will bear these matters in mind, to the extent that they remain relevant, in the consideration by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities of possible amendments to the co-operative companies and securities legislation.
(6) I have nothing to add to my answers to items (7) to (16) of this question.
(7) to (9) I have asked my Department to undertake further work on these items so that I can discuss the matter at an appropriate time in the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities.
(10) to (12) The honourable member will be aware ofss. 35 to 37 of the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (see answer to items (17) to (22) of Question 3213). At its meeting in Sydney on 12 February 1982 the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities decided to defer a decision on a possible review of the provisions in the Companies Act 1981 relating to shareholder class rights (see in particular ss. 125, 126 and 127) pending a decision on whether or not to establish a Companies and Securities Law Review Committee.
(13) Section 94 of the Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 amended s-para 129 (10) (h) (ii) of the Companies Act 1981 so that the reference to sub-section (9) became a reference to sub-section (12).
(14) I have asked my Department to undertake further work on this item so that I can discuss the matter at an appropriate time in the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities.
(15) See answer to item (7) of Question 3213. The Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities agreed at a meeting in Sydney on 12 February 1982 that the proposal raised by the honourable member should be examined further in the context of an exposure draft of the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill for enactment in 1984 or subsequent years.
(16) I am aware of the answer to items (12) to (16) of Question No. 3213 and of the answer to Question No. 4075. I understand that the matters raised by the honourable member in relation to s. 117 of the Companies Act 1981 have been discussed with advisers to State Ministers and representatives of the NCSC. These discussions have also considered various other proposals in relation to s. 117 that have been received

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3213

from other persons. It is expected that the exposure draft of the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1983 that will be placed later this year before the Ministerial Council for its consideration will contain possible amendments of s. 117.
(17) There is nothing that I would wish to add to the answers I have given to items (7) to (16) of this question.
Sports Development Program
(Question No. 4753)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to concern in the community that this country's 6 million registered sports participants are not being provided for in current Federal Government allocations, particularly in respect of the Sports Development Program.
(2) Has the Government considered direct allocations to be made to individual sporting bodies to encourage these bodies to program for the health and fitness of the Australian nation.
(3) Has the Government any tax policy that would allow tax rebates for large organisations that agree to underwrite or assist these programs.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In the 1982-83 Budget, an amount of $3.7m was provided for Sports Assistance Programs. This Program incorporates, inter alia, what was previously the Sports Development Program. Of the $3.7m, $3.2m is for grants to national sporting organisations. The amount provided for this purpose in 1981-82 was $2.9m.
(2) The question of criteria for allocating grants to particular sporting organisations is the responsibility of my colleague, the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, who is advised on this matter by the Sports Advisory Council.
(3) Section 51 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, the general deduction provision, authorises deductions for outgoings incurred in producing assessable income or necessarily incurred in carrying on a business for the purpose of gaining such income, except to the extent that the outgoings are of a capital, private or domestic nature. Businesses that sponsor or assist sporting programs may, therefore, be able to claim deductions for expenditure so incurred where it can be established, to the Commissioner's satisfaction, that an appropriate nexus (involving for example, publicity or goodwill) exists between the expenditure and the derivation of assessable income.
Independent Audit: Department of Employment and Industrial Relations
(Question No. 4782)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The following audit procedures apply to grants made by the Department to non-government organisations:
(a) The organisation is required to submit to the Department financial statements either on an annual basis or within a specified period.
(b) The statement must be audited by a qualified public accountant who is not an officer, member or employee of the organisation.
(c) Continued payment of on-going grants is subject to the receipt of vouchers or audited statements for the previous period.
(d) The organisation must certify that the conditions for which the grant has been made have been met.
Recipients of Bureau of Labour Market Research sponsored research grants are required to provide statements of expenditure fully supported by receipts or vouchers in lieu of independent audit requirement at (b).
Mr H. M. Miller: Corporate Activities in Long Bay Gaol
(Question No. 5018)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
(1) Has the Attorney-Genera!'s attention been drawn to recent Press articles relating to the alleged continued corporate activities of company director, Mr H. M. Miller, currently serving a prison sentence in Long Bay Gaol.
(2) Does section 227 of the Companies Act prohibit a company director from being a director of, or otherwise taking part in, the management of a company whilst in prison; if not, will the Attorney-General take immediate steps to ensure that such company directors are prohibited from acting in this capacity whilst in prison.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, I am aware of some of the Press articles in question. The New South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission has provided the following information in relation to this matter:
(a) Mr Miller was convicted on five counts of aiding and abetting Computicket Australia Pty Ltd to breach section 178A of the N.S. W. Crimes Act 1900. On 7 May 1982 Mr Miller was sentenced to 3 years imprisonment with a non-parole period expiring on 28 February 1983.
(b) According to Companies Forms 43 lodged with the New South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission on 8 June 1982, Mr Miller resigned as a director of Harry M. Miller and Company Pty Ltd, Harry M. Miller Attractions (Aust.) Pty Ltd and Densate Pty Ltd on 7 May 1982.
(c) The New South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission has no evidence to suggest that Mr Miller has taken part in the management of any of these companies while serving his sentence in jail.
(2) The policy in relation to section 227 of the Companies Act 1981 has been under consideration in the context of the planned exposure draft of the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1983. It is hoped that the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities will later this year agree to this exposure draft being made available for public comment. While the current version of

3214 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

the exposure draft does not contain any amendments to section 227. the Attorney-Genera!'s Department has been directed to ensure that when the public comments on the exposure draft are being examined, consideration is given to the matters raised by the honourable member in relation to section 227.
Sales Tax ExemptioQs: Fermented Fruit Juices
(Question No. 5021)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 8 September 1982:
(I) Did the Minister Assisting the TreasIJrer in March 1977 acknowledge thaI exemption from sale, lax would be reviewed for ferm~nled fruil juices other than grape wine when further sales tax exemptions were being considered as a result of previous requests and the representations of the Member for Wide Bay on behalf of Mr J. Gianduzzo who, since 1972 and trading as Tropical Wines in Bundaberg, Queensland, has annually produced 8,200 gallons of nongrape wines unique in Australia.
(2) Has the Government increased sales tax twice since 1975011 these products, from 15 percent to 20 percent, despite Mr Gianduzzo's appeals each time, while leaving grape wine and 2.pple cider exempt each time.
(3) Did the Government reject these representations in framing the 1978-79 budget for fiscal reasons without giving any other justification for the inequity of the position.
(4) Has Mr Gianduzzo co-operated fully with Australian Taxation Office inquiries as to his coHs, income and lUrnover, and established to their satisfaction that he is providing an attraction to tourists, including those spending foreign currency, and producing a produ,t which conforms with standards required for grape wines including alcohol content.
(5) Is he able to say wh~ther the Gianduzzo family has worked efficiently from 8 am to 7 pm, 7 days a week, 363 days a year for a return well below that of sugar mill, bar. retailing or ot"er award workers so that their enterprise is threatened while they still sell quality products at prices lower before sales tax, but higher after sales tax, than those of large wine enterprises enjoying to~al sales tax exemption.
(6) Did he '"gain promise a review when sales taxes were next reviewed in his repl) to me of 14 January 1982 and acknowledgr the existence of anomalies a~d the need to correct them carefully to avoid creating more unspecified anomalies and to cons:der other unspecified factors.
(7) Has the Government's review on ,~ach occasion since 1977 aggravated the anomalies, th~ existence of which it acknowledges, by ir.creasing sales tax on the products of tropkal wines but not on grape wine and apple cider.
(8) Has the Government exempted from sales tax under item 36 of the First Schedule, Divisior. VI of the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act: stout; cider; nonaicoho:ic fruit juice bever::.ges; vermcuths and aperitifs; apricot and other fruit juice essence cocktails; manhattan cocktail anct martin. cocktail made by McWilliams Wine Pty Ltd; apricot, banana, cherry, maraschino and pineapple wine cocktails ma<1e by Chateau Rosevale; banana and prunell;; cocktails made by Hamiltolls Ewell Vineyards Pty Ltd; Brandivino, an Australian wine with imported additIves; Norman Golden Glow apricot, cherfY and pineapple cocktails, and Stonyfell apricot 31ld cherry wine cocktails.
(9) Will he (a) give Mr Gianduzzo reasons for this discrimination, (b) define any new anomalies that could possibly arise if a prompt favorable determination was made and (c) respond celevantly to my request of 5 February 1982 for definition of the other factors to be considered.

Mr HowardThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes, but the increase in sales tax on fruit wines resulted from general across-the-board increases in rates. In the 1981 and 1982 Budgets all sales tax rates were increased by 2.5 percentage points so that goods previously taxable at 15 percent became taxable at 17.5 percent as from 19 August 1981 and taxable at 20 percent as from 18 August 1982. As fermented fruit juices were amongst those goods affected by the general across-the-board increase in rates it was not practicable to consider their position in isolation from all other goods that were previously taxable at the same rate as fermented fruit juices.
These general increases in rates did not apply to exempt goods such as grape wine and apple cider produced in Australia. However, the rate of tax on imported grape wine and cider increased in line with locally produced fermented fruit juices.
(3) In framing tile 1978-79 Budget the Government gave consideration to a wide range of representations for tax relief or other form of assistance. It was not a question of the Government rejecting these representations including those of Mr Gianduzzo but whether in the context of the overall Budget it was possible to grant some form of tax relief and, if so. what form it was to take.
(4) The Commissioner of Taxation informs me that he is not aware of any lack of co-operation on the part of Mr Gianduzzo.
(5) I am not personally aware of Mr Gianduzzo's work situation but the point has been made to me in representations on the matter.
(6) Yes.
(7) I have explained the Government's position in my answer to question 2.
(8) The goods referred to relate to decisions made by the Commissioner of Taxation under item 36 and are contained in the pubiication titled Sales Tax Exemptions and Classifications.
(9) (a) There is no discrimination in favour of the products listed in question 8 as against those produced by M r Gianduzzo. With the exception of stout and cider, all of the alcoholic products ruled to be exempt are made principally of grape wine and references to apricot, banana, cherry pineapple incicate the kind of flavourings added. These products are noi fruit wines of the kind produced by Mr Gianduzzo. Stout is exempt under item 36 (I), being a beer while cider is specifically exempted by item 36 (2). Wines produced from fruits other than the grape or from other products such as honey (mead) or rice (saki) are taxable.
(b) If fruit wines were to be exempted, the exemption would have to apply to both the imported and local product to avoid infringing the GATT This could have repercussions in relation to the discrimination between local wines and overseas wines and also the existing sales tax discrimination betw~en beer and cider of local and overseas origin. Those of Australian origin were exempted prior to Australia becoming a party to the GATT The exemption of imported products would reduce the element of protection at present enjoyed by Australian beer, wine and cider because oftlleir exemption.
(c) Other factors that need to be tak~n into account by the Government include the overall incidence of taxation including excise uut), customs duty and income tax and the general economic position of the industry. Wine producers, for example, incurred substantial income tax liabilities as a result of a change in the valuation of wine stocks some years ago and are only now recovering from that change.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3215

Australian Atomic Energy Commission: Reprocessing of Aluminium Fuel Elements
(Question No. 5160)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to pages 51 and 52 of the Australian Atomic Energy Commission's annual report for 1965-66 where it is stated that it had been necessary to reprocess several hundred aluminium fuel elements containing a total of one kilogram of uranium 233 used it' physics experiments; that some of these elements had become swollen and defective and all were becoming difficult to handle because of the increasing radiation levels due to daughter products of the contained uranium 233; that, a small laboratoryscale recycle facility was built and operated to produce decontaminated uranium dioxide for refabrication into new fuel elements, and that reprocessing and reconversion had been completed with a loss of approximately 1 per cent of uranium 233.
(2) In view of the Minister's answer to Question No. 4469 (Hansard, 18 August 1982, pages 669-70), what were the physics experiments in which the aluminium fuel elements referred to in part (1) were used.
(3) What volume of material has been reprocessed and reconverted in the recycle facility referred to in part (1). or any other facility, at Lucas Heights, NSW.
(4) What is the volume and nature of any materials (a) extracted and (b) stockpiled as a result of reprocessing and reconversion of this kind.
(5) What is the volume and nature of any waste materials produced and what practice was adopted for the disposal of material of this kind.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) The answer to Question No. 4469 referred specifically to spent fuel elements from the HIFAR reactor at Lucas Heights and has no bearing on this question.
The physics experiments referred to in the AAEC's Annual Report for 1965-66 were part of a program initiated in 1963-64 to obtain basic neutron data on the behaviour of various fuel moderator mixtures in high temperature gas cooled reactors. These experiments were also referred to in the AAEC's Annual Reports for 1963-64 (pages 34, 35) and 1964-65 (pages 38 and 40).
For the purpose of these experiments, one kg of U233, containing small amounts of U232 as an impurity, was obtained on lease from the USA and fabricated into fuel elements. Two sets of experiments were carried out, using the AAEC's MOATA reactor. In the first, sub-critical fuel assemblies (simulating conditions in a full, cold, reactor core) provided a means to check nuclear data and test methods of computing reactor core characteristics. In the second, samples representative of reactor core composition and sufficiently large to establish the reactor's nuclear properties were placed within MOAT A to measure neutron reaction rates.
(3) See (2). Initially the one kg of U233 was fabricated into 205 fuel elements, each containing an average of 4.85 grams of U233.
Fission product activity in the U233 was negligible because all experiments were carried out at extremely low level fission rates. However, as the decay of U232 present in the U233 resulted in the growth of daughter products and increasing

levels of gamma radiation, and also because during the experiments a small number of fuel elements had suffered damage, in 1966 all these fuel elements were processed to remove the radioactivity arising from the decay of U232 and the recovered uranium oxide was refabricated. 177 fuel elements were fabricated, averaging 5.05 grams of U233, as well as 20 half plates and 2 quarter plates. In 1967 the entire batch of elements was processed a second time in order to reduce the radioactivity arising from the growth of the decay products from U232, so that the material could be conveniently transported to the USA at the termination of the lease.
There has been no other reprocessing and reconversion of fuel clements at this or any other facility at Lucas Heights. The facility used for processing the U233 has been dismantled.
(4) (a) Overall recovery of uranium present after dissolution was about 98 per cent.
(b) None of the U233 was stockpiled: it was returned to the lessor in 1967.
(5) Solid waste containing 3,45g of U233 was obtained from treatment of processing solutions, and a further 3.34g of U233 are stored in solution. The solid waste has been placed in storage facilities at Lucas Heights. Contaminated solid materials such as gloves, tissues, equipment, aluminium powder and graphite containing 16.06g of U233 are also held in storage facilities at Lucas Heights, whilst contaminated materials containing a further 4.04g of U233 were disposed of in the Little Forest burial ground prior to its closure in 1968.
Family Foundation SA Inc.
(Question No. 5164)
Mr Scott asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to an organisation in South Australia calling itself the Family Foundation SA Inc.
(2) Is he able to state (al when this organisation was formed, (b) the names of its directors, (c) how it is funded and (d) what is its function.
(3) Are contributions to this organisation tax deductible; if so why.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) I do not have this information.
(3) The Commissioner of Taxation has advised that donations to the organisation are tax deductible because the Family Foundation (SA) Incorporated is recognised as a public benevolent institution for the purposes of section 78 (I) (a) (ii) of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Australian Bureau of Statistics: Printing by Private Contractor
(Question No. 5166)
Dr Theophanous asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(1) Is much of the printing of the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) and of sections of the Treasury now no longer done in-house, but sent out to private contractors.
(2) Has this method of printing Government material resulted in considerable savings of public revenue or is it more costly.
(3) If it is more costly, has the ABS been required to absorb the extra costs by reducing its services and the quality of its collections.

3216 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(4) If it is not more costly, can he give an assurance that no reductions in the quantity and quality of services by the ABS are envisaged by the Government in the next 12 months.
Mr Howard~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Australian Bureau of Statistics
(I) The bulk of ABS printing has long been performed either by the AGPS or by commercial printers. Recently, the remaining in-house printing has been placed with commercial printers.
(2) The measures referred to was introduced as a result of recommendations of the Printing Resources Rationalisation Group which indicated that total outlays to the Commonwealth will be reduced.
(3) Not applicable.
(4) The quantity and quality of services provided by the ABS in the next 12 months will not be reduced as a result of the discontinuance of in-house printing.
Department of Treasury
(I) The Department does not have any in-house printing facilities. The bulk of the Department's printing is undertaken by the AGPS and to a lesser degree by commercial printers.
(2) No change.
(3) Not applicable.
(4) Not applicable.
Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of the Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 5168)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange line telephones.
(5) What was the cost of (a) rental; (b) metered calls; and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PM BX serve the same purpose.
Mr Anthony~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Thirty-one (31) officers.
(2) (a) Department of Trade and Resources: Secretary; Regional Director, Sydney; Deputy Director, Sydney; Assistant Director, Sydney (3 positions); Journalist Grade A I, Sydney; Officer-in-Charge, visits Section, Sydney; Administrative Officer, Sydney; Regional Director, Melbourne; Assistant Secretary, Trade Publicity Branch, Melbourne; Regional Director, Perth; Assistant Director, Perth
(b) Export Development Grants Board: Executive Member; Assistant Director, Sydney
(c) Australian Uranium Export Office: Chairman (d) Australian Overseas Projects Corporation: Managing Director; General Manager (Operations)

(e) Export Finance and Insurance Corporation: Managing Director; Deputy Managing Director; General Manager; Assistant General Manager (Capital Goods); Manager (Victoria and Tasmania Branch)
(f) Joint Coal Board: Chairman; Member (2 positions); Secretary; Manager (EDP Services); Senior Motor Mechanic; Driver; Buildings Services Officer, Grade I (paging beeper)

(3) Yes.

(4) The rationale varies with operating requirements and equipment available in the various locations. Factors involved include:
Those very senior officers who have a need for guaranteed access to the telephone network at all times;
Where installed equipment is STD barred and officers have a demonstrated need for STD access at times when the switchboard is not staffed;
Officers with a regular requirement for access to the telephone network at times when a manual switchboard is not staffed;
Operational requirements dictate a need (paging beeper for Buildings Services Officer).

(5) (a) $4,646, (b) $19,719, (c; $401

(6) No.

Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 5172)

Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.

(2) What are the designations of these officers.

(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected toa PABX or PMBX.

(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange line telephones.

(5) What was the cost of (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line tele-
phones for 1981-82.

(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose.

Mr Peacock~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) 76.

(2) Secretary, Deputy Secretaries, First Assistant Secretaries, Collectors, Senior Assistant Collectors, Assistant Collectors, Sub-Collectors, Inspectors Detection Prevention In-
telligence and ADP, and officers of varying classifications who are involved directly with operational exercises of the Aus-
tralian Customs Service.

(3) Yes. However some extensions do not have 'in dial' facilities.

(4) Operational activities, confidentiality, security, twenty four hour access, and direct access.

(5)-

Rental
Metered Calls Trunk Calls
Total

$ 11,582
63,728 579
75,889

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3217

(6) No. A silent extension number would not meet all the needs speci fied in (4) above
Income Tax Appeals
(Question No. 5198)
Mr Maher asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many income tax appeals are pending in each State before (a) a Board of Review, or (b) a court.

(2) How many requests for a reference or appeal are awaiting consideration by the Commissioner of Taxation or a Deputy Commissioner.
(3) What is the anticipated delay in having an appeal heard before a Board of Review.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The position in respect of income tax appeals as at 30 June 1982 was as follows:

(a) Boards of ReviewHeard awaiting decision Part heard or adjourned Awaiting hearing
(b) CourtsAwaiting decision Awaiting hearing
Total

N.S.W.

Vic.

Qld.

S.A.

WA.

Tas. A.c.T.

Total

1

3

1

10

2

1

19

8

12

2

4

7

3

36

143

396

59

42

56

11

61

768

152

411

62

56

65

12

65

823

3

2

1

56

38

32

20

14

59

38

32

22

15

7 166

6

173

(2) There were 25,569 requests for reference to Boards of Review and 1,615 appeals to courts (representing less than 0.4 per cent of annual issues of assessment) on hand in the Australian Taxation Office as at 30 June 1982. Of those cases, 6,612 references and 602 appeals were deferred either at the taxpayer's request or pending the outcome of decisions in other cases or pending the outcome of enquiries or correspondence already in course. Of the remaining cases only a small proportion will need to be referred to the Boards of Review or the Courts. The vast majority will be resolved in discussions between the taxpayers concerned and the Australian TaxationOffice.
(3) The period which can elapse between the receipt by the Taxation Office of a request for reference to a Board of Review and the time when the matter is heard by the Board varies in each case due to a variety of factors. At present there are three Boards of Review. No. I Board is based in Sydney, No.2 in Melbourne and No.3 in Brisbane. Each Board also travels to other capitals and (as the need arises) to provincial cities and towns. Because of this it frequently happens that the delay in hearing cases in the less populous States is less than it is in the 'home' cities of the respective Boards. For these and other reasons it is extremely difficult to make an accurate forecast of the time it may take to have a case heard by a Board of Review. However, based on the historical annual output of the three Boards (and excluding deferred cases) it is estimated that as at 30 June 1982, No. I Board had approximately 18 months work on hand, No.2 Board had about 28 months and No.3 Board about 9 months.
Members oCParliament: Tax Evasion
(Question No. 5359)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
Has he sought assurances from Government members and senators that they have not (a) engaged in so-called bottomof-the-harbour and other tax evasion schemes and (b) hired advice on tax minimisation schemes from promoters of so called bottom-of-the-harbour and other tax evasion schemes; if so, what was the nature of those assurances.

Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The conduct of members of parliament in relation to their personal financial affairs is a matter for members and senators themselves.
The Report of the Committee of Inquiry concerning Public Duty and Private Interest recommends a framework of arrangements for dealing with the public duty and private interests of members of parliament.
The Government has announced that it supports the thrust of the Bowen Report. It will shortly be announcing its specific proposals in relation to members of parliament. All members of parliament are aware of the contents of the report.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Attorney General's Department
(Question No. 5537)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etcetera, of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.

3218 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (4) I refer the honourable member to the answer supplied by the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment to questions Nos 1990-2000, 2002-2005, 2007-2015 (Senate Hansard of 12 October 1982, page 1308).
(3) The legislation administered by me does not contain any such conditions. In the circumstances an occasion to stipulate other arrangements has not arisen.
(5) No.
(6) Having regard to the information provided above, no such steps are necessary.
Inquiries into Transport Problems
(Question No. 3986)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 23 February 1982:

(I) What royal commissions or other specialised inquiries have been initiated by the Government into transport problems between the States and/or within Australia between II November 1975 and the date of preparation of the answer to the question.
(2) What was the date of the (a) initiation and (b) report to the Government of each specialised inquiry or royal commission referred to in part (I).
(3) What information is he able to provide on (a) the costs associated with the conduct of and (b) the actions taken by the Government to implement the recommendation of each of the specialised inquiries and/or royal commissions referred to in part (I ).
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question relating to my portfolio is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) Many inquiries and studies into surface transport problems have been initiated and it would require considerable resources to provide information on each of them or to examine each to establish if it falls precisely within the terms of the question. The information set out in the following table, which deals with the period up to 16 July 1982, covers inquiries that publicly invited submissions. If the honourable member wishes to have further infomation on any specific inquiry or study I will endeavour to oblige him.

STUDIES AND INQUIRIES INITIATED INTO AVIATION PROBLEMS
11 November 1975 until 16 July 1982
(To limit resources used on researching information, the response has been restricted to those inquiries that sought public submissions )

Date of

Title of inquiry

Initiation of inquiry

Report

cdst of inquiry

Action taken on recommendation

Inquiry into the Revitalisation of Australian Shipping (Sir John Crawford)

28 May 1978

11 November 1981

$30,000 (approximately)

Inquiry into Representation
of Long-Distance Owner Drivers (Sir David Hay)

21 November 1979

4 March 1980

Not separately identified-funded from within Department of Transport appropriations

The Government decided that the Minister for Transport should hold discussions with shipowners, potential shipowners, and the
maritime unions to explore a package generally along the lines of the recommendations of the Report. Following these discussions the Minister for Transport and Construction will report the outcome to the government. Action is contingent on a positive response from the industry as a whole. The Report has served as a catalyst in encouraging industry to come to terms with its representational problems.

Inquiries into Transport Problems
(Question No. 3986)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 23 February 1982:
(1) What royal commissions or other specialised inquiries have been initiated by the Government into transport problems between the States and/or within Australia between 11 November 1975 and the date of preparation of the answer to the question.

(2) What was the date of the (a) initiation and (b) report to the Government of each specialised inquiry or royal commission refered to in part (1).
(3) What information is he able to provide on (a) the cost associated with the conduct of and (b) the actions taken by the Government to implement the recommendation of each of the specialised inquiries and/or royal commissions referred to in part (1).
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question, insofar as it relates to my portfolio, is as follows:

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3219

(I), (2) and (3) Many inquiries and studies into aviation problems have been initiated and it would require considerable resources to provide information on each of them or to examine each to establish if they fall precisely within the terms of the question. The information set out in the following

table, which deals with the period up to 16 July 1982, covers inquiries that publicly invited submissions. If the honourable member wishes to have further information on any specific inquiry or study I will endeavour to oblige him.

STUDIES AND INQUIRIES INITIATED INTO AVIATION PROBLEMS
11November 1975 until 16 July 1982
(To limit resources used on researching information, the response has been restricted to those inquiries that sought public submissions)

Date of

Title of inquiry

Initiation of inquiry

Report

Cost of inquiry

Action taken on recommendations

General Aviation Study

2 November 13 March 1981 1978

Independent Public Inquiry 21 May 1980 into Domestic Air Fares (Mr
W. Holcroft,

15 February 1981

Not separately identified-funded from within Departmental appropriations
$344,000 (approximately)

General Aviation Study was publicly released by then Minister for Transport on 13 March 1981 on the basis that there was no Government commitment to its recommendations pending industry consideration of the report and consultation on its cost recovery recommendation through the Aviation Industry Advisory Council (AVIAC). On 16July 1981, the Minister announced that the Government had decided not to take up the cost recovery recommendations of the Study. The non-cost recovery recommendations, other than those dealing with airport traffic priorities and noise abatement, were subsequently referred to AVIAC for consideration. Those matters are currently under review by the council. On the basis of the basic thrust of the Holcroft recommendations, the Government substantially revised the air fare formula for TAA and Ansett on I April 1981. A study undertaken by Price Waterhouse Associates Pty was commissioned in July 1981 to further address some cost allocation issues not finalised by the Holcroft Inquiry. The Government subsequently established the Independent Air Fares Committee which is now solely responsible for the setting and determination of domestic airfares for all regular public transport passenger operators. The powers of the Minister to approve domestic air fares previously held under Air Navigation Regulation 106 were repealed upon commencement of the Independent Air Fares committee Act 1981.

3220 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Title of inquiry Domestic Air Transport Policy Review
Major Airport Needs of Sydney (MANS) Study Port Phillip Airport Needs (PPAN) Study House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation Inquiry into Aircraft Noise

Date of

Initiation of inquiry

Report

Cost of inquiry

Action taken on recommendations

3 July 1977

Part I: Trunk Route
Services and the Two Airline Policy March 1978
Part II: Regional and
Local/Commuter Air Services September 1978

Not separately identified-funded from within Departmental
appropriations

II November Commonwealth

Not separately

1976

officers reported in identified-joint

December 1979

Commonwealth /State

study, involving resources of

numerous bodies

21 August 1977 March 1981

Not separately

identified-joint

Commonwealth/State

study, involving resources of

numerous bodies

21 June 1982 Inquiry still in course

Major recommendations of the Review formed the basis of the Airlines Agreement Act 1981, which ratified the 1981 Airlines Agreement, and the Airlines Equipment Act 1981, both of which were passed by the Parliament in June 1981. Other changes not requiring specific legislation have also been implemented. For example, the Government's import policy restrictions on aircraft have been revised in accordance with Review recommendations. Action is continuing to implement other Review recommendations: for example, a new licence category, the supplementary airline licence, is being introduced to formally recognise the commuter sector of the industry. Recommendations still under consideration
Joint Governmental monitoring proposed as recommended

National Crimes Commission
(Question No. 4073)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) Does he recall my repeated questions relating to the urgent need to set up a National Crimes Commission and his repeated rejection of this proposal.
(2) Is it a fact that Commonwealth responsibility for crime is divided between his Department, the Attorney-Genera!'s Department and the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs.
(3) If so, will he take immediate steps to co-ordinate the respective responsibilities under one authority.
(4) Is there a need for combined Federal/State initiatives in crime prevention; if so, will he give urgent consideration to the possibility of special powers being given to a composite Federal/State body to study and investigate organised corporate, white collar and international crime with a view to developing model laws and practices which could lead to a national approach to overcome the problem.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) to (4) The Commonwealth Government has, for some time, recognised the need for combined Federal/State initiatives in the enforcement and prevention of crime.
On 28 April 1982, in answer to a question without notice on this subject, the Prime Minister stated that the Government was considering the possible establishment of a Crimes Commission to tackle the problems posed by organised crime (Hansard page 1927). The issue of a Crimes Commission has also been taken up with the States through the Premiers' Conference, the Australian Police Ministers' Council and the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General.
On 21 October 1982 the Acting Attorney-General introduced, into this House, a Bill to set up the National Crimes Commission. The Bill contains several mechanisms to facilitate joint investigations by the Commonwealth, States and Northern Territory. I am hopeful that the States and Northern Territory will take this opportunity to participate in joint inquiries as appropriate.
Fluoridation of Water
(Question No. 4829)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3221

(I) Has his attention been drawn to the report of a Committee to the Quebec Minister of the Environment on 30 November 1979.
(2) If so, does the report confirm the mutagenicity of fluoridated water, with increased cancer mortality, and recommend suspension of fluoridation and further evaluation of the risks.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No. The report contains no convincing evidence that fluoridation of water increases mutagenicity and mortality from cancer. It recommends the suspension of a Bill dealing with compulsory fluoridation in Quebec until fluoridation has been subjected to further investigation.
With regard to mutagenicity, the extensive report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Fluoridation of Victorian Water Supplies (1980) summarises reports of studies in Britain in 1958 and 1962, and in the United States of America in 1974 and 1976, which show no association between water fluoridation and the incidence of congenital malformations. Details of a further investigation in England, which also shows no such association, were published in 'Community Medicine': 2.p.190, 1980.
The allegation of a link between fluoridation of water and cancer led to a number of investigations all of which show no association between fluoridation and cancer. These investigations were carried out in the United States of America, United Kingdom, Canada, New Zealand and Australia (New South Wales).
An investigation throughout Canada which was conducted by the Canadian Department of National Health and Welfare was completed in 1978. It was concluded that '. . . the maintenance of the fluoride level of potable water at approximately I mg/L is the most efficient procedure to decrease the incidence of dental caries, and such a level of fluoride poses no risk to the health of Canadians'.
Fluoridation of water in Quebec is continuing though it is no longer mandatory.
Invalid Pension: Mr Spiros Stroumbis
(Question No. 5008)
Mr Maher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
(I) Why was Mr Spiros Stroumbis of 177 Lyons Road, Drummoyne, New South Wales, refused an invalid pension.
(2) What was the date on which Mr Stroumbis applied for an invalid pension.
(3) On what date will Mr Stroumbis' appeal be heard and why has it been so long delayed.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I )-(3) Having regard to the confidentiality provisions of the Social Security Act I am unable to provide the information sought for the public record. I have, however, written separately to the honourable member, who has previously made representations to me on behalf of Mr Stroumbis.

Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Precedence under Commonwealth Protocol
(Question No. 5063)
Mr Scholes asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) What order of precedence has been accorded to the Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly under Commonwealth protocol.
(2) Have the States been asked to determine, or have they already determined, the order of precedence of the Speaker of the Assembly under State protocol.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) All members of the House of Assembly of the Australian Capital Territory are accorded precedence at item 32 in the Table of Precedence of the Commonwealth of Australia.
(2) Determination of the order of precedence under State protocol is a matter for each State. Changes to the Commonwealth Table of Precedence (including those relating to the Australian Captial Territory House of Assembly) are notified in the Commonwealth Gazette and that published information is available to the States.
Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly: Precedence at non-Commonwealth Functions
(Question No. 5076)
Mr Scholes asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
Does the Speaker of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly have precedence at non-Commonwealth functions in the Australian Capital Territory above the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Not if the Table of Precedence for the Commonwealth of Australia is followed.
Participation in the Public Service Board's Interchange Program
(Question No. 5079)
Mr Hayden asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) How many scientists, technologists and engineers have participated in the Public Service Board's Interchange Program in each year since its inception.
(2) From which Government laboratories, and in which fields did these participants come.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Interchange Program was established late in 1977. I am informed by the Public Service Board that since then, the following numbers of 'scientists, technologists and engineers' from the Australian Public Service have taken part:

3222 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Scientists-Research Scientists Scientists (i.e. "Science 1-5") Experimental Officers Engineers Surveyors Medical Officers Draughtsmen Technical Officers Other (Arboriculturists, Veterinary Officers)
Total

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

Total

6

8

4

3

22

2

2

2

8

2

I

I

4

7

9

5

4

3

29

3

2

6

2

3

2

3

2

8

2

2

17

27

19

13

8

86

Note: Where an Interchange placement spends two or occasionally three years it has been counted in all years. In total fifty officers in these categories have taken part in the program. Of these, thirty-two officers had placements which spanned more than one year.

Scientists-- Research Scientists
Scientist (i.e. "Science 1-5")
Experimental Officers Engineers Surveyors Medical Officers
Draughtsmen Technical Officers Other (Arboriculturists,
Veterinary Officers)

No. Department

Field of expertise

II Department of Defence Aeronautical Research Laboratories Central Studies EstablishmentDefence Research Centre--Salisburv Electronics Research Laboratory' Weapons Systems Research Laboratory Materials Research Laboratories
7 Former Department of the Northern Territory, Mines Branch
Department of Health, Therapeutics Division Department of National Development &
Energy Bureau of Mineral Resources Department of Primary Industry
Field Crops Division Department of Science & Technology Australian Government Analytical
Laboratories (WA) Bureau of Meteorology
2 Materials Research Laboratories
16 Department of Defence Support Government Aircraft Factories
4 Department of Administrative Services Australian Survey Office
3 Department of Health Tamworth Pathology Laboratory
Department of Social Security Queen Elizabeth II Rehabilitation Centre
Department of Veterans' Affairs Repatriation General Hospital,
Greenslopes
4 Department of Defence Support Government Aircraft Factories
Department of Veterans' Affairs Repatriation General Hospital, Heidelberg
2 Department of the Capital Territory City Parks Administration
Department of Primary Industry Bureau of Animal Health

organic chemistry operational analysis electronic research materials research aerodynamics weapons systems research fuel technology geology pesticide research copper resources research pharmacology meteorological diagnostics entymology
stress analysis weapon systems research aircraft design project management survey techniques (including
computerisation of records) digital topographic mapping pathology, rehabilitation medicine cancer therapy
aircraft design
tumour cell culture techniques
plant propogation and pest control research meat inspection

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 3223

United States of America Ports: Access to Nuclear-armed and/or Nuclear-powered Ships
(Question No. 5163)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) Is he able to say whether any cities in the United States of America deny access to their ports to nudear armed and/or nucl~ar-powered ships; jf so, (a) what cities. and (b) on what grounds is access denied.
(2) Is he also able to say whether any countries involved in the NATO alliance refuse access to their ports to nuclearpowered and/or nuclear-armed ships; if so. (a) which countries and (b) on what grounds is access denied.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 1 am informed that no cities in the Unit~d States of America deny access to their ports by United States Navy ships in the categories mentioned. However, some ports in the Un:ted Stat~s are not visited by conventional or nuclearpowered warships either because there is no operational requirement to do so or because of particular port characteristics such as channel depth, accessibility, port services, and so on. These requirements are assessed by national. not local authorities. The criteria employed by the United States authorities in deciding visits by United States Navy nuclearpowered ships to United States domestic ports are identical with those employed for vis:ts to foreign ports.
(2) I am informed that no NATO country imposes a blanket ban on visits by nuclear-powered warships. Requests for port entry are handled bilaterally between the governments concerned on a case-by-case basis employing safety and environmental criteria corresponding to those introduced by Australia in 1976. Visits by nuclear-armed ships are permitted by most NATO countries. However. I understand that Denmark and Norway maintain policies of not permitting the stationing of nuclear weapons in their territory in peace time and look to other governments to respect their nuclear policies. The United States. Britain and France follow a policy of neither confirming nor denying the presence of nuclear weapons in particular ships.
Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 5167)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected toa PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange line telephones.
(5) What was the cost of (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone line with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose.
Mr Howard--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2) Thirty-two officers currently have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices. Their designations are:
Department of the Prime Minister and CabinetSecretary, Deputy Secretaries (2), Assistant Secretary, Office of Ceremonial and Hospitality, Executive Assistant, Parliamentary Liaison Officer, Duty Officer.
Government House-Official Secretary to the Governor General, Deputy Official Secretary to the'Governor-General, Administrative Secretary to the Governor-General, Director Honours Secretariat.
Ombudsman's Office-Commonwealth Ombudsman, Deputy Commonwealth Ombudsman (2), Senior Assistant Commonwealth Ombudsman.
Auditor-General's Office-Auditor-General, First Assistant Auditor-General, Assistant Auditor-General (4).
Public Service Board-Chairman, Commissioner (2), Deputy Commissioner, Chairman, Promotions Appeals Committees (5), ACOA Nominee Promotions Appeals Committee, Administrative Officer Promotions Appeals Committee.
(3) Yes.
(4) To provide after hours access where a manual switchboard is installed, for confidentiality, to augment the number of lines available when switchboards could become overloaded and to provide a back-up in the event of a switchboard malfunction.
(5) The cost of the above lines was: (a) $5,309; (b) $28,708; (c) $1,745.
(6) No.
Department of Aviation: Re-establishment
(Question No. 5219)
Mr Morris asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
What were the reasons for the re-establishment of a Department of Aviation, particularly in the light of his steadfast opposition to the creation of such a portfolio from November 1975 to May 1982.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The previous Department of Civil Aviation was abolished in the Administrative Arrangements Order of 30 November 1973 during the time of the previous administration.
The re-establishment of an Aviation Department has been under consideration for some time and recognises the importance of civil aviation to the economy and to the community at large.
Commonwealth Employees (Employment Provisions) Act: Use of Suspension Provisions
(Question No. 5262)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 13 October 1982:
(I) On how many occasions, and in what departments, have the suspension provisions of the Commonwealth Employees (Employment Provisions) Act 1977 been implemented since the Act came into operation.
(2) How many persons have been suspended under the Act and for what length of time was each suspended.

3224 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Public Service Board, having consulted with the Department of Employment and [ndustrial Relations, has informed me that the suspension provisions of the Commonwealth Employees (Employment Provisions) Act 1977 have been used nine times in Commonwealth employment. The details of the use of the Act are as follows:
(a) Some 120 members of the Australian Telecommunications Employees' Association employed in the Australian Telecommunications Commission, were suspended from duty for the period 13-17 July 1979 for implementing work bans in support of a wage claim.
(b) 1132 Transport Workers' Union members were suspended in the period 21-31 July 1981 in the Departments of Administrative Services, Capital Territory, Defence, Housing and Construction, National Development and Energy, and Transport. The suspensions, which were issued over industrial action taken in support of a pay claim, were subsequently cancelled.
(c) 638 members of the Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association and 343 members of the Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers) employed in the Australian Telecommunications Commission were suspended from duty for the period 22-26 July 1981 in connection with the implementation of work bans in support of a pay claim.
(d) 480 members of the Licensed Aircraft Engineers' Association employed in Trans-Australia Airlines were suspended from duty for the period 14-17 August 1981 in connection with strike action taken in support of a pay claim.
(e) Approximately 90 broadcasting engineering officers employed in the Australian Broadcasting Commission were suspended from 14 to 17 August 1981 for engaging in strike action over a pay claim. [n addition, some 230 other employees in the Australian Broadcasting Commission were stood down during the course of the dispute because they could not be gainfully employed.
(f) 26 members of the Australian Telecommunications Employees' Association employed in the Australian Telecommunications Commission at the Haymarket Exchange were suspended from 2-14 December 1981 for implementing work bans in connection with a staffing dispute. 13 other staff at the Exchange were stood down during the course of the dispute.
(g) During the period 7-17 December 1981, a total of 451 members of the Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association employed in the Department of Social Security were suspended for implementing work bans in support of staffing claims. Suspensions were progressively lifted from II December and the final 414 were lifted on 17 December 1981.
(h) Some 640 Transport Workers' Union members were suspended from duty in the period 11-24 December 1981 for engaging in industrial action in support of a pay claim. The Departments of the Capital Territory, Administrative Services and Housing and Construction were affected, as were the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority and the Capital Territory Health Commission.
(i) Approximately 2240 members of the Australian Capital Territory Teachers' Federation employed in the Commonwealth Teaching Service were suspended from duty during the period 12-17 March 1982 for engaging in industrial action in support of a pay claim.

Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement Act: Voluntary Retirement Provisions
(Question No. 5263)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 13 October 1982:
What sum has been spent in payments under the voluntary retirement provisions of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979, to staff affected by the recommendations of the Review of Commonwealth Functions involving the transfer to the private sector of functions previously performed in the Australian Public Service.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Public Service Board has advised me that Section 17 of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act allows staff of the Australian Public Service to retire voluntarily at any time after they attain 55 years of age. The Board also advised that the Act makes no provision for any payments to such staff although those who are superannuation contributors receive the entitlements due to them under the Superannuation Act.
Visual Display Units: Department of Defence
(Question No. 5312)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 September 1982:
How many visual units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
1972-73-nil, I973-74-nil, 1974-75-nil, 1975-76-65, 1976-77-75, 1977-78-233, 1978-79-467, 1979-80-711, 1980-81-1,155,1981-82-1,426.
[n addition there are now 437 visual display units associated with microcomputer systems operating within Defence and the three Services as follows: Defence 65, Navy 122, Army 135, Air Force 115.
It has not been possible to ascertain a yearly breakdown for these.
United Nations Conference on Disarmament: Visas for Delegates
(Question No. 5347)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to problems some Australian delegates had in obtaining visas to attend the recent United Nations conference on Disarmament in New York, USA.
(2) Did he receive any requests for assistance in obtaining visas for delegates.
(3) [f so, what approach was made to the US Government and what was the response.
(4) [s he able to say whether the Australian delegate's applications for visas were treated in the same way as any other application.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3225

(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) No approach was made to the United States Government. Under the terms of the Headquarters Agreement signed between the United States and the United Nations, the United States undertook not to impose any impediment on the transit to the United Nations Headquarters district of representatives of non-governmental organisations recognised by the United Nations for the purpose of consultations under Article 71 of the Charter. Those Australians and other individuals refused visas to the United States were not representatives of such organisations.
In these circumstances the issue of visas is a matter for the United States to decide. It would not be appropriate for the Australian Government to suggest to the United States the manner in which they should exercise their responsibilities.
(4) The Government has not reason to believe that applications for visas by Australian citizens were treated any differently from those lodged by citizens of other countries.
Commonwealth and State Government Increases in Employees
(Question No. 5369)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) Has the number of employees of the Commonwealth Government, including the Northern Territory Government, increased from 400,500 to 417,900 between 31 December 1975 and 31 May 1982.
(2) Have a number of functions been transfered to the State Governments during the same period.
(3) Is he able to say whether the number of State Government employees has increased from 885,900 to 1,003,600 during the same period.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Employees of the Northern Territory Government are not employees of the Commonwealth. If the number of Commonwealth and Northern Territory Government employees are added together the growth over the period is as stated; this was indicated in my answer to Question No. 4695 in Hansard of the House of Representatives on 21 September 1982.
(2) The Public Service Board has advised me that it does not hold comprehensive information on movements of functions between all Commonwealth and State bodies. It advises, however, that in the period under review, for those departments and statutory authorities under ceiling control, the following transfers of functions between the Commonwealth and States took place:
(i) 137 staff of the Australian Legal Aid Office were transferred to the Legal Aid Commissions of South Australia, Queensland and Victoria, and
(ii) 9350 staff transferred from State Rail Authorities to Australian National Railways.
(3) Yes. Refer to my answer to Question No. 4695.
Cost of Royal Visit 1982
(Question No, 5406)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
What was the total cost of the visit to Australia in September and October 1982 by The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh to open officially the XII Commonwealth Games in Brisbane and the National Gallery in Canberra.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
All charges for the visit have not yet been brought to account but direct costs are estimated to be in the order of $778,000. Salaries and travel costs of departmental staff involved with the visit as part of their normal duties and costs incurred by other departments in carrying out their normal functions in relation to the visit are not included. In accordance with long-standing practice, charges related to the use of RAAF 34 Squadron aircraft are brought to account under the specific appropriation for use of special purpose aircraft and have also been excluded.
Australian Residents
(Question No, 5413)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
As at 30 June 1982 or at the latest date for which figures are available,
(a) what was the estimated resident population in Australia,
(b) how many were Australian citizens
(c) how many Australian citizens were resident outside Australia.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) June 1981--14,926,800; December 1981 (preliminary) 15,053,600.
(b) and (c) These figures are not available. The number of Australian citizens counted in Australia by the 1981 census was 12,931,073 but no direct estimates are available of extent of under-renumeration of Australian citizens at the census, or of the number of Australian citizens overseas at the time of the census.
Continuation of Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meetings
(Question No. 5415)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to media reports that various Commonwealth nations regard Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meetings (CHOGRM) as a waste of time.
(2) Which nations (a) opposed, (d) were neutral and (c) were in favour of continued CHOGRMs at the most recent meeting in Fiji.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Many Heads of Government present at the recent Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting in Suva referred favourably to the meetings and the opportunities afforded them of exchanging views on a wide range of topics of relevance to their countries.
(2) The decision to hold a further CHOGRM in two years time was reached by consensus among Heads of Government. I am not aware that any Head of Government opposes the holding of such a meeting.

3226 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Lectern Used by the Prime Minister
(Question No. 5497)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) Further to his answer to question No. 4103 (Hansard, 20 April 1982, page 1616), who owns the lectern which is made available for his use.
(2) Is the lectern used by him for both Liberal Party and official Government functions by use of the simple device of a movable panel on the front of the lectern which can incorpor. ate both party and official insignia.
(3) Has Philip Morris Ltd, of Moorabbin, Victoria, paid a five figure sum each year, over recent years, for transport of lectern around Australia, as well as for its repair and maintenance; if not, has any other large transnational corporation based in Melbourne made a similar contribution; if so, what are the details.
(4) Will he present to the House all the relevant accounts for these payments since he became Prime Minister; if not, why not.
(5) Have these sums been registered as a pecuniary interest; if not, why not.
(6) Has he, or the Minister for Primary Industry acting on his behalf, offered anything to the company in return for its generosity; if so, what are the details.
(7) Can he give the Parliament an assurance that the acquisition of the lectern and his use of it were not an attempt to bypass the proper tender processes of the Deparetment of Administrative Services so that expenditure on the purchase, transport and maintenance of the lectern would not become public knowledge; if not, why not.
(8) Will he now provide detailed answers to parts 3,4, 6 and 7 of question No.4 103; if not, why not, in each case.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (8) In addition to the information already provided to the honourable member by Mr Fraser on 20 April 1982 (House of Representatives Hansard, page 1616), I am informed that the lectern is the property of the Liberal Party of Australia which is also responsible for its maintenance.
The lectern is used by Mr Fraser at a variety of official and other occasions around Australia.
Cost of Royal Visits
(Question No. 5559)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What was the total cost to the Commonwealth Government of the 1982 Royal Visit by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II and His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh.
(2) What has been the total cost to the Commonwealth Government of each Australian visit by a member of the Royal Family during the last 10 years.
(3) In providing information sought in parts (I) and (2), will he give a detailed break up of the costs incurred.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) The annual Appropriation Bills until 1980-81 identified under the appropriations of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet costs of visits by members of the Royal Family. The costs of visits brought to account since that practice ceased are set out below:

Visit of HRH The Princess Anne, 1979 Visit of HRH Princess Alexandra, 1980 Royal Visit, 1980 Visit of HRH The Duke of Edinburgh, 1981 Visit of TRH Prince and Princess Michael of
Kent Visit of HRH The Prince of Wales, 1981 Royal Visit, 1981

$ 1,108 141,899 26,214 7,495
6,386 230,170 916,045

I am not prepared to authorise the considerable amount of
work which would be required to prepare detailed dissections of the cost of visits before the most recent Royal Visit. A break-up of the estimated costs involved in that visit (actual
costs not yet available) is set out below:

Use of RAAF B. 707 aircraft Commercial airline fares Road transport Hospitality Printing Hotel accommodation Postage and telephones Other ..

$ 440,000
16,000 250,000
20,000 18,000 16,000 11,000 7,000

778,000
Figures quoted in the above paragraphs relate to direct costs. Salaries and travel costs of departmental staff involved with a visit as part of their normal duties are not included. Similarly, costs incurred by other departments in carrying out their normal functions in relation to a visit are borne by those departments. In accordance with long-standing practice, charges related to the use of RAAF 34 Squadron aircraft are brought to account under the specific appropriation for use of special purpose aircraft and have also been excluded.

Darwin Patrol Boat Base
(Question No. 5568)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
(I) Did he say in his address to the Northern Development Council seminar at Port Hedland, Western Australia, on Friday, 22 October 1982, that the cost of the new Darwin Patrol Boat Base was $25m.
(2) If so, why has the price increased by $2m in one month, when compared with figures used in recent Department of Defence publications.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The Department of Transport and Construction spent $23m on capital works at the Darwin Patrol Boat Base by the end of September 1982, and that figure has been quoted in relation to the Base.
By the end of October 1982, the Department of Transport and Construction had spent $23.9m on capital works at the Base. It has recently estimated that the cost of the completed base will be $24.3m.

Balmoral Castle: Helicopter Flight
(Question No. 5591)
Mr Morris asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
(I) What was the precise nature of the representations he made to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales that enabled Mr Dick Smith to land his helicopter at Balmoral Castle in the

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3227

presence of media representatives during Mr Smith's recent round-the-world solo helicopter flight.
(2) Is he able to say whether promotional material of sponsors and/or others was distributed to those present at the landing of the helicopter at Balmoral Castle.
(3) Is he also able to say whether it is established practice for members of the Royal Family to allow their estates and/or premises to be utilised for promotional campaigns or exercises.
(4) Is he further able to say whether the Prince of Wales was concerned at the nature of activities that took place on the landing of Mr Smith's helicopter at Balmoral Castle.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) Mr Smith wrote to Mr Fraser and asked if Mr Fraser would be prepared to approach the Prince of Wales to see if the Prince would welcome Mr Smith in England during his round-the-world helicopter flight. Mr Fraser forwarded Mr Smith's request in the normal way to His Royal Highness who subsequently agreed. All details of arrangements for the welcome were then made directly between Mr Smith and the Office of the Prince of Wales.
Budget Appropriations
(Question No, 5601)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 November 1982:
In respect of Government outlays for 1982-83, what proportion of the total, expressed both in dollar terms and as a percentage, was authorised by (a) the Budget and (b) permanent and special appropriations.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
For the purpose of this question the term 'Budget appropriations' has been interpreted to mean appropriations contained in the Appropriation Acts (Nos I and 2) 1982-83 and the Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83.
A reconciliation between estimated Budget outlays in 1982-83 as shown on page 64 of Statement No.3 of Budget Paper No. I, 'Budget Statements 1982-83' ($47,067.2m) and appropriations of the Consolidated Revenue Fund (CRF)- dissected to identify amounts to be appropriated by Special Appropriations and Appropriation Acts (Nos I and 2) 1982-83 and the Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 is detailed in Tables I and 2 of Budget Paper No.5, 'Estimates of Receipts and Summary of Estimated Expenditure For The Year Ending 30 June 1983'.
The Appropriation Acts (Nos I and 2) 1982-83 and the Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 contain appropriations aggregating $13,986.4m. After adjustments have been made for:
allowance for prospective wage and salary increases (add $320m);
CRF expenditure from Budget appropriations but classified as financing transactions in Budget Statements (subtract $1.2m);
CRF expenditure from Budget appropriations but netted against receipts in Budget Statements (subtract $27.1 m);
Advances to the Minister for Finance and to the Presiding Officers (subtract $225.6m);
estimated expenditure in 1982-83 from Budget appropriations forming part of total outlays amounts to $14,052. 5m.

Estimated expenditure from permanent and special appropriations in 1982-83 by way of appropriation of the CRF ($31,648.4m) and Loan Fund ($2,670.3m) amounts to $34,318.7m. After adjustments have been made for:
allowance for cost escalation in education grants (add $1 lO.4m);
CRF expenditure from special appropriations but netted against receipts in Budget Statements (add $1 ,674.1 m);
CRF expenditure from special appropriations but classified as financing transactions in Budget Statements (subtract $892.9m);
estimated Defence expenditure chargeable to the Loan Fund (subtract $547.4m);
net increases in balance of Trust Accounts through which outlays are channelled (subtract $349.7m);
estimated expenditure from permanent and special appropriations forming part of total outlays amounts to $34,31 3.2m.
The two totals for Budget appropriations and permanent and special appropriations in the above tables do not add to total outlays listed in Statement 3 as account must be taken of CRF receipts offset against outlays ($1,298.7m)-an amount identified in Tables I and 2 of Budget Paper No.5.
The adjusted figures and relevant percentages against total outlays of $47,067.2m are:

Amount

$m

%

Budget appropriations

14,052.5

29.9

Permanent and special appropriations 34,313.2

72.9

The Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction
(Question No, 5609)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 November 1982:
(I) Further to the answer to Question No. 6241 (Hansard, 9 September 1980, page 1065) is it a fact that 7 countries (Canada, France, Greece, Switzerland, the USA., Belgium and Portugal) have now signed the Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, done at The Hague on 25 October 1980.
(2) When will the Australian Government sign and ratify this convention.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Only France has yet ratified the Convention.
(2) I am informed that the matter is presently before the Standing Committee of Attorneys General. I am also informed that no set time has been allotted for discussion of this topic and that it is not possible to say when the Standing Committee will complete its consideration of the question of Australia's becoming a party to the Convention.
Commonwealth Funding for Pre-schools
(Question No. 5634)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 November 1982:
(I) Has the 'block grant' method of Commonwealth funding for pre-schools resulted in an effective shortfall of over $15m in 1981-82.

3228 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) Will the Minister undertake to review the sum currently made available for pre-schooling with a view to increasing it substantially.
(3) Can the Minister also give an assurance that funding for pre-schooling will be adequately indexed in future.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I), (2) and (3) The Commonwealth has accepted the view, put with considerable emphasis by the States, that the basic responsibility for pre-school education lies with the States. The Commonwealth recognises the importance of preschools and provides financial support to supplement the States' own pre-school programs. This financial support, which is additional to the general purpose revenue grants, is provided to the State Governments in the form of a block grant and may be applied by the States according to their own assessment of priorities. The general purpose revenue grants have increased by 82 per cent since 1978-79. The block grant allocation for 1983-84 will be considered in the context of the 1983-84 Budget.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5703)
Mr Milton asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Prime Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since I January 1978; if so, what are the details?
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5707)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo Hoo since I January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
No.
Tax Concessions for Interest on Home Loans
(Question No. 4029)
Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) In view of the calls of some State Premiers for the Federal Government to exempt interest paid on home loans from assessable income tax paid by individuals and the Government's investigation of options for relieving the home loan repayment burdens placed on current home buyers as a consequence of high interest rates, has the Government estimated the revenue which would be forgone in 1980-81 by tax exemptions on:
(a) full mortgage interest payments of all home purchasers,
(b) full mortgage interest payments of first home buyers and

(c) one-third of the mortgage interest payments of first home buyers whose assessable income is less than
$20,000.

(2) If so, what are those estimates.

(3) If not, will he have such estimates made and provide
them to the Parliament to facilitate informed debate about the options for relieving home loan repayment burdens.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) to (3) As the honourable member will be aware the Government introduced legislation earlier this year to assist
home buyers who first occupied a home after I July 1977. The scheme provides a rebate on home loan interest payments in
the first year of occupancy up to a limit of $700 where there is a dependent child or dependent student or $500 where there is
no dependent child or dependent student, the rebate entitlement reducing by $100 per year over the succeeding
four years.

Following on a further decision announced in the Budget, more recent legislation has extended the home loan interest rebate to others in respect of interest that exceeds 10 per cent per annum on up to $60,000 of a loan. The rebate under both schemes is at the standard rate of tax and applies to home interest payments after I July 1982. Where a taxpayer meets the criteria for a rebate under both schemes the scheme which confers the larger rebate will apply.
The full-year cost to income tax revenue of allowing deductions in respect of home loan interest payments is estimated as follows:

(a) Full mortgage interest payments of all home

purchases

. . . . . . ..

(b) Full mortgage interest payments of first home buyers

(c) One-third of mortgage interest payments of
first home buyers whose assessable income is less than $20,000

$m
1,565 915
150

These estimates are based on estimated levels of home loan interest payments in the 1982-83 income year. The cost of the
existing home loan interest rebate schemes has not been offset against the estimates.

Small Arms Factory, Lithgow
(Question No. 4341)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 21 April, 1982:
(I) In view of the import restrictions that prevent the importation of military-type automatic rifles, why is the Small Arms Factory at Lithgow. N.S.W., engaged in a sales promotion program designed to sell similar weapons to the Australian public.
(2) Were these weapons manufactured for the Department of Defence.
(3) How many weapons is it proposed to sell to Australians.
(4) Does the Government consider the proliferation of this type of weapons in the public interest.
(5) What is the availability of ammunition for this type of weapon.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3229

(1) The Small Arms Factory at Lithgow is not engaged in a sales promotion program designed to sell military-type automatic rifles to the Australian public. Since 1978 sales of selfloading rifles have been permitted on the request of members of the public only when the buyer has proven authorisation under relevant State or Territorial laws to buy and own such a weapon.
(2) No.
(3) As from 1 September 1982 rifles can only be made available for sale to registered rifle club members. Their future requirements are not known, however I would estimate the quantity to be less than 30 per annum.
(4) Gun control legislation is vested in the States and Territory and public interest is more correctly expressed through State Legislature. The Government does not consider that sales of rifles to registered rifle club members represents a proliferation of this type of weapon.
(5) Ammunition manufactured to military specification in Government factories is made available only to members of the National Rifle Association and to licenced dealers.
Taxation: Deduction for Soil Conservation Expenditure
(Question No, 4704)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
Further to his answer to a question without notice (Hansard, 5 May 1982, page 2232) where he stated that the Government had legislated to allow expenditure undertaken by an individual farmer on soil conservation to be deducted in the year of expenditure instead of over 10 years, does the tax deduction referred to also apply to laser land forming in view of the fact that it is an important soil and water conservation measure in certain irrigation areas; if not, why not.
Mr Howard-The answer to the' honourable member's question is as follows:
The question of income tax deductions allowable for expenditure incurred by a primary producer on soil conservation is governed by section 750 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. Section 750 authorises an immediate deduction for the cost which a farmer incurs in constructing surface or sub-surface drainage works for the purpose of controlling salinity or assisting in drainage control on farmland, except where the work consists of the drainage of a swamp or low-lying land.
Land forming or levelling in irrigation areas to improve drainage of irrigation water, whether or not such work is carried out using laser equipment, is generally regarded as being for the purpose of controlling or combating salinity in the land or a potential salinity problem and, therefore, eligible for immediate deduction under section 750.
Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
(Question No, 4914)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
(1) Who are the members of the Aviation Industry Advisory Committee.
(2) Has the Committee made recommendations to vary the curfew at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport.
(3) On how many occasions has the curfew been broken in each year since 1970.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Membership of the Aviation Industry Advisory Council comprises:

The Hon. Wal. Fife, M.P., Minister for Aviation Chairman

Sir Peter Abeles or Mr K. R. Murdoch, Joint Chairmen Ansett Transport Industries Ltd

Mr F. W. Blake, National President General Aviation Association

Mr J. e. Fahey, President Royal Federation of Aero Clubs of Australia

Mr e. W. Freeland, Secretary Department of Aviation

Sir Robert Law-Smith, e.B.E., A.F.e., Chairman Australian National Airlines Commission

Mr J. B. Leslie, M.e., Chairman Qantas Airways Limited

Mr P. J. Patroni, President Aircraft Owners and Pilots' Association of Australia

Mr P. D. A. Wright, Chairman East-West Airlines Limited.

(2) Yes. The Aviation Industry Advisory Council has prepared a submission to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation. The sub-
mission was forwarded on 8 September 1982.

(3) Turbo jet aircraft have never been completely prohibited from operating during the curfew. Within the conditions of the curfew two categories of turbo jet aircaft may operate during the curfew: (a) under the operational pro-
visions of the curfew which allow for, such as, emergencies, and (b) with the approval of the Minister for Aviation. Those aircraft that operate outside the provisions of the curfew con-
stitute a third category. The aircraft in the last category break or breach the curfew; the others do not since they operate within the conditions of the curfew.

Complete records of the number of occasions on which air-
craft have broken the curfew at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport are only available from 1 March 1975. The occasions are as follows:

1975 (from 1 March)

nil

1976

nil

1977

nil

1978

nil

1979

16

1980

1981

1982 (to 31 August)

nil

The increase in the number of curfew infringements in 1979 resulted from a dispute over the relative responsibilities of Departmental and Airline company staff for operations within the curfew period. The dispute was resolved at the end of August 1979. The sixteen infringements, set out below, occurred in June, July and August and were landings averaging seven minutes before the end of the curfew. All used the noise abatemen runway, approaching over Botany Bay.

3230 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Date
6.679 3. 7.79 9.7.79 20.7.79 24.7.79 25.7.79 27.7.79 29.7.79 31.7.79 8.8.79 9.8.79 14.8.79 15.8.79 17.8.79 21.8.79 24.8.79

Time A/C type Runway Operator

0543 0557 0552 0553
0556 0551 0556 0556
0554 0554 0555 0554 0556
0552 0556 0547

DCIO B747
B727 B747 B747 B747 B747 B747
B747 B747 B747
B747 B747 B747 B747 B747

34 Garuda 34 Qantas
34 Ansett 34 KLM 34 Qantas 34 Alitalia 34 Qantas 34 Qantas 34 Qantas 34 Qantas 34 Qantas
34 Qantas 34 Qantas 34 Qantas
34 Qantas 34 Qantas

Queensland: Expected Population Growth
(Question No. 4927)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a statement by the Australian Conservation Foundation and Queensland Conservation Council that estimates of south-east Queensland's expected population growth were significantly underestimated.
(2) What estimate of growth does his Department use in planning the future demand for Telecom Australia services.
(3) Have several exchanges in south-east Queensland installed extra exchange equipment with a 1,000 line capacity to cope with demand pressures; if so, how long is this new equipment expected to meet the demand.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Telecommunications Commission, is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The future demand for Telecom services is monitored for individual exchange areas. In South-east Queensland the percentage rate of growth varies from 8 per cent in areas such as Toowoomba to 14 per cent in areas such as the Nambour District.
(3) In South-east Queensland 41 exchanges were increased by 1,000 or more line capacity during 1981-82. Typical examples are Mount Gravatt, Surfers Paradise, Noosa Heads and Bundaberg. This new equipment is expected to meet demand for an average period of two years.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Treasurer
(Question No. 4934)
Mr Holding asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the questions asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.

(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b) Procedures for the answering of questions on notice directed to me are as follows:
(i) The Parliamentary Questions Officer in my Department examines each Notice Paper and allocates each question asked of me to the area in my portfolio with responsibility for the subject matter.
(ii) Draft answers prepared in the relevant Division of my Department are submitted through a Deputy Secretary and the Secretary to the Treasury for approval. They are then submitted through my Private Secretary for my approval. Similar arrangements apply to answers prepared in the Australian Taxation Office and the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
(2) 617 (185 from senators, 432 from members).
(3) 61 working days.
(4)-

House of Senate Representatives

(a)

101

223

(b)

30

122

(c)

9

12

(d)

I

7

(e)

nil

nil

24 questions were transferred or withdrawn.
(5) 88 (58 from members and 30 from senators). II House of Representatives questions have been on the Notice Paper for 12 months or more. In each case, the delay was due to the heavy work-load of the Taxation Office and my office during this period.
Housing Funds
(Question No. 5007)
Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
(I) Which institutions lending for housing will gain access to additional funds as a result of the 1982-83 Budget decision to release I per cent from Statutory Reserve Deposits.
(2) What will be the cost of these funds to these institutions.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I refer the Honourable member to my statement of 9 November 1982 in which I announced that the Government has decided to defer for the time being its request to the Reserve Bank to effect an SRD release of I per cent or some $300m.
This was done against the background of a significant increase in liquidity in the banking system since the Budget and

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3231

an agreement by the major nationally-operated banks to
extend the commitment made last March to lend an additional $400m of housing finance for a further 12 month period with effect from March 1983. Furthmore, these banks
have indicated that, subject to a sufficient deposit intake and a sufficient number of eligible applicants, they would wish to increase this figure for the year commencing in March 1983 to
$500m.

Nurse Education and Training
(Question No. 5119)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 21 September 1982:
(I) How many students are enrolled in courses in basic nurse training at colleges of advanced education by (a) college and (b) year of course.
(2) Has the Government abandoned the target of 2200 students taking these courses by 1985, as recommended by the 1978 report of the Committee of Inquiry to the Tertiary Education Commission into nurse education and training.
(3) Has there been any evaluation of such courses; if so, what are the major conclusions.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1)-
BASIC COLLEGE NURSING ENROLMENTS, 1982

State/Institutions

Enrolments

New South Wales-

Cumberland College of Health Sciences

82

Riverina College of Advanced Education

48

Total New South Wales

130

Victoria-

Phillip Institute of Technology

224

Lincoln Institute of Health Sciences

195

Total Victoria

419

Queensland-

Queensland Institute of Technology

35

South Australia--

South Australian College of Advanced Ed-

ucation

.....

293

Western Australia--

Western Australian Institute of Technology

145

Tasmania-

Tasmanian College of Advanced Education

19

Total Australia

1,041

Information concerning students enrolled by year of course is not collected by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission.
(2) In considering the Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Nurse Education and Training, the Commonwealth Government agreed that the existing pilot courses in basic nursing should be maintained for evaluation purposes. It subsequently announced that it would support a further 350 college places for basic nursing; these additional places allowed the establishment of two new college-based courses in Queensland and Tasmania.
The Commonwealth Government did not accept the Committee of Inquiry's target figure of 2,200 college basic nursing places by 1985.

(3) Several evaluations of basic college nursing courses have been, and are being, conducted under the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission's Evaluations and Investigations Program. The completed studies are:
Lindsay D. Mackay, et aI, An Evaluation of a CollegeBased Basic Course in Nursing, August 1981;
John McArthur, et aI., The First Working Year in Nursing: An Evaluation of a Group of College Graduates, November 1981.
A third study of Victorian college graduates is due for completion in 1982-83. This study uses the methodology developed for the original study, but examines a much larger sample.
A comparative evaluation of the nursing performance of graduates fo the Western Australian Institute of Technology is nearing completion, and the final report of the study is expected later this year.
A major longitudinal study of college-trained nurses in New South Wales is being conducted, and is due for completion in 1986.
The findings of the small studies completed to date in Victoria appear to indicate only minor differences in the performances of college-trained and hospital-trained nurses:
(a) college-trained nurses feel some lack of practical skills, but these skills are quickly acquired;
(b) there is some evidence to suggest that college-trained nurses perform better in interpersonal areas of nursing;
(c) the nursing performance of college graduates tends to compare favourably with the performance of hospitaltrained nurses practising outside their training hospitals.
Review of Commonwealth Functions: Recommendations for Department of Home
Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 5154)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
(I) What are the details of all recommendations made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions which related specifically to the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the details of the implementation of those recommendations to date.
(3) Where a service formerly provided by the Minister's Department is now provided by private interests, what have been the (a) cost savings and (b) cost penalties incurred to date, in each case.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Details of all recommendations relating specifically to my portfolio are as follows:
Australian Archives premises to be shared with the States where possible-Considerabie progress has been made to develop a pilot project with Victoria. Implementation will depend on decisions by both governments on viability of the project and the availability of funds.
The Australian Film and Television School is directed to pursue full cost recovery for its Open Program activitiesNegotiations are proceeding to determine an appropriate and achievable level of recovery. The School achieved 46.8 per cent recovery of direct costs in 1981-82. The target for recovery of direct costs in 1982-83 is 50 per cent.

3232 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Commonwealth support for the 'Life. Be in it' Program to be terminated-Implemented.
Responsibility for the regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia to be implemented as far as possible by the States and Northern Territory with the Commonwealth maintaining a co-ordinating role-The IDC on Review of the Atomic Energy Act and Related Legislation is considering arrangements for the regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia in consultation with the States. Commonwealth and State legislation may be required in due course.
Responsibility for the financing of Northern Territory environmental regulatory services be transferred to the Territory Government (subject to the Territory establishing an independent environmental regulatory agency and continuing to have the Alligator Rivers Region Coordinating Committee and the Supervising Scientist consider the annual programs of the Northern Territory)- Funding of environmental regulatory services is now the responsibility of the Northern Territory Government. The Territory is developing legislation and arrangements relating to environmental regulation. The Alligator Rivers Region Co-ordinating Committee and the Supervising Scientist consider the annual environmental regulatory services program of the Northern Territory for the Alligator Rivers Region.
Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service (ANPWS) to maintain control of marine parks and its present policy functions-Implemented.
Operations functions of ANPWS, other than through management advice, to be gradually scaled down-Implemented.
Except where the Commonwealth is requested by a Territory to maintain full control, operation of non-marine parks, other than through management advice, to be left to the Northern Territory and Territory administrations to conduct under delegation-Implemented consistent with the maintenance of essential Commonwealth interests. An Advisory Commitee comprised of representatives of the Commonwealth, the Northern Territory Government and Northern Land Council has been established to advise on management of Kakadu National Park.
Essential Commonwealth interests in the Kakadu National Park to be maintained-Implemented.
Charging for archival storage of records of Commonwealth business undertakings to be initiated-The Archives is consulting with the Department of Finance and the Public Service Board concerning the components to be included in developing the costing formula. It is also proposed to consult with the Department of Administrative Services concerning the basis on which the Transport and Storage Division charging policy is being developed.
The Office of Women's Affairs to be continued-- No implementation required.
Level of Department staff concerned with cultural and heritage matters to be reviewed-The review has been undertaken by the Public Service Board and its recommendations implemented.
(3) Not applicable.
Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of Department of Treasury
(Question No. 5169)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:

(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange line telephones.
(5) What was the cost of (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
(I) Two.
(2) (a) Assistant Secretary. (b) Deputy Actuary.
(3) Yes.
(4) With regard to 2 (a) an exchange line is used exclusively to enable the speedy relaying of money market information from the Reserve Bank, Sydney to the Australian Wheat Board in Melbourne by 10.15 a.m. each morning in connection with Board's commercial borrowings.
With regard to 2 (b), as part of his duties, the Deputy Actuary is required to make frequent contact on a daily basis with organisations in Port Moresby. The number of digits required to dial the STD area code of Port Moresby is such that his PABX line does not have the capacity to dial both the STD area code and the number which he is calling.
(5) (a) rental $250.77, (b) metered calls- $767.51, (c) trunk calls-nil.
(6) No.
AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE (I) 69.
(2) Selected senior executive officers, some officers in key operational or security areas and for general use where existing PABX facilities are inadequate.
(3) Yes.
(4) To overcome inadequacies of existing PABX facilities, to provide a level of security and back-up in emergencies in key operational areas, and to increase the level of confidentiality.
(5) (a) $10,968.14 (b) $36,857.70 (c) $ 117.99
$47,943.83
(6) In some situations.
AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS (I) 10.
(2) (a) State Regional Directors, 3 (b) State Deputy Regional Directors, 4 (c) State Administrative Officer, I (d) Statistical Collection Officers, 2.
(3) Yes.
(4) (a) To facilitate ready communication for officers having a high rate of telephone contact, both with private and public sectors. (b) Confidentiality. (c) Security and emergency back-up in case of PABX failure. (d) To augment the number of lines on a small and overloaded switchboard.
(5) (a) Rental--$1,699 (b) metered calls-$18,771 (c) trunk calls-$55.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3233

(6) Not in all respects, but the matter is being reviewed.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN MINT (I) Three.
(2) (a) Controller, (b) Superintendent, (c) Numismatist.
(3) Yes.
(4) With regard to 2 (a) and (b) above the prime purpose of these lines is to provide confidentiality and security. (c) This line was provided to the Numismatist, located at Phillip in the Australian Capital Territory, to handle the 1980 gold coin issue. It is anticipated that the line will be relinquished at the conclusion of the 1982 gold coin issue later this year.
(5) (a) $720.73, (b) $4,128.33, (c) $91.20.
(6) It is not considered that a silent extension number would provide adequate security.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program
(Question No, 5232)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
(I) What information can be provided on the distribution of funds in the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program in 1982-83 and 1983-84 by (a) each State and Territory, (b) each road category of assistance and (c) any other category of assistance.
(2) By what means is it proposed to provide funding for improvements to urban public transport services.
(3) What types of projects will be eligible for assistance under the urban public transport program.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b) Allocation of funds to the States and the Northern Territory to be made under the Australian Bicentennial Road Development (ABRD) Program has not yet been completely finalised. National roads funds will be apportioned between the States and the Northern Territory in accordance with Commonwealth priorities, having regard to the works programs submitted for Commonwealth approval. Funds for road categories other than national roads will be distributed between the States and the Northern Territory in accordance with the proportional distribution of funds for the respective categories provided in the Roads Grants Act 1981.
An indicative distribution of ABRD funds between the States, the Northern Territory and road categories for the years 1982-83 and 1983-84 is set out in the table below.
(I) (c), (2) and (3) The enabling legislation for the ABRD Program also provides that moneys allocated for the construction of urban arterial roads may be used for the funding of urban public transport capital projects if a State or the Northern Territory so chooses. Urban public transport capital projects will be eligible for assistance under the ABRD Program provided the Minister is satisfied that the project would result in the reduction of traffic on or wear and tear affecting the State's urban arterial roads and provided that a reasonable balance is maintained in meeting the needs of urban roads and urban public transport.
Taxation: Australian Residents Employed by Foreign Companies in Australia
(Question No. 5245)
Mr Beazley asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 13 October 1982:

(I) What steps are taken to ensure that Australian residents employed by foreign companies operating in Australia are paid their wages and salaries in Australia and thereby become subject to Australian taxation requirements.
(2) Is the Commissioner of Taxation investigating any operations in Australia where Australian citizens or residents have been offered the option of having their wages and salaries paid into bank accounts in countries with a low rate of income tax and taxation agreements with Australia to prevent double taxation on income.
(3) Has the Commissioner of Taxation expressed any concern in this regard with foreign-owned fishing companies who have an operational base in Australia.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Generally speaking there is no legal requirement that Australian residents employed in Australia by foreign companies operating in Australia be paid their salaries or wages in Australia. The Commissioner of Taxation has advised, however, that the view is taken that salaries and wages of Australian residents employed in Australia by a foreign company have their source in Australia and are therefore assessable to Australian tax whether or not they are paid in Australia. In such cases the employer is required to make tax instalment deductions at the prescribed rates. Inspections are made of employers' records to ensure that they are complying with the PAYE provisions of the income tax law.
(3) The Commissioner has not expressed any general concern. He is, of course, obliged by section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act to preserve confidentiality in respect of specific cases.
Visual Display Units: Department of Aviation
(Question No. 5321)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
How many visual display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
On 30 June 1982 my Department had 242 visual display units in use. I have not asked my Department to devote resources to earlier research as the Aviation portfolio was established on 7 May 1982.
Pensions: Report of Forecast Rises
(Question No. 5348)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a report in the Brisbane Sunday Mail of 15 August 1982 that the Minister had forecast large pension rises in the August Budget.
(2) If so, what was the basis for this report.
(3) Can the Minister say whether many pensioners' hopes were raised as a result of this report but subsequently were dashed when no pension rise was forthcoming in the Budget.
(4) Was the report accurate.
(5) If so, what steps will the Minister take to compensate pensioners for undue stress and heartbreak the report evoked.

3234 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (5) My attention has been drawn to an article "Ageing: Good news Budget", in the Brisbane Sunday Mail of 15 August 1982 which attributed to me predictions of specific pension increases in the Budget. I did not make any such predictions and regret that some pensioner readers of the Brisbane Sunday Mail may have had their expectations raised by the false report.
Vegetable Production in Tasmania
(Question No. 5354)
Mr Burr asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 19 October 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a statement by Mr Les Richardson, Chairman of the Vegetable Council of the Tasmanian Farmers and Graziers Association, claiming that there has been a substantial cut-back in the plantings of green beans, peas, cauliflower and broccoli in Tasmania; if so, can he say whether the cut-backs are associated with negotiations with the New Zealand Government for closer economic relations.
(2) Can he say whether General Jones Ltd or Gordon Edgell Pty Ltd or any of their affiliated companies have vegetable processing operations in New Zealand.
(3) Can he say whether the reduced vegetable production in Tasmania n,ight be taken up by increased imports from New Zealand.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (3) The Department of Primary Industry has made enquiries into reports of some reduction in the area of vegetables contracted for processing purposes in Tasmania. The Department is satisfied that there is no link between the changes in the area contracted for vegetables in Tasmania and the arrangements for closer economic relations between Australia and New Zealand.
Most vegetable products of importance for Tasmania are already free of duty or subject only to the minimal tariffs if imported from New Zealand. In these circumstances the agreement achieved with New Zealand for an accelerated removal of its export subsidy arrangements for peas, beans, sweet corn and potato products and for a phasing out of export subsidies on all other products from 1985 to 1987, should result in an improvement in the relative competitiveness of Tasmania's vegetable growing and processing industries vis-a-vis New Zealand.
(2) I am advised that the only affiliation between Australian and New Zealand vegetable processors is the operation of a single frozen vegetable processing plant by Petersville Australia Limited in New Zealand through its international branch, Petersville International Limited. The plant is situated in Blenheim in the South Island and I understand is geared mainly to supplying the New Zealand market and export markets other than Australia.
Population Estimates
(Question No. 5411)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 20 October 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to 'Population estimates and projections of local government areas in Western Sydney: an analysis of the issues' by Donald Perlgut of the Western Sydney Regional Organisation of Councils.

(2) Will he ask the Australian Bureau of Statistics to commenton it.
(3) Will he ask the Bureau to undertake a study of underenumeration in census data associated with non-English speaking residents, especially in the Fairfield City Council area.
(4) Is there any substance to the claim on page 16 of the paper that Fairfield City Council has forgone $135,000 of Commonwealth revenue funds during the last 5 years because of under-estimation of population.
(5) If the claim is correct can an adjustment be made by way of an ex-gratia payment or an adjustment in the next allocation.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) is currently investigating some of the matters raised in the paper, and will provide comments directly to the Western Sydney Regional Organisation of Councils in the near future.
(3) No. I am informed that the ABS conducted an Australia-wide evaluation survey soon after the 1981 Census for the purpose of measuring under-enumeration in the Census. An analysis of the data from this survey is understood to have shown that, overall, there is no significant difference in census under-enumeration between Australian-born and overseas-born persons.
I am also informed that special efforts were made in the 1981 Census - in the Fairfield City Council area as well as other areas with large numbers of migrants--to produce an accurate enumeration of persons born overseas. These efforts are considered to have been successful as the results of the evaluation survey show that only a very small percentage of persons was missed in the Census.
(4) As far as the Commonwealth's local government tax sharing funds are concerned, the allocation bet ween local authorities within a State is related, among other things, to the population of each authority. Since estimates of the population in the Fairfield City Council area would need to be compared with estimates of the population derived on the same basis in other local government jurisdictions in New South Wales, it is not possible to comment on the substance of the claim concerning $135,000 foregone by the Fairfield City Council.
(5) Under the local government tax sharing arrangemens, the Commonwealth provides funds to each State government on the basis of a set formula. Each State is then responsible for the allocation of the funds between the local authorities within its borders. The question of any additional payments to individual local authorities is therefore a matter for consideration by the State government concerned.
Tullamarine Airport: Membership of Committee
(Question No. 5452)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 21 October 1982:
(I) What information is he able to provide on the achievements of the joint Victorian/Federal Government Committee established by his predecessor in 1980 to establish Tullamarine Airport as the main gateway to Australia for international air travel.
(2) What are the names and classifications of the past and present membership of the committee.
(3) On what occasions has the committee met.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3235

(4) What recommendations has the committee made to the Government and what action has been taken in respect of each recommendation.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) At the meeting in December 1980, the Minister for Transport, Mr Hunt, agreed to a proposal made by the former Premier of Victoria, Mr Hamer, that a joint committee be established to monitor progress made in encouraging international airlines to provide a better balance of services between Melbourne and Sydney. No such committee was subsequently established, although Mr Hunt did write to all international airlines serving Melbourne, asking them to consider the possibility of increasing their use of Melbourne Airport within their approved levels of services to Australia.
(2) to (4) Not applicable.
Adult Migrant Education Service
(Question No. 5494)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
In respect of the Adult Migrant Education Service for each of the last 10 years, how many (a) teachers were employed on a (i) full-time casual basis and (ii) permanent basis and (b) students engaged in (i) 'on-going' and (ii) 'initial settlement' education.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Difficulties have been experienced in the past in collecting information about various aspects of the Adult Migrant Education Program, and details of the number of teachers employed in the various categories are not held by the Commonwealth. It is expected that this information will be available from 1982-83 following the introduction of new statistical reporting arrangements.
(b) The initial settlement, or "on-arrival" English language course began in 1977-78. Accordingly, enrolment statistics are available only from that year. The student enrolments in OnGoing and On-Arrival courses for that period and for OnGoing courses since 1972-73 were as follows:

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

On-Arrival
3,071 8,859 11,263 16,096 17,668

On-going>
42,418 50.663 63,862 76,536 89,559 95,881 91,508 t79,579 t82,149 t83,479

> Includes correspondence courses, home tutor scheme, continuation classes and courses-in-industry, as well as full time and part-time courses.
t Figures for the last 3 years have been adjusted to show wherever possible, only new enrolments. Earlier figures reflect total participants including those continuing from previous years, particularly in relation to correspondence courses, continuation classes and the home tutor scheme.

Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of Social Security
(Question No. 5538)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for materials and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etc., of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) No materials or equipment currently in use in the Department of Social Security or bodies under my control are known to contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Yes.
(3) to (6) As no PCBs are known to be in use in my Department or bodies under my control these parts of the question are not applicable.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Monitoring of Environmental Contamination
(Question No. 5553)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What are the details of existing arrangements for the monitoring of environmental contamination by polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) What are the details for each incident of PCB contamination occurring in each year since 1970-71, giving (a) dates, (b) locations, (c) amounts, (d) effects on (i) human health and (ii) the environment, (e) costs of clean-up operations and (f) any follow-up (i) health and (ii) environmental monitoring which has taken place.
Mr McVeigh--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The responsibility for monitoring environmental contamination by PCBs or any other hazardous chemical is that of State authorities.
(2) I do not have the information requested. Such information would be held by State authorities.

3236 REPRESENTATIVES 8 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Export Earnings
(Question No. 5560)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
What proportion of Australia's export earnings. expressed in money terms and as a percentage of the whole, is directly attributable to intellectual work such as (a) product innovation, (b) royalties, (c) design skills, (d) banking, (e) insurance, (f) films, (g) books, (h) television programs and (i) information services.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is given in the table below:
SELECTED EXPORTS AND OTHER EARNINGS OF AUSTRALIA, 1981-82

Percentage

of total

Amount

exports

(a) Product innovation
(b) Royalties (c) Design skills (d) Banking (e) Insurance
(f) Films (g) Books (h) Television programs (i) Information services

$m

"'25

0.128

na

na

na

na

12'1

0.005

'''27

0.138

na

na

na

na

Total exports

'''19,586

100

(I) Source: ABS balance of payments statistics--invisible
credit item 'royalties and copyrights', which includes charges made for the rights to reproduce books etc, or to make use of
Australian inventions or manufacturing processes overseas or for design work carried out in Australia for overseas
principals. (2) Source: ABS overseas trade statistics-Standard Inter-
national Trade Classification (SITC) item 883.00 'Cinema-
tograhic film, exposed and developed, whether or not incorporating sound track or consisting solely of sound track. negative or positive'. The value does not include the overseas
earnings from royalties and copyrights. (3) Source: ABS overseas trade statistics--SITC item
892.11 'Printed books, booklets, brochures, pamphlets and
leaflets'. The value does not include the overseas earnings from royalties and copyrights.
(4) Source: ABS overseas trade statistics-total exports.
n.a. not available.

Employment Statistics
(Question No. 5561)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 27 October'1982:
(I) When will the figures for employment derived from the Commonwealth Census of 30 June 1981 be published.
(2) In the event that the figures are published before an answer is provided to part (I) of this question what (a) are the numbers of persons employed in manufacturing in each Commonwealth Electoral Division and (b) percentage of the total labour force in each Electoral Division does this figure constitute.
(3) What are the (a) national, (b) state and (c) territorial statistics for employment in manufacturing expressed (i) in figures and (ii) as a percentage of the total workforce in each case.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Employment figures from the 1981 Census have been available, on microfiche, since July 1982.
(2) Statistics on the numbers of persons employed in manufacturing industry in each Commonwealth Electoral Division (CEO) at 30 June 1981 are included in microfiche batch 81.208, 'Small Area Data-Commonwealth Electoral Divisions', a copy of which is available in the Parliamentary Library. These fiche also contain information on the total labour force in each CEO. The percentage of the total labour force in each CEO, employed in manufacturing, can be derived from these figures.
(3) Statistics on the numbers of persons employed in manufacturing industry at the national, State and Territory levels are included in microfiche batch 81.303, 'Small Area Data-States and Australia'. These fiche also contain information on the total labour force at the national, State and Territory levels. The percentage of the total labour force in the States. Territories and Australia employed in manufacturing can be derived from these figures.
Unemployment Rates in Ethnic Communities
(Question No. 5588)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
What surveys have been carried out by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, or what other statistical material is available to the Bureau, which compares unemployment rates in various ethnic communities in Australia, for example (a) Yugoslav, (b) Greek, (c) Italian, (d) Maltese, (e) Polish, (f) German, (g) Dutch, (h) Jewish, (i) Lebanese, (k) Vietnamese and (I) Chinese.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Statistics of unemployment rates classified by country of birth are compiled from the Bureau's monthly labour force survey and published in 'The Labour Force, Australia' (Catalogue No. 6203.0). Unemployment rates for persons born in Yugoslavia, Greece, Italy, Malta, Poland, Germany, the Netherlands and Lebanon are shown in this publication. Estimates for persons born in Vietnam or China are not available, nor is information available from the labour force survey on the Jewish community.
Informa'ion on unemployment rates by country of birth is also available from the 1981 Census of Population and Housing; see table 7 in microfiche batch 81.501, a copy of which is available in the Parliamentary Library. As regards the Jewish community, information that may be of interest will be a cross-classificatory table of religion and labour force status, expected to become available for the whole of Australia towards the end of 1983.
Taxation Evasion and Avoidance
(Question No, 5698)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Further to my question without notice of 28 October 1982 (Hansard, page 2703) requesting him to take immediate steps to set up within the Australian Taxation Office its own legal division to ensure that the Office will be self-sufficient and accountable in the field of taxation litigation and recovery, can he intimate (a) whether he has discussed the matter with the Commissioner for Taxation and (b) when he will take steps to set up within the Taxtion Office its own legal division.

Answers to Questions

8 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3237

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) As I said on 28 October 1982 in answer to the honourable member, I have raised this matter with the Commissioner of Taxation. The Commissioner is examining the implications of the proposal which, as the honourable member will realise, involves issues which would need to be resolved in consultation with the Public Service Board and the Attorney-General's Department. It is not a matter which can, or should, be decided hurriedly.

Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5717)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minsiter attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since I January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question.
No.


