House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 128, 1982 Tuesday, 17 August 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.

(LP) (NP)

The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.

(LP) (NP) (LP)

The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.

(LP) (NP) (LP)

Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife

(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)

The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner

(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)

The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.

(NP) (LP) (LP)

The Honourable William Michael Hodgman

(LP)

Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner

(LP)

The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

(NP)

The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson The Honourable James Joseph Carlton The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (LP) (LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W. ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W. Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic. Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W. Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic. Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP ALP LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP LP LP NP LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP LP ALP ALP NP LP LP ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton. LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

AUSTRALIA
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Hansard 1982
FIRST SESSION OF THE THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT
(FIFTH PERIOD)

Pursuant to the Resolution of the House of Representatives passed on 7 May 1982, the House of Representatives met on Tuesday, 17 August 1982, at 1.45 p.m.

Tuesday, 17 August 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannbn-Prime Minister)-Mr Speaker, a number of changes were made to the Ministry on 7 May 1982. I would like, with the concurrence of the House, to table a list of changes to portfolios. I also seek leave to have the list incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted. The document read as follows-
I inform the House that the Governor-General made the following appointments on 7 May 1982.
Mr Sinclair. Minister for Defence. Sir James Killen. Vice-President of the Executive Council
and Leader of the House. Mr Fife. Minister for Aviation. Mr Macphee. Minister for Employment and Industrial
Relations. Senator Baume. Minister for Education. Mr Hunt. Minister for Transport and Construction. M~ Viner. Minister for Defence Support. Mr Brown. Minister for Communications. Mr McVeigh. Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. Mr Wilson. Minister for Aboriginal Affairs. Mr Carlton. Minister for Health. Mr Hodges. Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.

Representation arrangements in this place are as follows: Mr Anthony will represent the Minister for National Development and Energy; Mr Howard will represent the Minister for Finance; Mr N. A. Brown will represent the Attorney General; Mr Wilson will represent the Minister for Social Security; Mr Thomson will represent the Minister for Veterans' Affairs; and Mr Fife will represent the Minister for Education.
DEATH OF THE HONOURABLE N. J. O. MAKIN, A.O.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I move:
That this house expresses its deep regret at the death on 20 July 1982 of the Honourable Norman John Oswald Makin. A.O.- a member of this House for the Division of Hindmarsh from 1919 to 1946. Speakerfrom 1929 to 1931. member for the Division of Sturt from 1954 to 1955. member for the Division of Bonython from 1955 to 1963. a Minister of the Crown during the Second World War. Ambassador to the United States of America from 1946 to 1951. President of the Security Council of the United Nations in 1946 and 1947. places on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service and tenders its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.
All of us were saddened to learn of the death of Norman Makin on 20 July. Norman Makin served Australia in a large number of capacities with great distinction. In his maiden speech in this House on 20 March 1920 Mr Makin spoke of his intention to further the interests of this country and to further its general prosperity and progress. He worked to this end in and out of the Commonwealth Parliament with distinction for the next 62 years. It is a proud record.

2 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Death ofMr N. J. O. Makin. A.O.

In his last speech in this place in October 1963 he returned to that same theme of the need to build Australia up, saying that the Australian people had the capacity and the courage to continue to build up their country. Norman Makin was born on 31 March 1889 at Petersham in New South Wales. He was educated at the Central Public School in Broken Hill and in 1918 was elected President of the South Australian branch of the Australian Labor Party. He was first elected a member of the House of Representatives, representing Hindmarsh, in 1919. When Mr Scullin became Prime Minister in 1929 Norman Makin was elected Speaker of this House. As Speaker he was committed to this institution and was well respected by all who came in contact with him.
Norman Makin also served with distinction on a number of committees of the House. From 1922 to 1925 he was a member of the Commonwealth delegation to the Empire Parliamentary Association in the United Kingdom. In 1937 he was a member of the delegation which visited that country for the coronation of King George VI. He was also a member of the Standing Orders Committee from 1932 to 1946 and from 1956 until his retirement from this Parliament in 1963. During the Second World War, Norman Makin was a member of the Australian Advisory War Council from October 1940 to 1945. He served as Minister for the Navy and Minister for Munitions from 1941 to 1946, during which time he presided over the rapid expansion of the Royal Australian Navy. He was Minister for Aircraft Production from 1945 to 1946. In 1946 he resigned from the House of Representatives to become Australia's first Ambassador to the United States, remaining in that post until 1951. In 1946 and 1947 he was also the first president of the Security Council of the United Nations. In both posts, he was able to serve this nation and the cause of international peace and security with great distinction.
In the general election of 1954 Norman Makin was re-elected to the House of Representatives as the member for Sturt. Following a redistribution of seats in the year following, he was elected as the member for Bonython and retained that seat until his retirement from Parliament in 1963. He gave many years of devoted service to this House and to Australia. He was a Minister, Speaker, a j11ember of the House for many years and our ambassador in a post which was and still is of vital importance to our interests. Above all, he was a man who was intensely proud of Australia and of the movement he so ably represented. He was awarded the Order of Australia in 1980.

Norman Makin is survived by two sons. His wife, Ruby, predeceased him. On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, I extend my sympathies to his family. The life of Norman Makin is one of the great examples of an Australian who has served this country throughout more than a century. He did it in a way which was dedicated and which earned the respect of all those who came in touch with him. I was in this House when he was still here and I was privileged to know him. I valued his friendship as I am sure did all members of the House of which he was a part. He was one of those people from whom, I think, we could all profit and learn in certain times. I doubt that I ever heard words spoken in anger or bitterness by Norman Makin in making speeches in this Parliament. He put forward his views with strength but, at the same time, with a sense of moderation and a sense of understanding that this institution and the country it represents are much more important than anyone of us.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-I join the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in expressing condolences to the surviving members of the family of the late Norman Makin. It is a matter of melancholy circumstance that has us today expressing condolences to those surviving members of the late Norman Makin's family. Norman Makin I recall vividly on my entry to this Parliament 21 years ago. He was a man of considerable distinction physically. The measured diction with which he delivered his addresses to this Parliament, a steady commitment to principle, in spite of a long life of service in public affairs and in spite of the many frustrations and disappointments which must have confronted him over that period, and a practical idealism were the ingredients which, it seemed to me, went to make up the late Norman Makin in this Parliament.
Norman Makin served this country well. He served it for long periods and on two occasions in the national Parliament. He served it elsewhere at international forums. At all times a steadiness of purpose guided him in the discharge of his duty and public service. He was a man of great principle and, in the period during which I knew him in the national Parliament, he gave great encouragement, indeed fatherly encouragement, to the younger members who came into this institution. He was a man who by his physical courage-a courage by the way in which he projected his views by the moderation with which he expressed himself-was an inspiration to all who worked with him. His vivacity of interest in the political affairs of this country-a vivacity of

Death of Mr N. J. O. Makin, A.a.

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3

interest which went well above party commitments on many occasions-stayed with him until the end of his life. I still vividly recall meeting him in Adelaide during the 1980 election campaign at the major rally which the Labor Party conducted in that capital city. His involvement then was as passionate in its commitment as it was when he was a youth. I suppose the thing which struck me most of all as I listened to him on many occasions speaking in this House and as I frequently and clearly recall those occasions was the way in which the man expressed himself. He clearly conveyed that his feelings were steeped in a sincerity which was unassailable.
His record of service to this country, like the achievements of the governments in which he held prominent positions, speaks proudly for itself. He entered Parliament in 1919 when its meeting place was in Melbourne. He served as Speaker during the period of the Scullin Government. He was the first Speaker to shun the gown and wig, preferring a distinguished black suit and bow tie, I am informed, and proudly boasting that he 'did not need a mace to control the Parliament'; a proud boast which would be resorted to with greater caution these days, I expect, Mr Speaker.
Prime Minister Curtin appointed him to the crucial wartime post of Minister for the Navy and Minister for Munitions. He was a War Cabinet member and a member of the Production Executive of Cabinet. He also served as a member of the Australian Advisory War Council from 1940 to 1945. In 1946 Norman Makin became the first President of the United Nations Security Council. Following service as Minister for Aircraft Production under both Forde and Chifley, Prime Minister Chifley appointed him the first Australian Ambassador to the United States of America. His contribution within our Party, the Australian Labor Party, was equally commendable and just as enduring. He served as President of the South Australian Branch of the Party from 1918 to 1919, and was Secretary of the Parliamentary Labor Party from 1928 to 1929 and from 1934 to 1941. He served for a time also as Federal President of the Party.
His character was suited to the many overseas roles entrusted to him-from ambassador to his membership of the Far Eastern Commission, and his governorship of the International Bank in Washington. He established easy and often quite personal relationships with such eminent figures as the late President Truman, Nelson Rockefeller, General Marshall, Governor Dewey, Eleanor Roosevelt and a range of other people who in

their own way had been instrumental in changing or influencing the course of history.
The late Norman Makin was a noted lay preacher but he well respected the frailty of human nature. I was attracted to the obvious quality of the man of never being a moraliser, even though he was devoted, quite obviously, to the belief in the perfectability of man and society if ideals were established and pursued with generosity and sincerity. His services to the United States, to the Australian Parliament and to the Australian people exemplify that commitment in practice. The Australian Labor Party remembers Norman Makin with warm admiration and it extends deepest sympathy to his sons, Lloyd and Harold.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources)-On behalf of the members of the National Country Party I would like to join in the very fine tributes that have been paid to our late colleague Mr Norman Makin, A.O. I knew Norman Makin in this House. I also knew him long before I became a member of this House. My association goes back to the time when as a very young schoolboy my parents brought me to Canberra. We lived in the Kurrajong Hotel. Norman Makin then had a young family and everbody lived as a very happy group in either the Hotel Canberra or the Kurrajong. We lived in the Kurrajong. There was no going home at the weekends. It was just one great community with everybody relying on and getting to know each other.
I remember Norman Makin as a real gentleman. He was a very dedicated, very sincere person. He certainly was the elder of this House at the time of his retirement. I think that to reach the fine age of 93 dispels all the theories that politicians die early. The fact that he was a very good Methodist and did not drink or smoke probably added considerably to his life span. His lay background was exhibited in the way he behaved in this Parliament, in his approach to carrying out his responsibilities as a member of parliament and in his sincerity towards the Australian Labor Party, to which he had devoted his life.
I recall Norman Makin having onerous responsibilities during the war years as Minister for the Navy and then as Minister for Aircraft Production. As a boy I recall going to Garden Island for the opening of the new dock. It was Norman Makin's efforts that led to the building of that dock and he opened it on that occasion. He was a man with a most distinguished record. Very few Australians will ever achieve the record that he achieved of 36 years in Parliament, two of them as

4 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Death ofMr N. J. D. Makin. A.D.

Speaker, having held a number of portfolios. He was appointed the first Australian Ambassador to Washington. During that period he was made the first President of the Security Council of the United Nations. For anybody to have that sort of record is noteworthy and something for all of us to be proud of. Certainly this is an occasion on which to pay a tribute to him and to express sympathy to his family at the loss of a great Australian.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide)-I join earlier speakers-the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), and the Leader of the National Country Party (Mr Anthony)-in expressing condolences to Lloyd and Harold and to their wives Pauline and Colleen and their children. I say at the outset that, had he been here, certainly the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), who was a lifelong and close personal friend of Norman Makin, would have wished to join in these condolences, as would every Australian Labor Party member who has retired from this Parliament, including Clyde Cameron, Jim Toohey, Clem Ridley, Fred Birrell, Martin Nicholls, Reg Bishop, Jim Cavanagh-all people who worked with Norman over a long period of years.
Norman Makin was one of the greatest sons of the Australian working class. He was born at Petersham in New South Wales in 1889. He attended the Central Public School in Broken Hill. He was a pattern maker by trade and a member of the Australasian Society of Engineers. He entered the Parliament in 1919 at the age of 30 and he was the member for Hindmarsh until 1946. During that time he saw the transfer of the Parliament from Melbourne to Canberra. He often said that his first view of this place was from the earthworks under the floor before even one brick had been laid upon another. As has already been said, he was also Speaker of the House. He was a member of the War Cabinet from 1941 to 1946. As Minister for the Navy and Minister for Munitions from October 1941 to August 1946 he helped expand the Royal Australian Navy from a total strength of 16 ships at the beginning of the war to 350 ships at the completion of the war. He was also Minister for Aircraft Production from February 1945 to August 1946 and Acting Minister for External Affairs in 1945.
He resigned from the Parliament in August 1946 upon being appointed the first Australian Ambassador to the United States when Australia u~graded its diplomatic representation from a legatIOn. Not only was he Australia's chief delegate to the United Nations, but also he became the first President of the United Nations Security Council.

He was also a member of the Far Eastern Commission and Governor of the International Bank in Washington. Following the termination in 1951 of his appointment as Ambassador to the United States, he returned to South Australia and in 1954 ran for the seat of Sturt and was successful. After a redistribution, he transferred to the newlycreated seat of Bonython, which he won and held at two subsequent elections.

Norman Makin eventually retired from politics in 1963. He accepted very few honours-a Doctorate of Laws, membership of the Order of Australia, a United Nations Peace Medal and a certificate from the Methodist Church commending him for 70 years of lay preaching. He served his party as South Australian President, as Secretary to the Australian Labor Party in the House of Representatives, and was the first South Australian to become Federal President of the Party he loved. He served the people of three electorates for a total of 36 years in Parliament, the country for five of those years in the war Cabinet, and the international community for a further five years as diplomat and statesman.

Right up until the time of his death Norman Makin took an interest in the activities of the party. He always insisted on paying at every function to which he was invited. At every election and by-election until the time of his death Norman Makin forwarded a cheque to the Labor Party office to help its campaign funds. He was an outstanding person. He was dearly loved by everybody within the Labor Party, which is not an easy achievement, and he leaves behind him great warmth in the party. People will have great memories of Norman Makin. Very few of us will be able to emulate the great achivements of this wonderful person.

Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Vice-

President of the Executive Council)-Politics

generates its own distinctive misconceptions, and

in the vanguard of those misconceptions is the

view held by many people outside Parliament that

personal friendships cannot be formed where

there are political differences. I trust that it is the

common experience of all of us in this Parliament

to identify that as a misconception. Probably it is

just as well that that is so because unrelieved

conflict is not an emancipating element in the

democratic process.

'

When Norman Makin left this Parliament he
came to me-he always addressed ,me as
'James'-and said: 'I want to give you sOmething.' I said: 'What is that?'. He gave me thebOufid vol-
umes of the Convention Debates. It was a very
generous gift, a very valuable gift. In~eOf the

Death ofMr N. J. O. Makin, A.a.

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 5

volumes, in what I can describe only as copperplate writing, he wrote:
To The Hon. D. J. Killen, LL.B, Minister for Defence.
In acknowledgment of a warm personal friendship and with my highest regard.
NORMAN MAKIN (Former Australian Ambassador to the USA, and Minister of the Crown.)
He could have presented those volumes to scores of libraries and they would have been very welcome. Indeed, he could have given them to many of his colleagues who shared his political views, but he gave them to a person who did not share his political views. It was, I regard, a very generous expression of friendship.
He held strong political views and he held strong social views, and this is no paradox. His early life was not easy. He had a strong personal commitment to the Christian faith and he held a strong commitment to the Christian ethic. Integrity and honour, to Norman Makin, were not some curious estates to be treated in a very casual fashion. They were very precious estates. To illustrate just that I will tell a story which, I suspect, has never been told before. When Norman Makin was Ambassador to the United States the then Prime Minister Menzies visited the United States and Makin accompanied him to the White House to visit President Truman. After discussion of a quarter of an hour or so, he turned to Prime Minister Menzies and said: 'I have no doubt you will be wanting to discuss matters of great confidence', and he rose to leave. Menzies put his hand on Makin's arm and said to him: 'I have no secrets from you.'.
Norman Makin had a distinctive record of parliamentary service. It is incredible to think that a few of us sat in this House with a man who sat in the Parliament when it met in Melbourne. His political experience was immense. When in Adelaide I would visit him, and his interest was maintained to the end. He would recall with vigour past events and past political figures. He had an inquiring mind as to what was going on in politics today. On the occasion of his ninety-third birthday I sent a message to him and I received a letter in reply. I shall read it to the House. It states:
My dear James,
If my thoughts could be 'minted sovereigns'. you and your dear wife Joy would be millionaires. I am enriched in my feelings by the most gracious and generous telegram of congratulation and good wishes on the occasion of my ninety-third birthday anniversary.
You are both regal in the gifts of friendship that so crowns these my senior years with golden thoughts of the years that have been and for the years still to be for me.

Yours ever to be with respect and goodwill, Norman Makin.
The words of Robert Browning come back. He said:
Grow old along with me!
The best is yet to be,
The last of life, for which the first was made:
Our times are in His hand.
To the Makin family I extend my deepest sympathy. Norman Makin led a long life, a vigorous life. He had a very distinguished life.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython)-I wish to join briefly in this motion of condolence. Norman Makin was older than the party which he served for most of his life-a life that is now inextricably entwined in the history of that party. He could recall the election of the first ever Labor Government with an absolute parliamentary majoritythat of the Verran Government in South Australia in 1910. He was a member of this House for 37 years and four months, the third longest serving member in its history, representing in turn the seats of Hindmarsh, Sturt and Bonython. He served under every Federal Labor leader to date except the first three and the last two. He remained until his death at the age of 93 actively and passionately concerned with the party to which, with his Methodism, he had dedicated his life. I regret that I had only a minor acquaintance with his vast fund of reminiscence, anecdote and legend about the Australian Labor Party.
Others have already enumerated the high offices in which Norman Makin served this nation. I will only note, Mr Speaker, that out of that range of offices he most preferred your office. He once wrote:
My favourite position was the Speakership of the Parliament. It seemed to lift the occupant right above the contentions of politics.
This concern about the contentions of politics was a life-long theme for Norman Makin. Although he never flinched from the hurly-burly of politics, as is evidenced by his 37 years in this place, and although he always remained staunch in his convictions, he deprecated the animosity of political life. In 1931 he said:
The reason why politicians do not get on better with each other is because they will not try to understand one another.
Perhaps there are lessons for all of us here. Despite his achievements he remained always a very humble and very approachable man, seeking neither rewards nor honours for his service. Although he became the grand old man of South Australian Labor, his retention to the very end of an extraordinary youthful and zestful outlook on life enabled him easily to span the half century or

6 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Death ofMr N. J. O. Makin. A.a.

more that frequently separated him from his conversational companions. I hope the day will come when this Parliament will honour him by renaming the seat of Bonython after its first and greatest member.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh)-I wish to make a small contribution to the tributes to the late Norm Makin. I wish to pay a tribute for a number of reasons. I pay tribute to Norm Makin the member for Hindmarsh; to Norm Makin, the unionist; to Norm Makin, the statesman; and to Norm Makin, the local preacher. I was privileged to know Norm Makin initially through the trade union movement. He was a member of the South Australian branch of which I was the State Secretary. Just recently I attended a function in the company of Clyde Cameron and Norm Makin. I consider it a great privilege to have known the man.
Norm Makin was elected to the House of Representatives for the Federal seat of Hindmarsh in 1919. He was re-e1ected on a number of occasions-in 1922, 1925, 1928, 1929, 1931, 1934, 1937,1940 and 1943. He resigned in 1946. However, he re-entered Parliament in 1954, representing the seats of Sturt and, later, Bonython, in 1955, 1958 and 1961. I know that the electors of Hindmarsh, of all political persuasions, would wish to record their thanks to Norm Makin for the care and attention he gave to their representations.
Hindmarsh was well served by Norm Makin. On behalf of the people of Hindmarsh I say: 'Well done and thank you'. Norm Makin was a proud and loyal unionist, a member of the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union. He joined what was then the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, known as the ASE, in July 1911 and was a pattern maker by trade.
Norm Makin was born at Petersham, New South Wales, in 1889. His early life was spent in Broken Hill, where he became proficient as a metalworker. Trade union values and traditions were clearly a part of Norm Makin's life. He never lost those values and traditions. Speaking on the Supply Bill, in the House of Representatives on 4 March 1920, Norm Makin referred to an increase of 50 per cent over a period of eight months in the price of boots. In response to an interjection suggesting that people would end up with bare feet, Norm Makin said:
( have seen bare feet already. and ( know that children from some families are sent to school without the necessary food because the bread-winners are not receiving an adequate wage to meet the exorbitant cost of living. ( can cite a caSe of one man, a Government employee in South Australia. with a wife and nine children. He is in receipt of the minimum wage. He desires to conserve their interests and to be a faithful husband and father. ( said to him, '( suppose you will be attending the

Eight Hours celebrations tomorrow?' but he replied, 'No, ( will not be able to do so.' ( said, 'Surely you are a good unionist, a good labourite?' 'Yes', he responded. '( am that, without doubt', but where I am unable to take my wife and children I am not prepared to go myself'. I pointed out that there was nothing in connection with the Eight Hours celebrations that should hinder him from taking his family to witness them, to which he answered, 'Of course not, but the fact is that I am unable to provide my children with shoes and stockings in order to make them presentable enough to go into the city.'
Norm Makin went on to point out that at that time that was not an isolated case.
Norm Makin retained his union membership right to the end. He never faltered in his passionate defence of the working class, the trade unions and the Australian Labor Party. He was proud of the Labor movement and the Labor movement is proud of Norm Makin. Norm Makin was a statesman. The Australian Parliament has seen, and will see, many politicians but few statesman. I doubt that we shall see statesmen of the calibre of Norm Makin. His many roles included Speaker of the House, member of the Advisory War Council, and Cabinet Minister with many important portfolios such as those of Navy and Munitions.
On the international post-war scene he was the first President of the United Nations Security Council and the Australian Ambassador to the United States from 1946 to 1951. Norm Makin was recently awarded the Order of Australia-a somewhat belated but appropriate recognition of the quality of his service to the nation. Norm Makin, statesman, earned his place in Australian history. Norm Makin, local preacher, served for 75 years. In the early 1920s, when the Federal Parliament was still meeting in Melbourne, Norm Makin was much sought after by suburban churches as a preacher on special occasions. Recently he was awarded a certificate for completing 70 of those years as a local preacher in his church. Norm Makin has earned his place in Australian history.
Question resolved in the affirmative, honourable members standing in their places.
DEATH OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR PHILIP McBRIDE, P.e., KCMG.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I move:
That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 14 July of the Right Honourable Sir Philip ~~~ride. P.c., KCMG., a member of this House for the DIVISIOn of Grey from 1931 to 1937 a senator for South Australia from 1937 to 1944 and a me~ber of this House for the Division of Wakefield from 1946 to 1958, a Minister of the Crown for II years; places on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service; and tenders its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.
All honourable members were saddened to learn of the death on 14 July of Sir Philip McBride. Sir

Death ofSir Philip McBride, KCMG.

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 7

Philip was born on 18 June 1892 and was educated at Burra Public School and later at Prince Alfred College in Adelaide. He was first elected to this House for the Division of Grey at the general election of 1931. Sir Philip was re-elected to this House in 1934 and, subsequently, in October 1937 was chosen by the South Australian Parliament to fill a casual vacancy in the Senate. He was re-elected to a full term in the Senate commencing in 1938 but was defeated at the general election of 1943. In 1946 Sir Philip was re-elected to this House as the member for Wakefield and retained his seat at the general elections of 1949, 1951, 1954 and 1955.
Sir Philip began his ministerial career in the first Menzies Ministry as Assistant Minister for Commerce from April 1939 to October 1941. He was later Minister for Supply and Development and Minister for Munitions from 1940 to 1941. He was also a member of the War Cabinet during this time. Sir Philip was, in fact, the last surviving member of that first Menzies Ministry which led Australia through the early years of the Second World War. Following the return of the Menzies Government in 1949, Sir Philip resumed his ministerial career as Minister for the Interior from 1949 to 1950. In 1950 he was appointed Minister for Defence and retained that post until his retirement from Parliament in 1958. Sir Philip was also actively involved in politics outside the Parliament. He was a member of the United Australia Party when he was first elected to this Parliament and played an important role at the time of the establishment of the Liberal Party of Australia, and after his retirement from this House he maintained his involvement with politics and was Federal President of the Liberal Party from 1960 to 1965. Sir Philip also made a valuable contribution as a pastoralist and served as president of the Stockowners Association of South Australia. He was created a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George in 1953 and a Privy Councillor in 1959.
Norman Makin and Sir Philip McBride were both born before the formation of the Commonwealth of Australia. They lived through two world wars and saw vast changes throughout the time they were in public life, and indeed before. I think it does not hurt us to recall at times the changes of which they were a part and which they helped to guide. They both had a wealth of history which is beyond the living memory of the current members of this House and an experience that few of us will ever attain. Again, it is a demonstration of the very great service that has been given to this Parliament and to the people of Australia by people who have served the major

part of their lives in this institution. On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, I express sympathy to Sir Philip's widow and two surviving sons.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-I join with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and on behalf of the Opposition express condolences to the surviving members of the late Sir Philip McBride's family; that is, to Lady McBride and their two sons. The late Sir Philip McBride gave long and distinguished service to this Parliament. He served in it for 27 years and represented the seats of Grey and Wakefield. In the period during which he served in this Parliament he gave public service as Minister of the Crown in the portfolios of Commerce, Army, Supply and Development, Munitions, and again later in the Menzies Government in Army, Navy and Defence. Up to his retirement from politics he served his party as Federal President of the Liberal Party of Australia-for five years to 1965. He was of course a close associate of the late Sir Robert Menzies for some 30 years-indeed from the time of the formation of the Liberal Party. In that formation he played an instrumental and valuable role. According to all accounts he was known for his down to earth approach to politics, and at the same time for his patient behind the scenes work in influencing Liberal Party organistion and policy-making methods. He gave, through these instruments, a quiet strength to his party, especially at times of strain, and functioned as an effective resolver of tensions, especially in situations where fissures were threatening. He is survived by Lady McBride and two sons. He was aged 90 years at his death. He gave long service to this Parliament and enjoyed a long and fruitful life. We express our condolences to the surviving members of his family.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources)-I would like to pay tribute to Sir Philip McBride and to express sympathy to Lady McBride and her two sons on his death. Sir Philip was very greatly respected in this Parliament. He was of immense importance to the Liberal Party organisation and he was greatly respected as a man. At the time of my entering this Parliament he was Minister for Defence. He held that position with great distinction. I think he was aptly described as man Friday in the Menzies Cabinet-a man who always adopted a low profile approach to questions but who seemed to wield very considerable influence. He was a practical, down to earth man who held great status. His point of view was always regarded as being sound. I found him a modest man-perhaps he

8 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Death ofSir Philip McBride, KC.M.C.

was a shy man-but he was always totally responsible and totally conscious of his responsibilities as a member of parliament.
Sir Philip served in many roles in both Houses of this Parliament, the House of Representatives and the Senate, and was a member of Sir Robert Menzies' first post-war Ministry. I am told that until his death in July he was the last surviving member of the Menzies' first post-war Cabinet. He was a man one looked up to and admired. He kept active after his retirement. He was very prominent in business and within the pastoral interests of South Australia. On many occasions I had the opportunity to have discussions and exchange points of view with him. He was a man to be remembered, to be missed; a man one could easily love and respect. Therefore, I express sympathy to his family and to his friends.
Mr GILES (Wakefield)-I thank the House for permitting me, as the member for Wakefield, also to say something about Sir Philip McBride and to join in the motion of condolence. I did not sit in this House with Sir Philip McBride; at that time. I was in the State Parliament. My early memory of the greatness of the man as it affected me at that time was the tremendous trust and faith that the Premier of South Australia, Sir Thomas Playford, and the Honourable Mr McBride had in each other. I believe it was a very important facet of the trust that existed in those days between the State Government and the Federal Government, a trust which, to paraphrase the words of an earlier speaker, it is not always easy for one party to place in another. I believe he made a significant input into my State of South Australia.
Sir Philip was a part of a wonderful, long line of members for Wakefield who achieved real greatness. I refer to Sir Charles Hawker, Sir Philip McBride and, indeed, to our well-beloved Bert Kelly. Mr Speaker, Sir Philip McBride was a very perceptive, quiet and astute man who went to the core of a problem very easily and capably. For that he earned very great respect from his party colleagues. I join with other speakers in expressing sympathy to his widow and two sons.
Mr WALLIS (Grey)-As the member for Grey I add my condolence to what has been said about the late Sir Philip McBride. Sir Philip McBride was the member for Grey from 1931 until 1937 and, of course, served later as the member for Wakefield and as a senator. Whilst I did not know Sir Philip McBride personally, I certainly knew of him in politics in South Australia. He served not only as a member and as a senator but also as a Minister of the Crown in a number of

ministries. As I said, I did not know him but I did know of his political involvement. I know that he came from one of the large pastoral families in South Australia. His family was very well known. I remember my own association with one of his properties. I do not know whether Sir Philip McBride ever knew, but we used to shoot kangaroos on his property without his permission. I add my condolences to those of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and other speakers and extend my sympathy to the family of Sir Philip McBride.
Question resolved in the affirmative, honourable members standing in their places.
DEATH OF THE HONOURABLE SIR JOHN McLEAY, KCMG., M.M.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-Mr Speaker, I move:
That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 22 June of Sir John McLeay, KCMG, M.M., a member of this House for the division of Boothby from 1949 to 1966, and Speaker from 1956 to 1967, places on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service and tenders its profound sympathy to his family in their bereavement.
Mr Speaker, we were saddened to learn of the death of one our our former colleagues, Sir John McLeay, on 22 June. Sir John McLeay was one of a number of notable members who entered the House of Representatives as part of the first Liberal Government under Sir Robert Menzies in 1949. He served in this place until 1966 and held office as Speaker for a record term of ten and a half years. Throughout his lifetime Sir John and his family served this country with distinction. His brother George was a senator and Minister in the early Menzies governments and his son John succeeded him in the seat of Boothby on his retirement and also served as a Minister.
Sir John McLeay was born on 19 November 1893 at Port Clinton, South Australia. He was educated in that town and at Unley Central School. Later he took a commercial course at Muirden Col1ege. In 1915, after the outbreak of the First World War, Sir John enlisted in the first Australian Imperial Force and served in France with distinction as a stretcher bearer in the 13th Field Ambulance. He was awarded the Military Medal at Villiers-Bretonneux. Throughout his life Sir John maintained an active interest in veterans' affairs, being a past president of the South Australian Legacy Club and a past member of the board of the Returned Services League.
Sir John McLeay was wel1 versed in government before he was elected to this chamber as member for Boothby in 1949, having served in

Death ojSirJohn McLeay, KC.M.C., M.M.

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 9

both local government and in the South Australian Parliament. He was a councillor of the U nley City Council for a long period from 1925, was Mayor of that city and served as a member for Unley in the South Australian Parliament. He was also a councillor of the Adelaide City Council and the Lord Mayor of Adelaide from 1946 to 1950. As a member of the House of Representatives Sir John served on the Privileges Committee from 1950 to 1956 and was Chairman of that Committee from 31 August 1954. He was Temporary Chairman of Committees from 27 August 1952 until he succeeded the late Archie Cameron as Speaker on 29 August 1956.
It is as Speaker that Sir John McLeay is best remembered. Indeed in the decade in which he served as Speaker he became almost an institution in the chair, carrying out that role, as Harold Holt said at the time of Sir John's retirement, in a way which preserved the dignity of the House and its stature. The late Arthur Calwell, when congratulating Sir John on achieving a record term as Speaker on 12 November 1964, said that had the Opposition won the 1961 elections it would have kept Sir John as Speaker and even allowed him to wear his wig. Sir John McLeay gave great and meritorious service to Australia through a very long lifetime in many offices. He served in all levels of government with great distinction and with great honour. On behalf of the Government and the people of Australia. I extend my sympathy to Sir John's family.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-On behalf of the Opposition I join with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in extending condolences to the surviving members of the late Sir John McLeay's family-his son John, now Consul-General in Los Angeles, his son Peter and his daughter Barbara. Sir John, as the Prime Minister correctly pointed out, had a long and distinguished career of public service. He served in local government. He served as Lord Mayor of Adelaide. He served three years in the State Parliament of South Australia. He served 17 years in the national Parliament and, as if that strain was not sufficient in itself, he served in the most trying position of all-a decade as Speaker of the House of Representatives. My recollections of him are clear. He was Speaker when I arrived in 1961 and still Speaker in 1966 at the time of his retirement.
I should clearly acknowledge that there was a distinct quality to the style of control of the chamber that he adopted as Speaker. One would say that he gave it great stature and great strength but he discharged the administration of his responsibilities not always with an elegance. One

suspects that the robust good humour which he almost inevitably displayed spilled over into a general robustness at times of particular tension in the Parliament and he adapted the Standing Orders according to the circumstances prevailing. I say that with a clear recollection of some bruising which still lingers on my political psyche. I had been here but a short time and sat near where the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr Free) is now seated. Not far from me was a then irrepressible member of the Parliament, Freddy Daly. It is hard to believe these days that Freddy Daly would have been responsible for what might be described as at least moderately unseemly behaviour in the Parliament from time to time. But it was a fact, as some of us recall, and indeed witnessed. On one occasion Freddy Daly was making some pungent points in the Parliament and injecting great disorder in the ranks of the conservative Government opposite. Sir John McLeay made the quiet but firm observation that the next person to misbehave or behave in a disorderly way would be ejected from the Parliament. At that point I got up to walk out and leave the Parliament. He misinterpreted my physical movement and had me ejected immediately. Having a very conservative electorate and an extraordinarily slender majority in those days, I went back to my electorate with some timidity, but survived.
I learned to respect Sir John McLeay as Speaker in the discharge of his duties at trying times, but I learned to respect greatly and unstintingly the way in which he controlled this place. He did it mostly with a display, I repeat, of robust good humour and an understanding of the way in which the people who come to this Parliament at times conduct themselves when the going gets a little rough and provocative, and always in a way that suggested that he was prepared to make some adaptation of the Standing Orders to get around a tight spot. I observe in passing and in fairness to you, Mr Speaker, that I have noted that you too have been capable of doing that on the odd occasion, and we wish that you would extend it more often to this side of the House. But let me make it clear, and in conclusion, that my recollections of the late Sir John McLeay are affectionate ones, deeply respectful ones and ones appreciative of the service which he gave to this Parliament and service which obviously he gave to the community, while in the State Parliament of South Australia and in local government in that State. The Opposition expresses its deepest condolences to the surviving members of Sir John McLeay's family.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and

10 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Death o/Sir John McLeay. KCMG., M.M.

Resources)--I would like to associate the National Country Party with the motion moved by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and supported by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), by extending my sympathy and that of my party to the McLeay family. The death of John McLeay in June came as a very sad blow, an especially sad blow to many of us who remember Sir John with a great deal of affection. He was a jovial character who had a great capacity for remembering details about people and their lives. He was always inquiring after family circumstances. He was a very lovable character. I found out that only last year when I happened to meet him in Los Angeles, where he was visiting his son. He still recalled all the personalities and inquired fondly after them. He was a man who gave very distinguished service. He holds the record for length of service as Speaker of this House, having served a IO-year term. He followed the illustrious Archie Cameron in that position. He carried on the high standards that had been established under Archie Cameron, and I am pleased to say that they have been carried on by his successors too.
Sir John McLeay came from a very distinguished political family in South Australia. His brother, George McLeay, was a Cabinet Minister. He was a member of Sir Robert Menzies' first post-war Cabinet. In fact he was in Sir Robert's Ministry before the war. George McLeay died in office in 1955. Sir John was followed as member for Boothby by his son John, who is now Consul General in Los Angeles. Sir John McLeay will be remembered for his very outstanding service and his dedication. He was a greatly respected man, loved and admired by all. I extend very great sympathy to his son John, to John's brother Peter, his sister, Barbara, and to Lady McLeay.
Mr DOBIE (Cook)-I rise to speak briefly as a friend,of the family. I wish to record that Sir John McLeay was proud of several things. He was extremely proud of his Scottish heritage; he was extremely proud of every member of his family; and he was extremely proud of having been a member and a Speaker of this House. He always had a clear, lucid mind. It was my good fortune to be with him only a couple of nights before his death. At his great age he recalled with great humour the personalities of this place. As we have heard, he was a great Australian, not only in relation to his family and to his local area but also to his State and to his country. He was somebody to whom we should all look as an example. He had pride in what his sons and daughter had done. The mark of his real achievement in life is the affection with

which he was held and regarded at the time of his death.
Mr SPEAKER-In the course of time my family and the family of John McLeay-that is Sir John and his son John-became very closely associated. I was deeply concerned when John McLeay became ill and death was close. Notwithstanding his impending death, he was able to maintain an attitude to life which demonstrated the generosity he displayed to all people throughout his life and illustrated why he had acquired the affection of everybody who knew him. He was a very fine man, one whom I greatly admired and whose friendship I cherished.
Question resolved in the affirmative, honourable members standing in their places.
Mr SPEAKER-I thank the House.
DEATH OF MR C. E. GRIFFITHS
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Prime MinisterWannon)-I move:
That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 17 May of Charles Edward Griffiths, a member of this House for the Division of Shortland from 1949 to 1972, places on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service and tenders its sympathy to his family in its bereavement.
Honourable members will be saddened to learn of the death of one of our former colleagues, Charles Griffiths. Charlie Griffiths was born on 26 June 1903 at Jesmond, in New South Wales. He was educated at the Bribbaree Public School. Upon leaving school, Charles Griffiths joined the New South Wales Railways. He became actively involved in union affairs and was, in turn, an organiser and State councillor of the Australian Railways Union. From 1940 to 1952 he was State Secretary of that union. He was first elected to this House at the general election of 1949 for the newly created seat of Shortland. In his maiden speech to this House on 28 February 1950 he spoke of the great sacrifices made by the working people of Australia to aid the war effort and the evil influence of communism which he believed could be defeated if people could look to a secure economic future, free from poverty.
Charles Griffiths served as a member of the Printing Committee from 1951 to 1954 and was a member of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works from 1959 to 1966. He was a member of the Australian delegation to the ninth session of the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1964 and, in 1966, was a member of a parliamentary delegation to South Asia. In 1969 he was a member of the parliamentary mission which visited Hong Kong, Japan, the Republic of Korea and Taiwan. At the general election of 1972 he retired from this Parliament.

Death of Mr C. E. Griffiths

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES II

On behalf of the Government and people of Australia, I extend my sympathy to his widow, Jess, and to his family in their bereavement.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-On behalf of the Opposition, I join with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in extending sympathies to the surviving members of the late Charlie Griffiths's family. He served in this Parliament for 23 years. I served with him for II of those years. He was well known to me and recognised and respected as a hard working representative of his electorate. He was, in truth, an authentic voice of a very large and important section of the Australian community. He sought to present the problems which confronted ordinary people in the day to day challenge of living in society in the context of the speeches which he made in this Parliament. It was clear from the way in which he projected those experiences of ordinary people and the feeling with which he presented those experiences that he was dedicated in his service to his electorate.
It is important in this institution that not only the technical and complex matters that present themselves to this Parliament be responded to technically and in a complex way, as befits the particular issues of the time, but that also the problems that confront ordinary people, as prosaic as they may be, are also addressed. If that responsibility is failed, a very serious failure is evident in the way in which this parliamentary institution functions.
Charlie Griffiths's speeches, as I say, were always down to earth. There was a homespun quality about them. But they were always relevant to the experiences of people who were struggling, often with the greatest disadvantages, in ordinary society. They are innumerable; and they go to make up the Australian community. But his speeches were not always prosaic. Some of them were quite significant in the way in which they addressed themselves to particular issues, and some were memorable. I seem to recall that his farewell speech had a rather rivetting quality, and the Leader of the Opposition at that stage probably gave more attention to it than he gave to any other speech which the late Charlie Griffiths delivered in this Parliament.
The service of the late Charlie Griffiths in this Parliament has been referred to in some detail by the Prime Minister. It scarcely, therefore, requires me to go over that service again. I repeat that the Opposition feels greatly diminished at the loss of a former colleague who served the Labor Party well and who gave it lengthy service. Our condolences

are conveyed to the surviving members of his family.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources)-On behalf of the National Country Party, I would like to support the condolence motion and express sympathy to the members of Charlie Griffiths's family. Those honourable members who were in Parliament during this period will remember him. He was one of those people who had very strong beliefs. He was a very earnest character, but he had a great sense of humour and could always laugh at himself if need be. He was ready and willing always to get into the debates of this House. He was a very hard worker and, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has said, he had a great social conscience. Hardly an adjournment debate or a grievance debate would go by without him revealing some particular hard case. He was very concerned about social welfare and about pensions. He was well known for his participation in debates and his contributions to trying to help people in this area of great need.
Charlie Griffiths was an unfortunate member of Parliament in that he came here in 1949 and he retired in 1972-a long period of some 23 years and the Labor Party was in opposition for all of it. If the Labor Party had been in office, I am sure that Charlie Griffiths would have been a Minister and would have played an important part in a Labor government of the day. He was a man who was always hard working and who was ready to do his bit for the party, for the Parliament and for Australia. My sympathy goes to his family.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-I join the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in paying tribute to my predecessor and friend, Charles Edward Griffiths, or Charles as he was known to his family and close personal friends. His career was that of a local boy who devoted his life to the service of the community in which he grew up and of his fellow unionists of the Australian Railways Union. In the latter half of his life he went on to represent them in this House as the member for the new electorate of Shortland from its creation in 1949 until his retirement in 1972.
He started work in 1917 at 14 years of age as a shop boy in a railway depot in Newcastle. He progressed to become a top tradesman as a machine moulder at Honeysuckle workshop. From an early age he was active in industrial and political affairs, having joined the ARU in 1919. He became secretary of the Newcastle branch of the

12 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Death ofMr C. E. Griffiths

ARU in 1941 and then in 1945 its northern organiser for the area from Gosford in the south to the Queensland border in the north. In those ~ays union organisers did not have access to provided cars or other forms of transport. Many former colleagues of Charles still remember the familiar sight of him pushing his way to the various wor~ shops and job locations along the track on his
push bike.
His political career began when he joined the Adamstown branch of the Australian Labor Party in 1924. He later became president of the branch for 13 consecutive years. He was also elected to the presidency of the Hamilton State Electorate Council and served as a member of the State Executive of our party for the 11 years prior to his election to this House. As the first member for Shortiand, Charles quickly earned a reputation as a fighter for the rights of the battler, the ordinary man, the disadvantaged, the pensioners and the ex-servicemen. Literally thousands of his constituents would not have received their rightful entitlements had he not been here to fight their case for them either with the bureaucracy or with the Ministry. In the Parliament, in addition to normal parliamentary duties, Charles served as a member of the Joint Committee on Publications for two years and the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for eight years, when he stood down to provide opportunity for younger colleagues to participate.
Charles Edward Griffiths was a humble man and a good family man. He was a man who did not seek the limelight. He chose instead to serve the people he represented. I was very moved when I visited him a few weeks prior to his death on 17 May 1982 when, although fully aware of the seriousness of his illness, he stressed to me his love of Australia and his love of the Labor movement. He stressed to me also the vital need to carryon the struggle for the rights of the less privileged and the disadvantaged members of our community. His regret was that he had spent all his parliamentary life in opposition. If there was one tinge of bitterness in those last remarks and those last words to me it was in respect of a matter, the motive for which he was never able to understand. That concerned a reference to him by a weekend newspaper journalist as 'Charlie Who?'. That was something which hurt him deeply and it was something that he never got over.
Charles was the mainstay of his family-a large and close family-and a respected member of the Uniting Church. He served the electors of Shortland well; he served his union well and he served this Parliament well. Many people have reason to be thankful that Charles Edward

Griffiths was their representative in this House. To his widow, Jess, who supported him throughout their life together with all the pressures of union and parliamentary duties, to his son, Neville, to his daughter, Anne, and to the members of the Griffiths and Moxey families, I express my deepest sympathy in their bereavement.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes)-Mr Speaker, you and I served with Charles Griffiths for 17 years prior to 1972 when he left the Parliament. I suppose the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) would also recall, as he was also involved in debate in the Parliament at that time, that Charles had a great devotion to social welfare cases and to repatriation cases especially. He was not a man who had a hilarious sense of humour by any means, but I do recall a number of anecdotes about him. One is the connection with an occasion when he was telling the Parliament in great detail about the adversity of an ex-serviceman who, he said, had lost a limb, had had two heart attacks, and also had had a steel plate inserted in the back of his head. The man was totally disabled. Charles Griffiths said accusingly to the Government: 'What work do you expect a man such as that to do?' Eddie Ward retorted: 'Put him in the Senate.' That was one of the few occasions on which Charles took a joke very well.
Charles Griffiths was a very earthy man and a great family man. He served on the New South Wales Executive of the Australian Labor Party for nine years. He was devoted to his son and daughter and to his wife Jess. We would call Charles Griffiths a fair dinkum Labor bloke of the old school. He used to say that the rot set in in this country when people stopped using the lay-by system and resorted to using credit and hire purchase systems. That wiII give honourable members an idea of the type of fellow he was. I have very fond recollections of the service he gave to this Parliament and of the great devotion and sense of duty he had to under-privileged people in the community.
Question resolved in the affirmative, honourable members standing in their places.
DEATH OF MR J. L. CREMEAN
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House of the death on II August of Mr John La'Yr~r.tce Cremean, a member of this House for the dlvlslon of Hoddle from 1949 to 1955. As a mark of respect to the memory of Mr Cremean I invite honourable members to rise in their places.
Honourable members having stood in their places-

Notices ofMotion

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 13

Mr SPEAKERI thank the House.
APPOINTMENT OF CLERK OF THE HOUSE
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that the former Deputy Clerk of the House, Mr D. M. Blake, has been appointed to the office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives on and from 16 July 1982.
USE OF HANSARD REPORTS OF HOUSE PROCEEDINGS IN THE
COURTS
Mr SPEAKER-On 20 July 1982 I approved a request from counsel assisting the Royal Commission into the Australian Meat Industry that I allow certain Hansard reports of proceedings of this House to be adduced into evidence and referred to by the Royal Commission. Before giving that approval I satisfied myself that there was no question of privilege involved and that to refuse the request could have caused a delay in the work of the Royal Commission. I informed the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen), the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen), and the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) of my decision.
To avoid delays in the administration of justice it was long the practice of the Speaker of the United Kingdom House of Commons to grant such requests when the Commons was not sitting. This practice is no longer followed since the Commons resolved in October 1980 that its leave to use House records in the Courts was no longer required.
The decision I made on this occasion was entirely in accordance with the practice previously operating in the Commons. I propose to follow a similar practice in the future when the House is not sitting provided I am satisfied that there is no question of privilege involved. However, in doing so, I shall ensure that the attention of the court or tribunal concerned is drawn to the need to have proper regard to the limitations imposed by Article 9 of the Bill of Rights as applied through section 49 of the Constitution to safeguard the interests of this House and its members.
MILITARY USE OF TOXIC MATERIALS IN VIETNAM
Notice of Motion
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:

That this House(1) notes the Government's failure to debate 4 general
business notices of motion standing in the name of the Member for Melbourne Ports, the first of which was given on 25 November 1980, all of which have proposed a judicial inquiry into the claims of Vietnam veterans about their exposure to toxic chemicals; (2) expresses its grave concern at the Prime Minister's continued refusal to answer Question No. 1972 which was first placed on the Notice Paper on 9 April 1981, despite repeated challenges to do so, inside and outside the Parliament; (3) deplores the Prime Minister's continued failure to respond to grave charges made against him by the Member for Melbourne Ports in this House in debate on the Matter of Public Importance on 18 March 1982; (4) further notes that 39 ex-service organisations now support the call for a Royal Commission into the military use of toxic chemicals in Vietnam, and that included in this number is the Australian Veterans and Defence Services Council, and (5) therefore calls on the Prime Minister to(a) establish immediately the Royal Commission
sought by Vietnam veterans, and (b) make a statement to the House setting out his
personal involvement in all aspects of this matter, and the reasons for his procrastination.
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
Notice of Motion
Dr EVERINGHAM (Capricornia)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House, recognising that war begins in human minds, that the first casualty is truth and that Australia has breached international law, calls upon the Government to campaign for-
(I) worldwide democratic election of citizens' representatives to a United Nations chamber; and
(2) an International Year or Years for promotion of(a) democratically enforceable international law; (b) non-partisan versions of history; (c) frank apology for errors by all nations; (d) allocation of one percent of arms budgets to peace promotion activities, and (e) allocation of 0.7 percent of gross national product of affluent nations for self-development and selfsufficiency aid to the poor in the poorest nations.
HOMELESS YOUTH
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(1) notes the findings of the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare that 12,000 Australian children, many of them unemployed young teenagers are homeless, and finds the continuation of this situation completely intolerable, and
(2) calls on the Government to(a) raise the amount of assistance through the Homeless Persons Assistance Act 1974 as a matter of urgency; (b) raise the amount paid to 15-18 year old unemployed, and

14 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Questions without Notice

(c) to confer if necessary with its State counterparts regarding the construction of emergency accommodation to get our young people off the streets.

these areas. However, is it not true that there are some people in other parts of Australia, such as Muttaburra, Jundah, Dajarra and other small

BUDGET

centres, who do not have access to any radio or

Notice of Motion
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:

television services at all? Can the Minister please inform us what is proposed to be done to provide broadcasting services and television services to these people?

That this Parliament disapproves the selective and organised leaking of so-called Budget 'goodies'.
NOTICES OF MOTION
Mr SPEAKER-I should indicate to the

Mr N. A. BROWN-It is true, as the honourable member observed, that only a few days ago the Government announced that it would introduce a system of supplementary licences for radio

House that the first three notices of motion as given were excessive in length and contained argument rather than simple proposition. I must say that the fourth notice of motion was certainly a proposition in a simple form. I indicate to all honourable members that in the future I will not allow notices of motion to canvass the arguments that will be used to support a proposition and that the notices of motion will be required to be confined to the proposition.

and television. This, as I think the honourable member indicated, will bring frequency modulation radio to many country and regional towns and also a second television channel to those areas. However, the honourable member quite rightly drew attention to the fact that there are also some particularly remote areas of this country which still do not have any radio at all and which do not have any television at all. The Government has been concerned for a number of

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

years about the lack of services in those areas. The Government's response to this problem has

taken several aspects, one of which is the Remote

TAXATION

Areas Television Service, which takes television signals from the international satellite. Without

Mr WILLIS-I address my question to the. having to pre-empt anything the Treasurer may

Treasurer. Is it a fact that without income tax cuts say tonight, I am confident that our program in

totalling about $I,500m this financial year, Austhis regard will be continuing. There are many

tralian taxpayers will be paying a higher proplaces which are scheduled to receive that satel-

portion of their incomes in tax this year because of lite television service. I am in the process of

the Government's decision to abolish full tax examining a number at the moment. Bya remark-

indexation? Will the Treasurer concede, thereable coincidence Muttaburra, which is oneof the

fore, that there will be no real tax cuts unless inplaces that the honourable member just men-

come tax cuts of more than $I,500m are antioned, is one such place to which I have very re-

nounced tonight and that any increases in indirect cently approved the extension of the Remote

taxes will increase the amount of income tax cut Areas Television Service. That town has a popu-

needed to produce real tax cuts?

lation of some 400 people. In view of the fact that

Mr HOWARD-I invite my colleague to contain his interest and curiosity just a little longer. No doubt he will have plenty of opportunityincluding a full hour before that august body, the National Press Club, a week from tomorrow-to expound his views on his party's stand on taxation

the acquisition of land, which is necessary for the system, and the acquisition of equipment, which is also necessary for the system, are both well advanced, I am confident that television will be brought to that town and that area at least by the time of the Brisbane Commonwealth Games.

and also on that of the Government.

TAXATION

BROADCASTING: NON-METROPOLITAN

Mr MILDREN-My question is directed to

REGIONS

the Treasurer. Is it a fact that when the .present

Mr KATTER-I address my question to the Minister for Communications. The people of the areas involved noted recently with jubilation and with appreciation the announcement on the introduction of supplementary licences for nonmetropolitan radio and television services. This, of course, will bring an improvement in the choice of broadcasting outlets available to people in

tax rates were introduced in 1977-78 he claimed that only half a million taxpayers w~uld i>epaying more than the standard rate of 32c In the dollar? Is it a fact also that more thantwo million taxpayers are now paying more than, thiS.s,iiuldatd rate? Finally, is it a fact thatacCOrdingt? the latest statistics all average wage earners wIll be
paying a marginal rate of 46c in the dollar by the

Questions without Notice

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 15

end of 1982 unless the upper income threshold is changed for the 32c category?
Mr HOWARD-I do not remember what claims I made about the standard rate system because I was under the severe disability of not being Treasurer in 1977 when those rate scales were introduced. But I remember, in joining my colleague the then Treasurer, and the Prime Minister, making the entirely correct claim that the standard rate reform of 1977 introduced a simplified three-step rate scale which replaced the infinitely more complex rate scale which had, of course, been the subject of very significant change in 1975 when the Leader of the Opposition was Treasurer.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE FIGHTER SQUADRONS IN MALAYSIA
Mr FALCONER-My question is directed to the Minister for Defence. It concerns the news release which he made in Kuala Lumpur on II August relating to the deployment of Royal Australian Air Force fighter aircraft in Malaysia. Did the Minister say that one of the two RAAF Mirage squadrons presently located there would be withdrawn to Australia in 1983 but that a decision about the other squadron would be left to a later stage after consultation with the Government of Malaysia? What circumstances have influenced this change in the previously announced decision to withdraw both squadrons from Malaysia? What consideration is presently being given to the stationing of RAAF FA 18 aircraft in Malaysia?
Mr SINCLAIR-To start off with I should explain that there has been no change in the Government's announced position. At no stage have I or my predecessor suggested that a decision with respect to the second RAAF fighter squadron would be made before the discussions which are to take place in 1984. Those discussions are expected to embrace the degree to which the FA 18 has been progressed in its introduction to service in the RAAF and, of course, the manpower requirements that will be involved in the change from the existing Mirage squadrons to FA 18 squadrons. Any involvement of the RAAF in Butterworth has, of course, been in total agreement with the Government of Malaysia. There is no doubt that the presence of RAAF aircraft there has not only been appreciated by that Government but also has contributed significantly towards the enhanced security that is apparent in the region. In the future matters will need to be considered by both governments. It is for that reason that the whole question is up for review in 1984. In addition to the Mirage squadrons there is a flight of transport aircraft and P3C long range

maritime patrol aircraft stationed there from time to time.
SALE OF SHARES IN TREAMOG LTD
Mr MOUNTFORD-My question is directed to the Treasurer. Does an appendix to the McCabe-Lafranchi report show that vendors who sold shares in Treamog Ltd received in cash an amount equal to the accumulated funds of the company including the amount that ought to have been set aside as legally payable income tax? Since the Treasurer said on 25 July that his proposed legislation to recover tax evaded would be aimed at those who practised what could be called the Treamog ploy, will he guarantee that the legislation will take effect from at least 10 December 1976 the day on which the Treamog vendors sold their shares?
Mr HOWARD-I cannot recall every appendix to that report which was, of course, commissioned by the former Liberal Government of Victoria, not by the Victorian Labor Government, after discussion and consultation with the Federal Government at that time. Be that as it may, I accept that what the honourable gentleman said about the appendix is probably correct. I can say to him only that the Government has already announced its intention to bring in special legislation to collect taxation which was illegally evaded under the so-called bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. I am not yet able to say who will or will not be affected by that legislation. In the nature of the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act I doubt that I will be able to do so. Frankly, I do not know that I would want to be-I do not know that any Treasurer should specifically want to be-in the situation of knowing whether individuals might be affected by that legislation. However, I can give the honourable gentleman and the House an assurance that the legislation, if approved by the Parliament, will fall where it may and that no individual will receive preferential treatment from this Government as it prepares the legislation or, indeed, from the Commissioner of Taxation in his enforcement of that legislation.
VICTORIA: DROUGHT RELIEF
Mr FISHER-Is the Minister for Primary Industry aware of a reported request by the Victorian Government for special assistance for drought relief in that State? Can the Minister advise whether any such request has actually been made? If so, what is the Government's reaction to it?
Mr NIXON-It is correct that a request has come from the Premier of Victoria to the Prime

16 Ri:PRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Questions without Notice

J\.1iqister for fin~ncial ~ssistanc~ in drought aid !n that State. I noticed with some mterest a report m the Press that the Premier had asked for in the ordef.,o(SIOm. The telex that has come in does not mention any figure, but is simply a request. Indeed the telex shows a lack of appreciation and of real'knowledge of how the system of drought aid felllly works. I would like the Premier of Victoria to know that the present drought funding arrangements go back to the early I960s when a formula approach was devised by the then Treasurer, the late Harold Holt, which formula with some changes, is still in existence. All that is required for the Premier to ensure that he obtains funding is for him to make sure that the first $7m of drought assistance is paid by the State. The Commonwealth will contribute $3 for $1 after that amount has been paid.
It is interesting to note that, over the last two or three years, the Commonwealth has contributed $100m towards State drought assistance under that formula. The Premier ought also to know that there is no limit to the amount of funding available on the $3 for $1 basis once a State is eligible for it. Once the Premier has spent his first $7m, the Commonwealth will provide funding in a big way. The sooner the Premier gets on with the busiriess of assisting the farmers with their problems, the better it will be for all.
The Premier has said that we have been kind enough to assist New South Wales in a different fashion. He is again obviously unaware that New South Wales unlike Victoria, has suffered significant droughts and is now running into its fourth season of drought. For that reason, last year we made $20m available as an interest-free loan-not as a grant, as I suspect the Premier of Victoria believes-and this year we made available $10m as an interest-free loan. New South Wales has run into genuine financial difficulties because of the continuing drought over a number of years. Victoria is not in that situation. Therefore, I do not think that the Commonwealth would see it as proper to depart from the normal drought arrangements at this point. The Prime Minister will be responding to the Premier in due course.
MR DENIS HORGAN
Mr ROBERT BROWN-My question is directed to the Treasurer. I remind him that, on 2 June last, the Prime Minister, when referring to those people holding government positions identified by the McCabe-Lafranchi report as being involved in tax rorts, said that the responsible Ministers should consider whether those persons should continue in their positions. Has the

Treasurer, as the Minister responsible for the Australian Industry Development Corporation, yet reconsidered his appointment to the board of the AIDC of Mr Denis Horgan?
Mr HOWARD-The answer to the honourable gentleman's question is yes. Certain provisions under the AIDC Act govern the fitness or otherwise of people to continue to hold such a position. The Government has very carefully considered Mr Horgan's position. I can tell the House that the Government does not believe that the naming of certain individuals in reports which have recently been published of itself represents sufficient grounds for those people to resign or to be removed from public positions that they might now hold.
Mr Dawkins-Oh, he is a crook. He is a crook! The Liberal Party employs people like that and to get rid of them you would have to sack the whole party.
Mr HOWARD-Calm down, will you?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle will remain silent.
Mr HOWARDI can only say-
Mr Dawkins-You can't tell the difference between the crooks and the others over there.
Mr SPEAKER-The Treasurer will resume his seat. The honourable member for Fremantle will cease interjecting. I call the Treasurer.
Mr HOWARD-I can only repeat that this Government will not yield to the yahoo pressure which suggests that just because somebody is named in a report that is ipso facto a reason why that person should be removed from a position. I repeat-this is what matters to the people of Australia who are concerned about an equitable taxation system which honourable members on the other side of the House ought to be concerned about-that the Government has already announced its intention to bring in special legislation to collect taxation which was illegally evaded under the schemes covered by that report. I am not able to say who will be affected by the legislation. However, I assure the House, as I did in answer to the honourable member for Banks, that that legislation will indeed fall where it may and that no individual, irrespective of the position that that individual holds, will receive preferential treatment from the Government, as it prepares the legislation, or from the Commissioner of Taxation in his enforcement of the legislation. I believe and the Government believes that that is the right, correct and proper attitude to take. We will not yield to yahoo pressure simply because somebody happens to be named in an individual report.

Questions without Notice

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 17

CLOSER ECONOMIC RELATIONS WITH NEW ZEALAND
Mr BURR-My question is directed to the Minister for Administrative Services. In view of the effect that closer economic relations with New Zealand may have on a number of industries in Australia and in particular in Tasmania, will the Government agree to ask the Industries Assistance Commission to conduct a full inquiry into all the implications of CER before any agreement is concluded with the New Zealand Government?
Mr NEWMAN-The honourable member would be aware that quite detailed consultations have taken place between me and other senior Ministers of the Federal Government and Tasmanian interests over a range of industries. They include particularly the vegetable industry, the dairy industry and latterly the timber industry. In all of those consultations, we have sought to make very clear to those interests what the Government's policy is, that is, principally that there should be industry to industry consultations between the two countries. As the question of the lAC was raised, I will refer the question to the other responsible Ministers.
PROPOSED TAXATION LEGISLATION
Mr BEAZLEYMy question is directed to the Prime Minister. Has his attention been drawn to reports of a campaign by various high income groups against legislation which proposes to enable recovery of tax lost through bottom-of-theharbour schemes? Is he also aware that the Liberal Party in Western Australia and the Premier of Western Australia endorse this campaign? Will the Prime Minister give an undertaking to the House that opposition to the proposed legislation from vested interests will not stop him from introducing it as soon as possible and will not influence its content in any way? Will the Prime Minister now say when the House can expect to see this legislation?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The draftsman has been given instructions for that legislation to be prepared with maximum urgency. It will be introduced into the Parliament as soon as it has gone through the processes. It is intended that that should be early in this session. I give a total and unequivocal commitment that the kind of campaign that is being pursued publicly and through advertisements in the newspapers will not push the Government from its intention, its decision and its determination. There is no way that that statement can or will be qualified. It does not matter who is involved in particular campaigns. I think the honourable gentleman may have taken the name of the Premier of Western

Australia in vain. I have not seen comments associated with the Premier in relation to this matter. The legislation, once it has gone through the processes, will be introduced into this Parliament and will be pressed through the Parliament with the utmost vigour which the Government can command.
LEBANON
Mr GILES-Has the Minister for Foreign Affairs any information as to whether the Lebanese Government and, through it, the Palestine Liberation Organisation, have accepted Israeli final conditions governing the enforced exodus of the PLO from Beirut?
Mr STREET-I cannot give an unequivocal answer to the honourable gentleman. We have maintained contact with the activities of Mr Philip Habib, the United States emissary who has been trying to arrange a satisfactory agreement between the various parties for a withdrawal of the PLO and, indeed, all forces, from that unhappy country, Lebanon, and to enable the sovereignty of the Lebanese Government over its country to be returned to it. We certainly hope that this can be achieved. As the Prime Minister announced only a week or so ago, the Australian Government has given a lead to the world community in announcing that Australia will make $lOm available for the rebuilding of Beirut when circumstances allow that to happen. We hope that other countries of the world will follow our example.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Cunningham having addressed a question to the Prime Minister-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order.
Mr Hayden-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Tax dodging is a very serious matter in the community, creating great vexation for ordinary, decent and honest members of the community. Such a serious declaration by a senior member of the Liberal Party serving in this Parliament and former Minister requires some sort of response from the Prime Minister.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has made his point of order.
Mr Hayden-There should be no accommodation of tax dodgers anywhere, least of all within the Liberal Party.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has made his point of order. He well knows that there is no substance to it. The Prime Minister is in no way responsible for statements made by a

18 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Questions without Notice

member of the Senate who is not a member of the Government.
URANIUM MINING
Mr TAMBLING-My question is directed to the Minister for Trade and Resources. Now that the Jabiluka project has received the necessary approvals and authorisations to proceed to production as a uranium miner and exporter in the Northern Territory, can the Minister advise the House when he expects the Koongarra uranium project to be in a similar position?
Mr ANTHONy-it is the Government's policy to encourage the development of uranium resources in the Northern Territory and it is very pleasing that we have reached the stage where the Jabiluka project has now been given approval to proceed. As far as the Koongarra project is concerned, it is necessary for three requirements to be met before development approval can be given; that is, it must have the agreement of the Aboriginal people, it must conform with the environmental requirements and there must be compliance with our foreign investment policy. In relation to the environmental area, this Parliament passed legislation last year changing the original excised area for the Koongarra project. This was as a result of a request from the company and an evaluation of the possible environmental consequences for the Kakadu National Park. It was pointed out in the second reading speech that this change would actually improve the value of the park as well as help the mining company to meet the environmental regulations. That legislation was passed. Up to this point, although there have been discussions with the Aboriginals, they have some reservations about the altered boundary.
Mr Holding-The Aborigines have said they are opposed to it.
Mr ANTHONY-Allow me to finish. I am saying that they have some reservations about the area.
Mr Uren-The Ranger Inquiry had a few reservations too.
Mr ANTHONY-If the honourable member wants to talk about uranium, we are quite happy to do so, because we are happy with his policy. At the moment, further discussions are scheduled between the relevant land council and the traditional owners. I believe they will take place shortly. I hope that agreement will be reached. There is no objection to the actual mining of uranium; it is more a concern about the new boundaries around the prescribed area. As far as compliance with the foreign investment rules is concerned, Denison, which is a wholly-owned

Canadian company, will be required to divest down to 25 per cent of its current interest. At this point-to the best of my knowledge at any rate-no proposal has been put to the Foreign Investment Review Board. I hope that all these requirements will be satisfied in the fairly near future so that the Koongarra project can proceed, as is the Jabiluka project, because uranium development is very important to the commerce of the Northern Territory, and to employment and, of course, is of benefit to Australia in relation to a further export earning and making our contribution to the energy requirements of a needy world.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Les Johnson having addressed a question to the Prime Mini5ter-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will have to rephrase his question for it to be in order. I interpret it as asking the Treasurer for a legal opinion, and that is out of order.
Mr Young-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. This matter is already of some public consequence because the Treasurer has put out Press releases about it, I understand.
Mr SPEAKER-But the question, in the way in which it is framed, is asking whether it is legal and proper. It must be asking for a legal opinion.
INCREASE IN AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS: EFFECT ON TRADE
Mr BRADFIELD-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. It stems from statistics released yesterday that show a 17 per cent-plus increase in average weekly earnings. I ask: What effect will this have on our international competitiveness and what measures can be taken to stop Australia's gradual self-destruction through selfish and unrealistic earnings expectations?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I think that there is a great deal that can be done. I think that a good deal has been done over the recent period. The conference that was held between the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the Confederation of Australian Industry and the Government had a number of common elements. Whilst the parties to that conference would have given different emphasis to different events and circumstances, I think there was a common thread running through our concerns for the Australian economy, caused significantly but not exclusively by two factors, one being the downturn in the world economy, which is having a dramatic effect on export income and commodity prices. Nowhere is that more evident than in my electorate, where

Questions without Notice

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 19

the Alcoa smelter has come to a halt. It will be a ghost works for a considerable period. Honourable members may not be aware that that plant was being established not to supply the Australian market but to supply world markets in total, using Australian bauxite and Australian power. Those markets, of course, do not exist and the company ran out of funds and could not get partners. In those circumstances, it unfortunately had no choice. That is one of the starkest reminders of what can happen as a result of world recession and world difficulties.
On top of that many countries, because they were in a period of recession and of high and rising levels of unemployment-up to nearly 14 per cent in the United Kingdom and about \0 per cent in the United States-had been achieving through last year and the period before that levels of wage settlement of around 5 per cent or 6 per cent. The mood in the Australian economy and, I think, amongst the overwhelming number of Australians at this time last year was quite different from that which exists today. Unfortunately, there were wage pressures and wage agreements which tended to make Australian industry and exporters much less competitive at a time when other countries were becoming more and more competitive, even though they were under the threat of the difficulties imposed by the very real economic downturn in those countries. Be that as it may, the kind of figure that the honourable gentleman gave, which has recently been published, obviously makes us less competitive at a time when other people have been becoming more competitive. There is much that we need to do about it. I think the conference organised between the ACTU, the CAl and the Government provides a foundation upon which it is possible to build. I think also that the acceptance of the parties concerned-the maritime unions, the industries or companies concerned and the Government-of the Crawford report provides an example of working together, of a very real recognition that Australians have to sit down and solve problems together rather than try to argue about them or cast blame for what might have happened in the past.
In relation to the coal industry, there are Jhings that have needed doing. It would have been very easy to take certain attitudes about the reasons for delays out of certain coal ports. Instead of taking that as a purely political point it is much more important to sit down with the New South Wales and Queensland governments and the unions and companies concerned to take measures and decisions which will get coal moving and which will remove the bottle-necks, whether they are physicalor industrial relations, so that we can deliver

coal on time to our customers overseas. A great deal has been achieved in the last three or four months. There is much yet remaining to be done in that particular area.
Obviously the Government can take other decisions. We believe that we needed to make a special effort to set an example from the highest paid people within the Commonwealth environment. As a result of that, special submissions were made by me and by the Treasurer, obviously with the Government's full support, to the Remuneration Tribunal. Honourable members all know the result of that. If there had been a recommendation for a 12 per cent, 13 per cent or a 14 per cent wage increase, coming on top of what had happened before, it would have been very easy for that to be regarded as a bench-mark for other decisions. It could be said: 'You have had your 12 per cent, why shouldn't we?' A very different recommendation came forward in the event. The Academic Salaries Tribunal has followed that lead. A number of private enterprise companies around Australia have followed that lead and some have indeed gone a good deal further than that. Other submissions are being made before wage fixing tribunals.
I have written to Premiers in relation to these matters. The Premier of New South Wales has already taken action of a quite dramatic kind in relation to certain salary increases for public servants of the Government of New South Wales. So long as there is a recognition that this kind of restraint is important throughout all sections of the Australian community to return this country to the kinds of economic health and growth that we would all want, then I believe we have a capacity to work together and to achieve just that.
Statements by significant union leaders in recent times have contributed to the mood for restraint. I will be very disappointed, and I believe the Government and the Treasurer will be very disappointed if, as a result of the Budget that is announced tonight, there will not be a capacity to build more on the mood for restraint. I think that the Budget will establish substantial arguments in support of that in future wage determinations. Therefore, a number of avenues are open to the Government, and a number of avenues are open to other sections or groups within the Australian community, but overridingly we have to recognise that there are significant problems, some of which are home grown and some of which are caused by the wider world outside. We are not going to overcome those problems unless we have a capacity to work together to achieve results. I believe a significant advance in that direction has already been made.

20 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Questions without Notice

TAX DEDUCTIONS
Mr LES JOHNSON-My question is directed to the Treasurer. Has the tax deduction offered by the Liberal Party of Australia to those who help fund the Cook electorate been brought to his attention? Is any action being taken to prevent this scheme from being implemented? Can the Treasurer guarantee that no other form or variation of the access scheme is in operation?
Mr HOWARD-That matter has been brought to my attention. I made a statement a couple of weeks ago making it perfectly clear that there is no provision in the tax law of this country which would enable donations, as such, to a political party to be tax deductable. I discussed the matter with the then Acting Commissioner of Taxation who told me that contributions to bodies of the type described by the honourable member would not be tax deductible. He also said that contributions to foundations established by financial supporters of another political party would likewise not be tax deductible. Under those circumstances I give the maximum assurance that can be given by a Treasurer, having regard to the responsibilities of the Commissioner of Taxation for administration of the Act. I think the honourable member is really concerned, as I believe his question indicates, that moneys which are not tax deductible do not wind up in the hands of a political party. I gather by his nodding that that is what he is concerned about. I hope that he will talk to the treasurer of every branch of the Australian Labor Party around Australia as a result of his concern in the matter and make sure that the next time the treasurer of that Labor Party branch receives a donation from a trade union movement, that treasurer gets a written undertaking from the secretary of the trade union movement that none of the contribution has come out of the fees of the members of that trade union, because those fees themselves are tax deductible.
DONATIONS TO RELIEF FUND
Mr COLEMAN-My question, which is directed to the Treasurer, refers to the national organisation, of which the Prime Minister is patron, which is seeking to raise funds for relief in Lebanon. Has that organisation applied to have donations to that relief fund made tax deductible? Has the Treasurer made a decision on those representations?
Mr HOWARD-I have been approached by that particular organisation. I can inform the honourable gentleman that the request is being sympathetically considered at present. I hope to be able to make a statement about it tomorrow.

TAX DODGING SCHEMES
Mr CUNNINGHAM-Is the Prime Minister aware of any of his ministerial or former ministerial colleagues being involved in tax dodging schemes? What action has the Prime Minister taken to guarantee that neither he, nor any present or past member of his Ministry, is or was involved in tax dodging schemes?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Treasurer has made it very plain and I have made it very plain that as a result of legislation that is being introduced, it will fall where it may. That will be a matter for either the law authorities or the Tax Commissioner to prosecute. I am no more aware of negotiations that have gone forward between any members of this ~arliament, whether they are Ministers or private members of parliament, and the Tax Commissioner, than I am of the negotiations that have gone forward, no doubt from time to time, between the Tax Commissioner and members of the Australian Labor Party of the Opposition. Those matters, as the honourable gentleman would know, are matters for the Chief Commissioner of Taxation to pursue. There are certain laws of secrecy in relation to that. If the honourable gentleman would like the Tax Commissioner to inform me of negotiations with all members of Parliament, including all members of the Australian Labor Party, I suspect he will be advancing something which his colleagues may not want.
LIVE SHEEP EXPORTS
Mr LLOYD-Can the Minister for Primary Industry inform the House of any progress in the resolution of the live sheep export issue?
Mr NIXON-I held a meeting in Melbourne yesterday with the producers, processors and the Australian Council of Trade Unions on this question. At yesterday's meeting the producers confirmed that they were prepared to accept a levy of 2c per head on sheep slaughtered, raising therefore some $600,000 for promotion of sheep meats, mostly in the Middle East. This would of course be matched dollar for dollar by the Commonwealth.
If the processors were to join the producers in making a donation-they talked about a Ic offer-this would add another $300,000. That has not yet come to pass. The House will know that the Commonwealth has made $lm available for dollar-for-dollar matching. The significant thing is that the qualification the Commonwealth and the industry have relates to there being a resolution of industrial difficulties on the live sheep issue around Australia, but particularly in Portland. The Vice-President of the ACTU, Mr Crean, has

Questions without Notice

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 21

agreed to take this very question back to the ACTU Executive this week and provide me with some response by the end of the week. I look forward to that. As I understand, he has fairly detailed consultations to undertake not only with the ACTU Executive but also with the Trades and Labour Council in Melbourne or the Trades and Labour Council down in the Portland district. The market development fund will be handled under the auspices of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation. There is to be an advisory committee on the expenditure of funds which will . consist of three producers, one processor, one representative of the ACTU and a couple of Commonwealth Government representatives. All in all, some considerable progress was made at the meeting. Much depends on the outcome of the talks Mr Crean has with the ACTU Executive.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Humphreys having addressed a question to the Prime Minister-
Mr SPEAKER-The question is out of order.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, in what circumstances would a straight question in relation to the administration of a tax Act, where it is clear that the Country Party in Queensland is seeking to avoid and evade tax liability, be out of order except when it is discomforting for the Government?
Mr SPEAKER-The question of whether it is discomforting has nothing to do with the ruling. The question clearly asks for an opinion, and probably a legal opinion, and it is out of order.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I was not sure of the thrust of the question, but I think I am aware of it. Perhaps the honourable gentleman could repeat the question. If my assumption in relation to it is correct I suspect that it is a matter about which the Treasurer has made a statement in totally categoric terms within the last two or three weeks. I think it would help the House if the matter could be cleared up. If I cannot do it I suspect the Treasurer can.
Mr SPEAKER-I will not allow the question in its present form. If the honourable gentleman reframes it to put it within the bounds of the Standing Orders I will call him again.
AUSTRALIAN HOSTAGES IN ZIMBABWE
Mr LUSHER-Is the Minister for Foreign Affairs in a position to inform the House of the latest information available concerning the hostages that were taken in Zimbabwe? Are we as a

Government satisfied that the authorities there are doing everything that can be done to recover those people?
Mr STREET-Mr Speaker, as I am sure all members of the House would know, on 23 July two Australian citizens, Mr Bajzelj and Mr Butler, together with four other people, two United Kingdom citizens and two American citizens, members of a tour group, were abducted by armed bandits in Zimbabwe who subsequently demanded the release of some political detainees as a condition for the release of the hostages. The Zimbabwean authorities immediately started an intensive search operation covering an area of some 1000 square kilometres. I regret to report that so far these efforts have failed to make any contact with the kidnappers or their hostages but the Zimbabwean authorities are continuing to do everything they can to rescue those hostages. In particular we welcome the statement by Prime Minister Mugabe that his prime objective is the release of the hostages unharmed. Our High Commisison in Harare is in constant contact with the Zimbabwean Government about the matter.
I should say that there have been many conflicting reports about the hostages and their captors, but despite best efforts by everybody concerned it has been impossible to determine the truth or otherwise of these reports. As I said a moment ago, the present whereabouts of the captors and their hostages is unknown. I realise the enormous strain this places on the relatives of the people concerned and I am sure I am correct in saying to them that all members of this House extend their sympathy to them. For our part, we are continuing to inform the families of any developments as soon as we know about them.
TAXATION: QUEENSLAND NATIONAL PARTY ADVERTISING
Mr HUMPHREYS-Has the Treasurer's attention been drawn to the fact that a 46 per cent tax deduction is being offered for companies which advertise in the journal of the Queensland National Party? Has that tax deduction been approved by the Australian Taxation Office?
Mr HOWARD--My attention has not.until now been specifically drawn to that alleged offer. I will investigate what the honourable gentleman said. I can, only by way of preliminary comment, say that obviously for any company that takes out advertising space in any journal which is publicly disseminatedI do not know the dissemination of that journal, and this would apply to a journal of the National Party, the Liberal Party or the Australian Labor Party-to the extent only that a claim is made for bona fide advertising expenses,

22 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

General

that claim would presumably be deductible under the general deduction provisions of the taxation Act. There is nothing in the world about that that would in any remote sense be regarded or could be regarded as a tax avoidance practice. The important point is that contributions as such either so named or under the colour of something else which amount to donations to a political party are not permissible, but I will investigate the matter further. But to the extent that it is possible for the Taxation Commissioner, under the secrecy provisions of the Act, to tell me anything that is useful I will let the House and the honourable member know.
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-I wish to draw the attention of the members of the House to the fact that we have three former members in the chamber today: Mr Osborne, Mr Luchetti and Mr Staley.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
PROPOSED TAXATION LEGISLATION
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, may I just add very briefly to an answer I gave about the bottom-of-the-harbour schemes?
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If the advertisements continue it will result only in the people concerned paying the tax and paying for the advertisements too, and that will just cost them more.
PRESIDING OFFICERS ACCOMMODATION ADVISORY
COMMITTEE
Mr MILTON-Mr Speaker, I seek information concerning the recommendations of the Presiding Officers Accommodation Advisory Committee which I initially sought on 2 June 1981. When can I expect an answer to my request?
Mr SPEAKER-I will examine the matter and give the honourable gentleman a reply.
DEFENCE REVIEW COMMITTEE
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Defence)-For the information of honourable members. I present an interim report from the Defence Review Committee entitled 'A Minister and Department of Defence Support'. The report was released to honourable members during the recess.

AUSTRALIAN CANNED FRUITS CORPORATION
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 48 of the Canned Fruits Marketing Act 1979, I present the Australian Canned Fruits Corporation annual report for 1981. The report was released to honourable members during the recess.
AUSTRALIAN CANNED FRUIT SALES PROMOTION COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 18 of the Canned Fruits (Sales Promotion) Act 1959, I present the Australian Canned Fruit Sales Promotion Committee annual report for 1981. The report was released to honourable members during the recess.
AUSTRALIAN TOBACCO BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 26 of the Tobacco Marketing Act 1965, I present the annual report of the Australian Tobacco Board for 1981. The report was released to honourable members during the recess.
ROYAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO DRUG TRAFFICKING
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members. I present an interim report from the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking entitled 'Passports'. The report was released to honourable members during the recess.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) - For the information of honourable members. I present the report from the Industries Assistance Commission on approaches to general reductions in protection, certain budgetary assistance to industry and export incentives. The reports were released to honourable members during the recess.
CHRISTMAS ISLAND
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report from the inquiry into the long-term future of Christmas Island.
REGISTERED MEDICAL BENEFITS AND HOSPITAL BENEFITS ORGANISATIONS
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health)-Pursuant to section 76A (4) of the National Health Act 1953-80, I present the

Australian Broadcasting Commission

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 23

annual report on the operations of the registered medical benefits and hospital benefits organisations for \980-8\.
FAMILY MEDICINE PROGRAM
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health)-For the information of honourable members. I present the final report of the Committee of Review of the Family Medicine Program. The report was released to honourable members during the recess.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications)-For the information of honourable members. I table a paper entitled 'Government Decisions in Response to the Recommendations of the Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission'. I seek leave to make a short statement on that matter.
Leave granted.
Mr N. A. BROWN-The paper which I have tabled is a copy of the statement which I released on 4 July last to announce the decisions of the Government on the recommendations of the Dix Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. Having concluded its consideration of the Dix Committee's report, the Government took the view that the public interest would be best served if I announced those decisions as soon as possible. We also considered that there was a responsibility to inform the Australian Broadcasting Commission and Commission staff as soon as practicable of the Government's intentions regarding amendments to the structure, charter and responsibilities of the Commission even though this meant announcing these decisions during a period when the Parliament was in recess. I hope to be able to give notice, within the next few days, of my intention to introduce Bills to implement those decisions which require legislation. The Government's intention is that sufficient time be set aside for a cognate debate on the Bills and on the paper I have just tabled.
It is probably also appropriate that I should take this opportunity to note that today is the last day of service of Sir Talbot Duckmanton who today is retiring as General Manager of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. Sir Talbot Duckmanton has had a long and distinguished career in Australian broadcasting. He started to work for the Australian Broadcasting Commission in 1939.

Mr Barry Jones-As a sports broadcaster.
Mr N. A. BROWN-He is working with the Commission until the close of business today. I am reminded by the honourable member for Lalor that he started as a sports commentator. Except for a period of war service he spent his entire working life in the ABC. He presided over a great expansion of the ABC. He is a distinguished broadcaster and his public service and community service was recognised, of course, by the conferring of a knighthood upon him. I am sure that all honourable members would agree with me that it is appropriate to recognise his retirement after a long and distinguished service with the ABC and wish him well in his retirement.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (3.57)-The Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) has indicated, in tabling the Government's response to the Dix Committee report, that it is his intention to make time available in the future to have a debate on it. Therefore I will reserve any remarks I have to make until that time. I would like to associate the Opposition with the Minister's remarks about the retirement of Sir Talbot Duckmanton. The Australian Labor Party recognises the huge contribution that he made to the Australian Broadcasting Commission, both as General Manager and in the many years that he spent in the organisation leading up to his assumption of that position. I am sure that all members of the Labor Party would like to wish Sir Talbot well in his retirement.
Debate (on motion by Mr Bourchier) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING TRIBUNAL INQUIRY INTO CBE AND
SUBSCRIPTION TELEVISION AND RELATED MATTERS
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (3.58)-For the information of honourable members and pursuant to the appropriate statute I table a summary of the report and recommendations of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal inquiry into cable and subscription television and related matters. I seek leave to make a short statement on that matter.
Leave granted.
Mr N. A. BROWN-The subject of the Tribunal's inquiry, the report of which I have just tabled, is of prime importance to the Australian

24 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Australian Broadcasting Commission

community. The matters investigated have obvious social, economic and technological implications. For these reasons the Government has decided to make this summary of the report and its recommendations available now rather than wait for the complete report to be printed. The full report of five or six volumes will be tabled in Parliament at the earliest opportunity after I receive copies of it for tabling, and this will probably take place early in September. There will be a parliamentary debate on the report as soon as possible after that.
The Tribunal's major recommendations are that: Australia should introduce both cable television and radiated subscription television as soon as practicable. There should be limitations on the ownership and control of cable and radiated subscription television licences, based on factors such as prescribed interest levels, total media interests and the viability of existing broadcasting services. The restrictions on foreign ownership of commercial radio and television should generally apply, with some qualifications in respect of cable television, particularly in respect of companies that are naturalised for the purposes of the Government's foreign investment policy.
In respect of cable television, a further recommendation is that separation of ownership of the cable reticulation system and the operation of cable television should be permissible. The private sector and public authorities-including Telecom Australia-should have equal opportunities to own and maintain the cable reticulation system. Public authorities should not hold cable television licences but may lease channels on the system. Cable television licensees should provide separate channels for community, education and children's programming. Cable television systems should be permitted to carry enhanced services such as security services or two way tele-shopping services. Each conventional television broadcaster whose service is substantially within the licensed area of a cable television system should have the right to require his signal to be carried on that system.
Cable television licensees should be prohibited from importing signals from conventional stations in other localities, except in special circumstances. Advertising should be permitted on basic cable television services such as local broadcast television channels but not on additional pay channels such as those which televise recently released movie programs. In respect of radiated subscription television services, advertising should not be permitted within services that are encoded. The Australian Broadcasting Commission and the Special Broadcasting Service should not own or operate radiated subscription television services.

Cable television and radiated subscription television licensing processes should generally be similar to procedures under the current Broadcasting and Television Act. The licensing process for cable television should be administered by a single federal regulatory authority.
The Government intends to process the report promptly. It also wants to receive the widest possible range of views from the community on the inquiry's findings. I wish to thank the Tribunal and inquiry Chairman, Mr David Jones, the other members of the Committee, Mr Moremon, Mr Archer, Professor Gibson and Mr Wilkinson, and the Tribunal staff for their work in producing the report. The inquiry was established in July 1980 by one of my predecessors, the Honourable A. A. Staley, to report on a wide range of issues associated with the possible introduction of cable television in Australia. Later the terms of reference were extended to include a full examination of radiated subscription television. It is evident that the inquiry has had to confront many complex social, economic and technological questions. It has done so in a most professional and competent manner.
Finally, I reiterate the point that the intention' with respect to tabling this report, which honourable members will see is described as an interim report but which is really a summary, is to enable people to have it as quickly as possible and to have access to it earlier than they would if they had had to wait for the entire six volumes or so to be printed by the Printer and then tabled. The Government feels that it is in the public interest and in the interest of all those concerned and interested in this issue that people should have access to this document at the very earliest opportunity.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (4.4)-Ofal\ the social, political and economic problems facing Australia today the lack of cable and subscription television services does not rank very high. The ministerial statement made today is extraordinary in its timing and frustrating in its lack of content. The Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) has given us the menu but nothing to sink our teeth into. We are provided with a two-page statement by the Minister for Communications and a short interim report by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. We are told that the full report of five of six volumes will be tabled at a later date-in September unless an election intervenes-and then debated. The timing of the statement on cable and subscription television is

Australian Broadcasting Commission

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 25

significant. It is clear that the Government intends to adopt the report if it holds office long enought to do so. The announcement today is intended to guarantee financial support for the Government in what will probably be an early election campaign, depending on the public's reaction to tonight's Budget.
The Minister's statement shows exactly what the priorities of the Fraser Government are. With half a mil\ion unemployed, the best that the Fraser Government can offer is to provide them with 60 television channels to watch. Perhaps we are to witness the spectacle of a cable televisionled recovery. How extraordinary that the Government should be paving the way to adopt the Tribunal report on cable and subscription television before the report of the Davidson Public Inquiry into Telecommunications Services is received and debated. It is clear that, if the Tribunal report on cable and subscription television is adopted, it wil\ be another nail in the coffin for Telecom Australia. We have always argued that Telecom should provide the technical infrastructure for any cable system to be introduced in the future. Estimates of costs put before the Tribunal for cabling major cities were about $3,000m. Telecom's estimate was $1 ,200m. Telecom has the ducts underground and would presumably replace existing cable with optical fibre when the technology becomes generally available in about five year's time. It would be absurdly wasteful to introduce cable now with conventional technology and not to take advantage of fibre optic technology when it becomes available. This would be a classic example of built-in obsolescence.
In any case the development of satel\ite systems may make cable and subscription television systems much less attractive economically, especially if RCA's new second generation satel\ite is adopted. This may mean that a television set owner, by the use of a black box which he or she hires and which unscrambles signals from a satellite, will have access to more than 100 channelsassuming that this is regarded as an advantage in our media saturated society-without having to pay for the cost of constructing a cable network and hiring out his or her own line. If cable is to be introduced Telecom should provide this using Telecom ducting and the operators should be licensed through Telecom. If subscription television is to be introduced, the Australian Broadcasting Commission should have it because of its already existing national network capacity and because it would provide an additional and independent source of revenue for the ABC.

We condemn cable television in principle, at this moment, as an extravagance in times of economic recession-a modern form of bread and circuses. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) cannot give jobs but will offer the top 20 per cent of Australians a vast choice of television programs. Cable television wil\ have nothing in particular for specific identified needs in broadcasting, such as the needs of regional areas for example. Any employment generated would be short term and wasteful in the sense that it would be involved in duplicating Telecom resources. It would be better to develop the Australian television system in an orderly way offering additional over-the-air services and consider the possibility of introduction of cable television in specific areas when the new technology is available.
There is a very real politico-cultural problem in the programming of cable television. There is no doubt that the bulk of program materialwitnesses to the Tribunal inquiry said up to 60 channels-would be imported from the United States of America. In our broadcasting system, we have always seen the development of the system as one which sought social cohesion and cultural identity in this country. This Government adopted the report on self-regulation of the Broadcasting Tribunal which said that television should have 'an Australian look'. There is no way that cable television can operate in the foreseeable future on that basis. With four networks in Australia at the moment, we already have more than 450 hours of television programming in the major cities each week. Honourable members could imagine how exponentially that would increase if there were 60 networks operating right around the clock, seven days a week. That will effect a very serious diminution in the degree of Australian content.
The interim report is a very unsatisfactory document. The Opposition is unable to examine vital issues properly because the reasoning for those decisions is not supplied; it is in the other five or six volumes which, as the Minister said, have not yet been tabled. Yet we are asked to accept on trust statements such as this one on page 64 of the report:
The Tribunal reached the conclusion that the social. technical and economic arguments against the adoption of Cable television were outweighed by the favourable arguments.
But we are told for instance about the economic argument that there is doubt about the economies of program provision for al\ those new channels but that it is merely a commercial matter and not one for the Government. If that is the case, why

26 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Australian Broadcasting Commission

has every Australian government since broadcasting began always been concerned with questions of viability? Why has this Government paid great attention-quite rightly-to the question of the viability of country television stations, as recently as the announcement on supplementary licences? Surely they are commercial decisions? The report is absurd. It so severely breaks practically every established policy which has given us a reasonably good broadcasting system that it must be rejected and sent back to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal with the request that it should try again.
Amongst the other objections to the report is the fact that, first, there is no separation between the control of hardware-that is, the transmission systems themselves-and the software, the programming. Secondly, licences are to be for a whole system, not just for a channel. Is the system operator to say who gets the channel? That throws out of the window the present system of licensing a channel only after proper inquiry. Of course, this comes from the licensing body itself. Thirdly, we are told that the initial grant of licensing is to be for 15 years with 10 year renewals compared to five years and three year renewal periods at present. If we had neutral, public authority ownership of cable systems, renewals could be maintained at a five year or three year interval. But on this basis there is such a dramatic break with precedent that we need to know far more why the licence needs to be granted over a 15 year period.
The report is very lax on foreign ownership and on Australian content-all things patiently built up over the years. On top of this, we are told that public authorities are not permitted to hold cable television licenses. Why is there this discrimination? The report is hasty and ill-thought out. It is no basis on which to prepare the plan for cable television.
Mr N. A. Brown-Hasty!
Mr BARRY JONES-The Minister has interjected 'Hasty!' The report has come down with lightning speed for this Government. It has taken only two years for this Government to bring the report down. That counts as a hasty report with this Government, where like the mills of God things are inclined to grind very slowly.
Mr N. A. Brown-You regard two years as hasty, do you?
Mr BARRY JONES-The timing is very significant. The Government wanted out just in case it needed to rattle the tin in front of industry for a forthcoming election campaign. The report does

not answer the fundamental question that the industry and people who are concerned with the future of the communications industry in this country are asking. It does not present anything except a crude dogmatic approach. The Opposition is also disturbed at implications of conflict of interest in this report. A consultant to the companies interested in cable television-Myer, Amatil, Elders-IXL and other generous contributors to Liberal Party funds is Mr Henry von Bibra, a former legal partner of the Chairman of the Tribunal, Mr David Jones. The Chairman showed a surprising and a quite uncharacteristic lack of discretion in not disqualifying himself from sitting on this important matter given that such a critical role was taken by his former legal partner and where it is fair to say that the report completely accepts the argument put by his former legal partner.
Mr N. A. Brown-That is very ungenerous.
Mr BARRY JONESIt is not ungenerous. It is outrageous that the Chairman should not have disqualified himself in a situation such as this. It is the clearest kind of conflict of interest.
Mr Charles-What is his name?
Mr BARRY JONES-The Chairman, Mr David Jones, and his former partner, Mr Henry Von Bibra. It shows a fundamental lack of sensitivity on a very difficult issue such as this that the Government should allow the Chairman to continue to sit in this matter. This is a profoundly disappointing report. We should not report to judgment on it. It is yet another scandal on which I believe the judgment of the Australian people will shortly be passed against this wretched Government.
Debate (on motion by Mr McLean) adjourned.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill 1982. Loan Bill 1982. Supply Bill (No. I) 1982-83. Supply Bill (No.2) 1982-83. Appropriation Bill (No.3) 1981-82. Appropriation Bill (No.4) 1981-82. Social Services Legislation Amendment Bill 1982. Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.2) 1982. Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.3) 1982. Albury-Wodonga Development (Financial Assistance) Amendment Bill 1982. Roads Grants Amendment Bill 1982. Governor-General Amendment Bill 1982. Excise Tariff (Petroleum) Amendment Bill 1982. Radiocommunications Licence Fees Bill 1982. Radiocommunications (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 1982.

Assent to Bills

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 27

Home Deposit Assistance Bill 1982. Homes Savings Grant Acts Amendment Bill 1982. Off-shore Installations (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1982. Customs Tariff Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill 1982. Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill 1982. Excise Tariff Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill 1982. Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) (Nos I to 9) Bill 1982. Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill 1982. Export Control Bill 1982. Export Control (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1982. Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Bill 1982. Health Legislation Amendment Bill 1982. International Fund for Agricultural Development Bill 1982.
CRIMES AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Message received from the Senate acquainting the House that the Senate has agreed to the amendments made by the House to the Crimes Amendment Bill 1982.
ASSENT TO BILLS
Assent to the following Bills reported:
Excise Tariff (Coal) Amendment Bill 1982. Coal Industry Legislation Amendment Bill 1982. Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill (No. I)
1982. States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Bill 1982. States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Legislation
Amendment Bill 1982. Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill 1982. Customs Tariff Amendment Bill 1982. Senate Elections (Queensland) Bill 1982. Loan Bill 1982. Supply Bill (No. I) 1982-83. Supply Bill (No.2) 1982-83. Appropriation Bill (No.3) 1981-82. Appropriation Bill (No.4) 1981-82. Home Deposit Assistance Bill 1982. Homes Savings Grant Acts Amendment Bill 1982. Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.2) 1982. Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.3) 1982. Social Services Legislation Amendmel)t Bill 1982. Albury-Wodonga Development (Financial Assistance)
Amendment Bill 1982. Roads Grants Amendment Bill 1982. Governor-General Amendment Bill 1982. Excise Tariff (Petroleum) Amendment Bill 1982. Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment
Bill 1982. Export Control Bill 1982. Export Control (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1982. Health Legislation Amendment Bill 1982. International Fund for Agricultural Development Bill
1982. Radiocommunications Licence Fees Bill 1982. Radiocommunications (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill
1982. Off-shore Installations (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill
1982. Customs Tariff Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill
1982.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill 1982.
Excise Tariff Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill (No. I) 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill (No. 2) 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill (No. 3) 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill (No. 4) 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill (No. 5) 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill (No. 6) 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill (No. 7) 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill (No. 8) 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill (No. 9) 1982.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classification) Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Bill 1982.
TAX AVOIDANCE
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The loss to revenue of many millions of dollars because of the Government's failure to pursue the collection of income tax and to prosecute persons responsible for defrauding the Commonwealth of revenue.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.16)-There can be no more important matter in the Australian political climate at present than the matter of tax avoidance. During the recessnamely, in May-a report called the McCabeLafranchi report was tabled in the Victorian Parliament. It was a report of an investigation of certain companies in Victoria. In the process, that investigation revealed the most massive fraud of Commonwealth revenue. It says that the fraud amounted to at least $200m. In a subsequent statement-what would be called a mea culpa statement-the Treasurer (Mr Howard), in endeavouring to explain the Government's inaction and apathy, admitted that he knew of at least 31,000 companies being involved in tax avoidance over a five year period. That is in his Press statement.

28 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Tax Avoidance

If one were given an extrapolation of that in relation to the number of companies investigated by McCabe-Lafranchi, one would see that it is no exaggeration to say that tax avoidance at present could be costing $6 billion. What would happen if, this evening, the Treasurer were able to allocate $6 billion to the needy in Australia? That would amount to at least four times what he might give by way of tax cuts. And there are all the questions that apply to the needy schools and hospitals and the fact that the States are entitled to at least a third of that money.
Let us look at the facts. In the statement made by the Treasurer, who apparently does not have time to come into this House to debate the matter, this situation is made very clear. This is a very important matter. We are dealing with a matter of fraud and the failure of a government to do anything about fraud-a criminal action. The McCabe-Lafranchi report refers to transactions in which companies are bought by dealers and sold-on to directors who are sham directors and nobody can ever trace them or the company after that happens. In the process of the sale of this company-in the sold-on provisions-all the tax liabilities that should have been paid to the Commonwealth are avoided. As the investigators said, the transactions were a sham, the companies were dumped and the loss of revenue to the Federal Government was massive. The generated losses of many millions of dollars come about because of the trading in shares of companies sold-on to sham directors in sham transactions. There is fraud all the way through.
The report clearly states that the Melbourne operation was established in 1976 as Commercial Securities Ltd. It names the directors. It says that a network of commissions was established and that the process was the largest tax avoidance operation in this country. The factor which assisted the growth was the failure of the Australian Taxation Office to take any action. One cannot blame just the people in the Taxation Office. The Treasurer and the Government have the laws that apply-they are the laws of income tax and the laws of crime-so they have plenty of laws to catch in the net those who want to avoid tax and those who are guilty of fraud.
We have only to look at Part IV of the Income Tax Assessment Act, which relates to penal provisions. There is a penalty for failure to furnish returns, a penalty if a person refuses to give evidence, a penalty for lodging a false return and a penalty for lodging a false declaration. There is certainly a double penalty for what is called fraudulent avoidance. There is certainly clear evidence of what the Commissioner can do by way of

making prosecutions. He needs only a mere averment of the offence to make a prima facie case. Nothing has happened in a period of years.
Let us go back to this report. It talks about the arrangements that were made. Discounts were given to those who were handling the matter. There were those willing vendors who obviously participated in this fraud. That is a significant point. We have all the details. Here is some of the evidence: The sham directors were procured by a Mr Faint, an associate of Mr Maher. Faint alleges that Maher required him to procure purchasers who would be able to disappear, who were of little or no substance and who had little or no assets. We now have this classic result of the bottom-of the-harbour scheme. The Treasurer is now known in the cartoonist's situation as the Calamari Kid because nothing has happened about the whole matter of dredging up what should have been obvious in any reasonable legal approach to this issue.
Do we have to accept the view that the Taxation Office is so devoid of legal intelligence that it does not know fraud when it sees it? Are the Attorney-General's Department and the CrownSolicitor so unable to see the situation that they cannot lodge one prosecution for fraud when this evidence is within the knowledge of the Department of the Treasury? Is it a cover-up by a Government which is not able to admit that it could not cope with the situation or, worse still, is unwilling to cope with the situation? The dreadful explanation given by the Treasurer in a massive tome of 27 June can be summarised by saying that the Treasurer is not expected to know everything that is going on in the Taxation Office and that perhaps there was some legal advice to the contrary. I doubt that very much indeed.
In summary, the vendors, that is, those people who have got away with the money-perhaps they are not the ones one would call the shams, but they are the beneficiaries-received a generous consideration which had no regard to tax liability. The dealers went on to withdraw the balance and give themselves secret commissions, but the Taxation Commissioner was left lamenting. If this is the evidence, how is it that the Government is now talking about doing something about it and introducing some legislation that needs to be brought in? I submit to honourable members that the legislation already exists. It is contained in the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act. There can be prosecutions for either stealing or, certainly, conspiracy. The Crimes Act provides for it. It is about time this Government did something about it instead of trying to mislead the

Tax Avoidance

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 29

public of Australia that nothing could have been done.
There is evidence from a Mr Hurley who admits that the persons involved were shams and stooges. He would be an excellent witness in the box if one is talking about conspiracy. Pages 18 and 19 of the McCabe-Lafranchi report list the names and addresses of all the sham directors. These people knew that the directors and secretaries had no knowledge of the companies into which they were capitulated. They were sham transactions. It was obvious that they would never be found and could never be established in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act.
So let us get it very clear. The real issue is that there have been transactions covering thousands of companies over a period of years extending perhaps as far back as 1973. In fact, we cannot find any prosecutions at all. In one case only a liquidator was appointed. Why were liquidators not appointed in all the other cases? That is the normal process when a company cannot pay its debts. What is wrong with this Government that it cannot find out where crime, particularly conspiracy, takes place? It wasted $20m in a conspiracy case against unfortunate Greeks. All they received was the invalid pension and they are still getting it. But the Government wasted $20m trying to persecute them. It is very clear from the investigations that they asked this rhetorical question: 'Why was no action taken?' Whatever the position those responsible for the decision not to prosecute ought to be regarded as being answerable for the losses that have flowed from the abuse. That matter comes right back to this Government. It cannot avoid this in any shape or form.
In the report of June which the Treasurer gave at length he said that he did not really understand the position himself. He came back with a further statement a month later saying that he had more advice and that the Solicitor-General would indicate that in one case there was some cause for action. I know that the Solicitor-General is a man of the utmost integrity. I submit that if he had had a look at the report, if he had seen the evidence that was available to the Taxation Office, to the Treasurer and to the Government, prosecutions would have been lodged years ago. This is the significant point of this report. Because no prosecutions were lodged, as the investigators said, this increased the nerve of Mr Maher. The lack of decision promoted the nerve of Maher. The schemes are now, of course, jokingly referred to as bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. Maher's nerve was so increased that he just stepped around the

tax avoidance legislation of 1978 and apparently he was not too worried about the legislation of 1980.
I want to deal with the fact that I now know that an opinion was given to the Taxation Office, one which would have been available to the Treasurer if he had asked for it-if he has not already done so-and certainly to the Attorney General's Department, by a leading silk in Melbourne to the effect that something should have been done. That option dates back to 1978, and it notes that if a conspiracy to defraud the Commonwealth can be established, there is a strong possibility that the agreement being the subject of that conspiracy is itself a nullity.
In other words, the transfer of shares has never taken place. We see the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Treasurer here today saying: 'Oh, we are going to bring in some Act to try to avoid the transfer'. There was a learned Queen's Counsel opinion which any reasonable lawyer would support that if a transaction is done by fraud it is no transaction at all; it is a nullity. Those shares have never been transferred. What about having an explanation from the Government as to why this opinion has never been disclosed in any report by the Treasurer? The reason is that the Government does not want to attack some of its own kith and kin. Let us make this very clear. The Queen's Counsel makes the point himself:
It is impossible of course to hypothesise as to degrees of informality which might be produced in any particular set of circumstances but assuming that the purchaser is for example, non-existent and that the transactions upon which the vendor embarks are nullities, the real risk is' that the vendor remains the shareholder and director as previously and the company has to discharge the tax liability despite the fact that the assets have found their way into the hands of the entrepreneur.
In that situation and from a practical view-point the Commissioner would probably look to the vendor to recover the lost income tax.
Nothing has been done. The Queen's Counsel said:
The above considerations lead me to conclude that a prudent vendor of current profits in today's climate should satisfy himself (to the extent of obtaining competent advice) that the sale in contemplation: (a) will not involve him in any offence under the Companies Act, (b) will not involve him in a conspiracy to defraud and, (c) will be made to a bona fide purchaser of substance (not straw) conscious of his prospective liabilities and with acceptable means of discharging them.
That is the position. That is the law. So why did we have this nonsense brought in today that we will have some legislation that will amend and cure the situation? I make it very clear againthis is a very significant point in this opinion that where people such as this have been engaging

30 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Tax Avoidance

in the practice of what we can only say is fraud the vendors themselves could well be indicted.
So, from a practical point of view in the short few minutes available to me I say that the Opposition is able to establish to honourable members the names of the people through the McCabeLafranchi report; it is able to establish that there was a learned Queen's Counsel opinion back in 1978 that there should have been prosecutions. There has not been one prosecution. Billions of dollars are being lost in the hands of these crooks who should be brought to book. The only way, as this report says, that we will ever stop tax avoidance is by bringing in criminal penalties. If we prosecute these people one knows very well that juries will convict them. Is the Government fearful that some of its own friends will be involved? Is that the real reason it has not acted, when one looks at some of the people who are involved in the vendor position? That is the real reason. It is no good just arguing that the Government cannot do it because it does not have the law on its side. I emphasise the point that there is that opinion. I think any reasonable lawyer must say that the law is surely not such an ass that we can have all the provisions for preventing conspiracy to defraud, stealing and for dealing with the question generally of failure to lodge returns under the taxation Act which can all go for nought because these people did nothing at all about it.
The investigators make the point about how the banks got involved in this issue. They picked a little place called Stones Corner up in Brisbane where there were three banks. They make the point that on just one afternoon 60 companies were transferred through one branch of a bank. This involved $30m to $60m in the one afternoon. They make the point also with regard to a used car salesman being able to buy a company for $1.3m. He was an employee of Maher and others. What other evidence does the Government want? People who are working hard and paying their taxes are paying more taxes now because this Government has failed. The real issue is: We should be asking for the Treasurer's resignation. If he cannot administer an Act better than this he ought to get out. Admittedly, he only got this information in 1978 and a lot of defalcation and defrauding took place before that. But it is no excuse to say to the people of Australia, 'I can't do anything about it' when there is this report, when there is the law and when the Treasurer failed to admit that he had an opinion from a learned silk in Owen Dixon Chambers in Victoria which clearly says that as far back as 1978 action should have been taken. The Opposition wants to know

why it was not taken. It looks forward to an immediate explanation from the Treasurer.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-I call the honourable member for Macarthur.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (4.32)-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr Holding-Nobody knows more about cooking the books than this bloke.
Mr BAUME-I think that interjection was the normal disgraceful one and I hope that action will be taken against the person who made it. I would ask you to do so, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-On the premise that an interjection was made by a member proceeding across the chamber, which is in contravention of the Standing Orders, I invite the honourable gentleman so concerned to withdraw.
Mr Holding-I withdraw.
Mr BAUME-Tax avoidance is now dead. They are not my words; they are the words of the national chairman of one of Australia's largest accounting firms. In a letter to the Sydney Morning Herald this morning Mr Roderick C. Cameron stated:
Tax avoidance is now dead. I refer to avoidance (use of artificial schemes) as distinct from evasion (the cash economy).
When are the media going to give due recognition to the achievements of the Treasurer, Mr Howard, in relation to tax avoidance?
Mr Cameron went on:
There continues to be widespread coverage of the avoidance of huge sums of taxation in past years in such a way that the public must believe that a major problem still exists.
From listening to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) today one would get the false impression that it would still exist. Mr Cameron continued:
Extensive coverage given recently to the rather emotive remarks of Mr John Miller, president of the Australian Society of Accountants, would have added further to that impression.
The fact is that tax avoidance is finished. Mr Howard has had to overcome enormous problems, particularly those arising from certain High Court decisions in years past. The war has been won by the Treasurer and the public should be left in no doubt of it.
Mr Howard deserves the highest praise.
Tax evasion, however, by those engaged in 'cash' business continues to be a major problem--
Particularly for many supporters of the Australian Labor Party-
And involves a vast amount of lost revenue. The Treasurer will not make much headway in overcoming it without the active co-operation of all members of the community.
We should all resist making payments in cash (even if offered a lower price) and should not co-operate WIth those who obviously evade their responsibilities to the communIty In this way.

Tax Avoidance

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 31

I read that letter, particularly the last bit about the cash economy, to drive home to the Australian Labor Party that some officials in unions which are very close to the Australian Labor Party protested violently when there was an attempt some years ago to examine methods by which the cash economy, which is now the biggest area of tax evasion in Australia, operates. It involves the payment by cash for work done by people who do not want to have any record kept of that work. Various unions close to the Labor Party violently protested when attempts were made to examine methods by which this money could be recouped for the benefit of those Australians who are obliged to pay tax as pay-as-youearn taxpayers. It seems to me that we have simply to examine whether the points made by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition can, in fact, be even vaguely sustained. He said that the Government has failed to pursue the collection of income tax. Now that is an incredible statement. The announcement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) of 25 July to which the Deputy Leader of the Opposition referred in such a disparaging way clearly rebuts the statement but no doubt he did not want

to read that bit. The Treasurer said that the amount of revenue which can be collected from vendor shareholders in bottom-of-the-harbour strips of untaxed company profits is estimated to be $450m and we are proceeding to get that money. The matter of public importance also states that the Government has failed to prosecute persons responsible for defrauding the Commonwealth of revenue. This is clearly wrong. The report of the Commissioner for Taxation for 1980-81 clearly shows that in the preceding financial year legal proceedings were taken in 68,394 cases to recover income tax and additional tax. The amounts sued for in such cases totalled $151 m. In 68,394 cases legal proceedings were taken and yet we are told by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition that we have failed to pursue the collection of income tax. I seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard the table of the number of cases and the amounts sued for by States, which is in the official report of the Taxation Commissioner.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Schedule A6Legal proceedings to recover tax and additional tax. Period: 1 July 19791030 June 1980

ScheduleA6

Office

Number of cases

Amount sued for

Costs incurred

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

28,428 16,419 5,203 3,275 9,249 2,506
461 2,853

$ 73,172,513.52 21,644,558.00 16,687,894.33 6,702,976.87 18,945,975.15
5,807,554.69 2,740,917.60 5,545,385.00

$ 448,607.27 643,289.00 262,678.20 48,995.55
22~,537.70
41,513.10 28,377.70 86,723.00

Total

68,394 151,247,775.16 1,789,721.52

- Including additional tax and tax instalment deductions.

MR BAUME-I thank the House. I proceed now to the general question of whether the tax which was not paid at the time in respect of bottom-of-the-harbour activities has in fact been lost. The Opposition has quaintly ignored the fact that there has already been an announcement that this money will be pursued; that is, money that was evaded by fraud, in effect. There is no doubt that the statement made recently by the Treasurer clearly indicated that those people who have benefited as a result of fraud will be obliged to pay back the money involved.
The analogy I make is a simple one. If someone in a pub buys for $30 what he knows to be a $1,000 gold watch he has no good title to it and

the owner can in fact, as I understand it, recover it. Certainly, that is the clear moral situation. When someone buys a thousand dollar watch for $30 he does not have good title to it. I use those figures because that is exactly the sort of proportion that was involved in bottom-of-theharbour deals where someone would sell a company which had a net worth of nothing. It may have had, say, assets of $IOO,OOO-for example cash in the bank. But it may also have a bill due to the Taxation Commissioner of $100,000. So the one balanced the other. The company really had no net worth. Yet the vendor would sell that company to a promoter for $97,000, in other words less 3 per cent. He would

32 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Tax Avoidance

get cash for the payment of a small commission just as the fellow in the pub would get a watch for the payment of a very small commission. I want it recognised that there is very little difference between the people who benefited in both casesthe man who bought a thousand dollar watch for $30 and the man who got cash by selling his company, knowing it to be worthless, for an enormous sum, such as $100,000. They are the very people that this Government is pursuing for the recoupment of that money. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition suggesting that nothing is being done indicates an extraordinary approach to reality. It seems to me not only that a lot has been done already, as the official statistics show, but also that a lot more is being done.
Let us deal with the question of how much has been lost. The most important point to be made in this respect is that the money has not been lost. Certainly the promoters of these schemes who perpetrated the frauds do not have the money to pay it back. They ended up with only the 3 per cent. They are like the fellow in the pub who sold the gold watch for $30. All they have is the $30. We want the thousand dollar watch back. We want the total proceeds. To carryon as though all we have to do is prosecute the promoters is arrant nonsense. We want the money back. The promoters do not have it and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition knows it. He knows that he is putting up an immense smokescreen which has absolutely nothing to do with recouping the money. This Government is keen on recouping the money rather than putting on an act. It is keen to recoup the money from the people who have benefited and that is why it made the announcement last month which is most significant and which, of course, was ignored by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition because it did not fit into his version of history, which is arrantly nonsensical.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition talked about the immense delays involved in getting things done. I remind him that when the Labor Government was in office it was pe:fectly well aware of the Curran schemes and all it got around to doing was making a 'Thou shalt not operate Curran schemes' statement. It did nothing more than that because it is very difficult to proceed in this way. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition knows that from his own experience in government. That is why I am so disappointed to hear the sorts of comments he made today. It seems to me that we have to recognise that this money is not lost. The announcement of 25 July foreshadowed legislative measures to be introduced to obtain payments from the vendor shareholders, the people who actually benefited

and who, in effect, ended up with the gold watch for only $30 when they knew it was worth $1,000. The proposal to recoup the unpaid company tax from these strips indicated that a substantial amount of the $500m-odd attributable to such activities prior to the amendment to the Income Tax Assessment Act in 1980 which banned this sort of thing is capable of recoupment.
Let us remember that this practice, this style of bottom-of-the-harbour activity, was in effect prohibited by action of this Government in 1980. The Opposition will say: 'Oh, but it hasn't worked'. Of course it has worked, just as a law against murder is fairly effective in diminishing murder. The existence of a law cannot assuredly prevent every murder. Even when people were being hanged for murder people still committed that crime. The question is whether these actions of the Government have prevented the continuation of these kinds of frauds. The answer to that is clearly that they have. The second question is what are we doing about recoupment. The clear answer is that we are proceeding to recoup the money. The question we keep on hearing is: 'Why don't you proceed against the promoters?'. Let us get this exactly clear: Last month a revised advice from the Solicitor-General came to the Government and in the light of that recent opinion action is being taken to bring before the courts the promoters and their associates under provisions of company and criminal law.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Now.
Mr BAUME-The Deputy Leader of the Opposition says 'now'. The fact is that we now have an opinion which says we can prosecute those people. But let us get this clear: Whether we prosecute them or not does nothing for the recoupment of tax. The promoters charge only about 3 per cent. We want the 97 per cent. In other words, this Government is more interested in the substance. The Opposition is concerned with the 3 per cent. We are concerned about the 97 per cent and about the people who got the benefit of the frauds. There is no doubt that we will proceed-I trust successfully, in the light of the amended legal opinion we now have-against the promoters. I do not know what the Deputy Leader of the Opposition will then have left to say on this topic because the legislation that this Government has introduced has killed those kinds of devices; it has killed the whole industry. We did not hear the Deputy Leader of the Opposition address himself clearly and unequivocally to the fact that this Government has prevented and has now killed off tax avoidance of this nature and certainly tax evasion.

Tax Avoidance

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 33

Mr CampbellNo one believes that.
Mr BAUME-We hear from the more intelligent members of the Opposition that no one believes that. All the honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell) has to do is to find out, if he can-no doubt the honourable member has appropriate people to find out from-whether there has been any continuation of this kind of activity. I am unaware of it. If the honourable member is aware of it, he would be doing his duty to the nation and certainly to the Australian Taxation Office if he reported those activities instead of coming into this House and pretending, with no information whatsoever, to know about these schemes which have been outlawed by this Government and in respect of which recoupment and prosecutions are under way. If he can do anything more than pretend that these actions, this kind of activity, have not ended, it would be his duty not to make a smart-Alick interjection but to provide some material so that action can be taken against the people who he apparently knows are proceeding with these activities. If he does know and if the Opposition knows, they have a duty to report it. They have failed to do so.
There is no evidence of a continuation of these schemes because the Government has ended them. As the senior partner of this major accounting firm and many other commentators, including leaders of the accounting industry, have said, this Government has done more than any other government to end this kind of tax avoidance and to recoup the proceeds of tax evasion. The record is clear and unequivocal. The sorts of nonsensical statements made by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and, by way of interjection, by other members of the Opposition, do their case no good.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr DUFFY (Holt) (4.48)-The contempt with which the Treasurer (Mr Howard) treats this matter has obviously been shown to this Parliament this afternoon by the Mickey Mouse reply to the allegations that were put forward in a hard form today by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). However, I would like to deal very briefly with a couple of matters from what the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) had to say, which included a fair amount of fairy tale stuff. He announced that Mr Roderick C. Cameron had said that tax avoidance was dead. We are supposed to end the debate on that issue. He then went on to point out that the High Court of Australia had presented problems to the Government. It has not presented any

problems to the Government in respect of prosecutions under the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act. That is what we are talking about and that is what the Deputy Leader of the Opposition was talking about. There have been no prosecutions under that Act.
The honourable member for Macarthur then referred to a list in the report of the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation in relation to tax collected from other people. That is not what the Deputy Leader of the Opposition was talking about. It is a pity that the honourable member did not have enough intelligence to understand what the Deputy Leader of the Opposition was talking about. The only thing that came out of the speech of the honourable member was that the promoters of the schemes will be delighted because he indicated quite clearly that the Government will not be taking any action against them. Of course, that is something which we all knew. He then stated that there was no evidence that the schemes were still continuing. There is plenty of evidence that the schemes are still continuing. If this Government does not have the facilities or the intelligence, and if it does not know where the Corporate Affairs Office in Victoria is situated or how to search those companies, it is not our obligation to provide them.
Mr Lusher-Where is this evidence?
Mr DUFFY-It is in the Corporate Affairs Office in Melbourne, if the honourable member could be quiet and listen; I have told him that twice. The response of the Federal Treasurer to the McCabe-Lafranchi report was confirmation that his so-called fight against tax avoidance has been nothing more than hollow rhetoric. His first reaction was to brand the report as a political stunt. Within two days the Treasurer-a self styled crusader against tax avoidance-was on the back foot desperately defending the hopeless record of the Government in this area.
Firstly, he peddled the line that no action could be taken against the practices referred to in the report which took place prior to the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980. I will deal with that matter once and for all because it is just another excuse for the lack of will by this Government to act on tax avoidance. The Treasurer yaps at the heels of the tax avoidance industry while it goes from strength to strength and continues to defaud the Commonwealth of revenue at the expense of the wage and salary earners of this country. On 26 November 1980 the Treasurer announced pompously in this House that the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Bill, under which there had been no prosecution to this date, would impose severe

34 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Tax Avoidance

penalites on those who engaged in evasion of income tax or sales tax through the use of 'straw' companies and 'straw' trusts. It does not matter much what the penalties are if a government does not prosecute anybody, and that is what this Government has done. He went on to admit that the Bill did not in principle break ground that company and criminal laws had not already touched.
In a letter dated 28 November 1980 the Law Institute of Victoria provided the Treasurer with two opinions, the reason for doing so being the unjustified opposition of the legal profession to the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Bill. Unfortunately, the reason for providing the opinions to the Treasurer was not very highly motivated. However, the opinions were important for other reasons. The opinion of Mr N. H. M. Forsyth spelt out that calculated and fraudulent tax evasion was already a grave criminal offence. The opinion cited section 23 I (I) of the Income Tax Assessment Act, section 86 (1) of the Commonwealth Crimes Act and section 124 (I) and (3) of the Companies Act. These were only examples. The opinion also stated that other sections of the Companies Act, Bankruptcy Act, State crimes Acts and common law offences could have been used against calculated and fraudulent evasion of tax. The opinion further stated:
How it can be said that they---
referring to the sections-
are inadequate when they have not even been tested in such a situation, I find rather surprising.
Not once had this Government taken any steps under any of those Acts to take action against people who were defrauding the Commonwealth. Yet the Treasurer stated in the House on 26 November 1980 that he could not do anything. He was introducing this great new legislation which would solve all the problems! Now, 20 months later, we have still had no prosecutions. In his second reading speech the Treasurer dealt with the situation in which a company having a tax liability or a possible tax liability lends money to another company out of which it is stripped so that the first company cannot obtain payment of the loan. In such a case the opinion to which I referred cited the case of Walker v. Winborne (1976) ALJR 446 as authority that directors in such circumstances were guilty of misfeasance under the Companies Act and were liable to repay the money lost to the liquidator of the lender company. No action was taken and still has not been taken against people in those circumstances.
A joint opinion of Mr G. L. Davies, Q. c., and Mr
D. G. Russell, also provided to the Treasurer, supports this view.

Another offence clearly disclosed by the McCabe-Lafranchi report was to deprive the Commonwealth of Australia of revenue. These offences were covered by the Income Tax Assessment Act or in furtherance of a conspiracy by section 86 of the Commonwealth Crimes Act. For the Treasurer to claim otherwise is nonsense. He is not fair dinkum on this issue and has shown himself incapable of enforcing existing laws against those who are prepared to use devices which have distorted the whole tax system in this country. Worse than the conclusion that the Treasurer was incapable of carrying out his job is the obvious conclusion that he lacked the will even to have a go. His grandstanding does not cover up his lack of action. Clearly the claim by the Treasurer that no action could be taken prior to the enactment of the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980 is incorrect. The fact is that he preferred to take the easy option, that is, to do nothing. The Act on which the Treasurer places so much reliance was passed 21 months ago in this House, yet we have not seen one prosecutionsomething which the honourable member for Macarthur did not understand. He has left the chamber, unfortunately-not that it would make any difference; if one told him again and again he would not understand. The time for the Treasurer to put up or shut up has long passed.
I now turn to the Australian Taxation Office, which copped a fair bit of flak when the whole situation blew up. Everybody said that it was the fault of the Taxation Office; they would have liked to transfer the blame to it. On I June 1982, members of the Taxation Officers Branch of the Federated Clerks Union challenged Mr Howard to 'explain why nothing has been done about this massive evasion of taxation by a wealthy section of the community'. There has been no reply to members of that union by the Treasurer. The president of the Victorian Branch said that none of the $200m in lost revenue had been collected and that no prosecutions had been launched against anyone involved in the schemes. I would like to lay odds about how much will be collected. We heard a great deal of nonsense today from the honourable member for Macarthur about how much money will be collected.
Mr Hawke-What would you offer?
Mr DUFFY-One could have good odds on that; five to four, anyway. The day after that attack by members of the Taxation Office-the very next day-Mr Fraser really jumped a big hurdle. He then started talking about retrospectivity. On the same day, Mr Howard asked Mr O'Reilly, the Commissioner of Taxation whether

Tax Avoidance

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 35

staffing of the Investigation Division of the Taxation Office could be strengthened. The chickens were coming to roost. What had the Treasurer discovered? He had discovered nothing. It was just another attempt to create a smokescreen. He knew that the infamous razor gang decisions taken last year imposed a reduction of 324 on the staff of the Taxation Office. These levels were appealed against, but staff levels had not been restored for nine months. As Mr O'Reilly, the Commissioner of Taxation, said, the most serious effect on the Taxation Office has been the loss of experienced staff in the audit and investigation areas. He added:
There is a lag in getting trained staff. You cannot get people off the street and make them experienced auditors or investigators. That is a process that takes time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LUSHER (Hume) (4.58)-Tax avoidance is the issue that it is in Australia today because of this Government's active campaign against it. It is an issue not because of anything that the Opposition may have done or may have thought that it has done, but simply because the Government, in its endeavour to ensure that there is a policy of ensuring that the tax burden is shared fairly across the community in Australia as a whole, is seeking to protect its revenue and to ensure that people are not getting away with tax avoidance in this country. This Government has done more than any other Government to stamp out tax avoidance in Australia. It is on the record that, since July 1977, this Government has brought in 30 separate measures to deal with specific tax avoidance arrangements. The Government, of its own making, has created an issue out of the tax avoidance industry in Australia. It has wiped out tax avoidance in Australia and the Opposition has done nothing other than to jump on a bandwagon which the Government has created.
There has been a lot of discussion here today-I think most of what the Opposition is trying to put to the House today is based upon it-of the report by McCabe and Lafranchi from Victoria. It needs to be understood that that report is historical. It describes what was done by certain companies and certain promoters before legislation was passed in this Parliament which has effectively stopped that practice. That is what needs to be understood. The schemes referred to in the report are no longer operating. They have not operated since legislation was passed in this House some time ago. I understand that the New South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission is drawing up a list similar to that which McCabe and Lafranchi drew

up in Victoria. That will expose the names of those companies and those operators who have done in New South Wales what McCabe and Lafranchi exposed in Victoria. I have no problems-with the exposure; I think that is a good thing. The fact of the matter is that we have to recognise what it is. It is an exposure of something that happened before legislation was passed which has stopped the operation of those schemes.
Mr Duffy-They could have been prosecuted before; you know that.
Mr LUSHER-The Opposition has come in today and accused the Treasurer (Mr Howard) of contempt for not coming in and dealing with this matter proposed for discussion. They have introduced the debate on the day when the Treasurer is to bring down his Budget. Now, if one wanted to get the Treasurer's attention on this matter, today was really the day to bring such a debate on.
Some points need to be made in relation to this matter of public importance which has been brought forward by the Opposition. The first point is that the revenue has not been lost. The revenue has not been lost until such time as assessments have been raised and contested and it has been found in favour of the taxpayer, or against the Commissioner, that the tax will not be collected. That is the first thing that needs to be understood. The second thing is that legislation is in place which makes virtually most, if not all, of these schemes inoperative. Further legislation is proposed by the Government to ensure that revenue which may be in doubt will in fact be collected. That is an important point. The third point that needs to be made is that new arrangements about taxation in dispute have been announced. The Treasurer has indicated in a recent statement that the penalty rate-
Mr Duffy-Recent?
Mr LUSHER-Recent, August. The Treasurer indicated that the penalty rate for late payment of tax will be 20 per cent whereas it has previously been 10 per cent; that the 50-50 rule under which taxpayers who have an amount of taxation in dispute pay half now and leave the other half until it is determined whether it is in fact due or will no longer apply; that all tax in dispute will have to be paid; and that if ultimately the finding is in favour of the taxpayer, he will get his money back and he will get interest on it. I believe those new arrangements will do a significant amount to ensure that the tax in dispute is not withheld from the revenue.

36 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Tax Avoidance

I say to my friend the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy) that these arrangements, which he keeps on interjecting are new-I do not dispute that they are new-were not brought about as a result of any action from the Opposition or any suggestions of the Opposition; they have been brought about on the initiative of this Government in exactly the same way as all the legislation to which I have referred has been introduced on the initiative of this Government. This Government is concerned to protect all taxpayers in Australia, to make sure that tax is collected and that no sectors of the community are immune from tax, thereby putting greater burdens on the rest of the community. Another point that needs to be raised in relation to the matter that has been brought froward is that the Taxation Office is stilI raising assessments against companies which were stripped before the Crimes (Tax Offences) Act became law. I believe that is a point which needs to be raised.
For the benefit of the House, I need to make a few points about the effectiveness of what has been achieved by the Treasurer. I wish to give a few quotations. The first is a quotation from a Mr Keith Knight who is a former director of the Ward Knight and Dunn Merchant Bank, which was named before the Costigan Royal Commission into the Painters and Dockers Union as being a promoter of tax schemes. Mr Knight said:
John Howard has been more successful than any other Treasurer. He has effectively killed the tax avoidance industry for the general taxpayer.
Mr Ron Crowe, the chairman of the national tax committee of Arthur Young & Co., a national firm of accountants, said:
There are still trust stripping and sales tax schemes, but it takes a brave man to get involved in them.
That statement was made before further statements by the Treasurer which would have firmed it up. Mr Jon Kirkwood, a taxation partner at Ernst and Whinney, chartered accountants, said:
The use of bottom-of-the-harbour schemes would be a ridiculous risk for both the vendors and the purchasers. As for trust-stripping, there must be very little left in this area and what is left can only be said to be very risky.
The Treasurer has made it clear that he intends to stamp it out and I would not recommend it to a client.
Mr Bruce Fisk, a partner in Touche Ross and Co., another national accounting firm, when asked whether he believed the use of bottom-of-theharbour schemes was stilI widespread, said:
No, at least not in New South Wales.
Our experience is that tax avoidance in the form of paper schemes are now not available in New South Wales.
As the honourable member for Macar!hur (Mr Baume) indicated earlier, Mr Roderick Cameron,

the National Chairman of Coopers and Lybrand, another national accounting firm, stated:
Tax avoidance is now dead.
The war has been won by the Treasurer and the public should be left in no doubt of it.
Mr Howard deserves the highest praise.
If that is not enough, the Treasurer has revealed in recent days that the provisional tax receipts for the last financial year, 1981-82, were more than $200m above the Budget estimate. He claims that that is significant evidence of the success of the Government's campaign against tax avoidance. I agree with him. The Fraser Government has done more to stamp out tax avoidance than any other Federal or State government in Australia's history. This commitment can be evidenced by the number of announcements and pieces of legislation enacted by this Parliament. Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Act, which has applied since 27 May 1981, was inserted into the Act to provide an effective general anti-avoidance provision. We overcame something which no previous government was able to overcome. The Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980 provides five years gaol or $50,000 fines for persons who engage in evasions through straw companies or straw trusts. The Acts Interpretation Act has been amended to require the courts to pay attention to the law's intent and spirit instead of the strict letter of the law. During the Fraser Government's period in office the Treasurer has acted on 26 occassions, through 22 pieces of legislation, against 54 separate schemes. With the approval of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen), to whom I have shown this tabulation, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a summary of tax avoidance schemes legislated against or proposed to be legislated against since I July 1977.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
SUMMARY OF TAX AVOIDANCE SCHEMES LEGISLATED AGAINST OR PROPOSED TO BE
LEGISLATED AGAINST SINCE I JULY 1977
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1977
Section 99A~deceased estates to which no beneficiary presently entitled assessed under section 99 or 99A.
Section 103A~company not treated as a public company for Division 7 purposes where a public company is a shareholder unless the public company has an effective and indefeasible controlling interest.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1978
Section 6BA~bonus shares to have no independent cost in determining profit or loss on resale when shares received tax-free.
Sections 36 and 52A~trading stock schemes involving shares and other choses in action.

Tax Avoidance

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 37

Section 46B-deny tax rebate in respect of dividends which arose from modified dividend stripping and similar operations.
Section 78A-deny a deduction for gifts made under arrangements whereby the donor retains rights to use the gifted property.
Section I05A-dividend not credited towards the making of a sufficient distribution where payment of the dividend is accompanied by the company's receipt of a substantially equivalent compensating amount.
Section 157 (3A)-averaging provisions not to apply to persons who become entitled to a minimal share of primary production trust income.
Sales Tax Assessment (Nos I to 9) Amendment Acts 1978
Amendments to counter five specific forms of sales tax avoidance.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1978
Sections 50A-N-provisions introduced to prevent trafficking in current year loss companies.
Sections 46A-B-close off avenues that remained after amendments contained in Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1978 for a double benefit to be obtained through dividend stripping by use of an interposed trust.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1979
Sections 82KH and KJ-prepayment schemes. A deduction to be denied for prepaid outgoings which are part of a scheme to reduce a person's liability to income tax.
Sections 82KH and KK-schemes to postpone liability to tax-provisions to counter schemes involving arrangements between parties where one party obtained a deduction while the other party does not bear tax on the matching amount in the same year of income.
Section 100A-trust-stripping schemes-to prevent tax avoidance through the introduction of a tax exempt nominal beneficiary which relieved the trustee from any tax liability.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1979
Section 6BA-amendments to ensure the amendments enacted by Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1978 against 'Curran' schemes are effective against variations of the earlier schemes.
Section 36-amendments to ensure the amendments enacted by Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1978 against trading stock schemes cover certain commodity trading schemes.
Section 52A-amendments to ensure the amendments enacted by Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1978 against trading stock schemes cover scheme variations which sought to obtain deductions for the value of property acquired where expenditure was not incurred.
Section 82KL-to counter expenditure recoupment schemes which involved the effective recoupment by a taxpayer of a claimed loss or outgoing such that the loss or outgoing was not really suffered.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1979
Section 80-- to prevent the carry-forward of losses from one income year to the next generated under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1979
Sections 56, 59, 59AA and 62-amendments to counter various schemes which misuse the depreciation provisions by inflating the cost price of depreciable property
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1980
Section 82KH-amendments to extend the operation of provisions enacted by Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1979 in relation to expenditure recoupment

schemes so that the provisions will apply to schemes based on deductions for bad debts
Division 6AA-amendments which provide that, subject to certain exceptions, income derived, directly or through trusts by minors will be subject to tax at a rate equal to the middle rate of personal income tax (46 per cent for 1980-81)
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1980
Section 6-amendment to remedy technical deficiencies revealed by a Court decision in the law governing taxation of royalties derived by non-residents
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981
Section 100A-amendments to ensure the amendments enacted by the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1979 to counter tax avoidance through "trust stripping" are effective against scheme variations which exploit the exclusion from the 1979 amendments of income of a trust estate to which a beneficiary becomes presently entitled in the capacity of a trustee of another trust estate
Division 9c-provision introduced to counter tax avoidance through the exploitation of the general exemption from income tax that is accorded income of certain charitable organisations, associations, funds and other bodies
Section 82KH-amendments to counter further expenditure recoupment schemes of tax avoidance involving nominal expenditure on films, in operating an exempt gold mining business, in purchasing consumable supplies, on market research, on computer software, in respect of commission for collecting assessable income, on afforestation, in enhancing the value of shares held as trading stock, or on master sound recordings
Section 36A-amendments to counter further tax avoidance schemes that seek to exploit the special provisions of the income tax law which relate to transfers of trading stock where there is a continuity of interest in that stock
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981
Sections 177A, B, C, D, F, G-provisions introduced to replace section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act to deal with artificial schemes of tax avoidance in a general way
Section 177E-introduced to bring the stripping of company profits within the scope of the new general antiavoidance provisions
Section 226 (2A)-introduced to impose statutory additional tax of twice the tax avoided, subject, of course, to remission by the Commissioner of Taxation and the right of objection and subsequent review by one of the independent Taxation Boards of Review, on taxpayers whose schemes are struck down by the new general anti-avoidance provision
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.3) 1981
Division 6Bintroduced provisions to tax the income of certain public unit trusts, which acquire property as a result of a company reorganisation, as company income and to tax distributions to unit holders as dividends
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981
Section 26 (eb)-enacted provisions to tax payments made to employees to induce them to return to work
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1982
Section 26AAA-amendment to prevent profits made from short term property transactions escaping tax through the use of interposed companies or trusts
Sections 95B, 97, 98, 100A and 12lG-introduced measures to counter schemes that seek to exploit the trust provisions by using multiple sub-trusts
Sections !02AF and 102AG-introduced measures to ensure that the special tax on income derived by minors

38 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Petitions

applies to income that a child receives through a trust from the provision of services by others
Division 13-introduced provisions to deal with the taxation of Australian businesses controlled by non-residents and to counter transfer pricing arrangements with effect from 28 May 1981
MEASURES ENACTED TO COUNTER TAX EVASION
Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980
Made it a criminal offence for any person to enter into, or aid or abet a person entering into, an arrangement with a purpose of reducing or removing the capacity of a company or trustee to meet an income tax or sales tax liability
MEASURES ANNOUNCED TO COUNTER TAX AVOIDANCE SCHEMES WHICH HAVE YET TO
RECEIVE LEGISLATIVE EFFECT
18 December 1981-announcement that the investment allowance deduction will no longer apply where a tax exempt statutory authority is the real 'end user' of the plant. The Government will continue to review the operation of leveraged leasing and similar arrangements.
9 February 1982 -announcement that 'expenditure recoupment' provisions would be extended with effect from 24 September 1978 to counter further recoupment type schemes involving rebates and deductions for calls paid on shares in afforestation schemes and rebates for moneys paid on shares in petroleum exploration companies. Any rebate scheme entered into after 9 February 1982 will attract additional tax on the same basis as do schemes covered by Part IVA.
II May 1982 -statement aimed at making it clear beyond all doubt that trust stripping schemes can no longer have their intended effect of enabling participants to avoid payment of income tax. If found to be necessary, existing legislation aimed at striking down trust stripping schemes will be strengthened and will include provisions for additional tax at least as great as that which applies to schemes covered by Part IVA.
24 June 1982 --announcement that measures will be introduced to deny equity participants in certain kinds of leveraged leasing and similar arrangements all the deductions attributable to the ownership of the plant. The Government will continue to review the operation of leveraged arrangements.
25 July 1982-announcement that special legislation will be introduced to recover from vendor shareholders the company tax that was evaded in 'bottom-of-the-harbour' strips of untaxed company profits, carried out before the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980 made such conduct a specific criminal offence.
Mr LUSHER-I rest my case.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Deputy Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
National Estate Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the lack of effective Federal environmental protection legislation and urge that suitable legislation be enacted immediately.
Your petitioners are concerned that National Estate areas such as South West Tasmania, the Great Barrier Reef and the

Western Australian Jarrah Forests cannot be fully protected until adequate legislation exists and is enforced. Your humble petitioners therefore call upon the House of Representatives to ensure that all provisions of the Heritage Act and the Environment Impact of Proposals Act are fully complied with in respect of National Estate Areas. In particular your petitioners call upon you to adopt the recommendations of the report of the House of Repres~ntatives Standing Committee on the Environment on South West Tasmania. Your petitioners believe that this is a national issue and must be resolved by the action of the Federal Parliament.
Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Birney, Mr John Brown, Mr Cadman, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Hunt, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Keating, Mr Morrison, Mr Ruddock, Mr Sainsbury and Mr Spender.
Petitions received.
University of Queensland
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that:
The students and staff of the University of Queensland express their dismay at the lack of adequate federal government funding to our University, which has resulted, interalia, in the erosion of our library facilitieswe note that:
The opening hours of our main library have been reduced from 93t hours a week in 1975 to 72 hours a week in 1982.
The number of new books purchased per year has fallen from over 50,000 in 1976 to under 23,000 in 1981.
The number of books in storage and inaccessible to students and staff has risen from none in 1977 to over 40,000 in 1981.
The number of books discarded in 1976 was over 6,000-by the end of 1981 over 70,000 had been discarded.
We believe this to be educationally retrograde and economically wasteful.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that government funding levels be increased to a level sufficient to allow the University to restore our previous library facilities.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann, Mr Cross, Mr Dean, Dr Everingham, Mr Hodges, Mr JuIl, Mr Katter, Mr McVeigh, Mr Millar, Mr Moore and Mr Thomson.
Petitions received.
Taxation
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that whereas the current rates of personal income tax are onerous and destructive of personal incentive, particularly since the cessation of income tax indexation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formally call upon the Parliament assembled to legislate such changes to the current taxation law as will-
raise the minimum level at which income tax is first payable to at least $4,500,
proportionately increase the figures at which the higher rates of tax attract,

Petitions

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 39

allow taxpayers to claim the full amount for each item within the Concessional Expenditure Rebate, and
adjust the rates of tax payable so that no higher rate of tax is payable than fifty percent of income earned.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield, Mr Cadman, Mr Dobie, Dr Edwards, Mr Howard, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Keating, Mr Morris, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Ruddock.
Petitions received.
Excise on Wine
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
that any sales tax or excise on Australian wine would adversely affect employment in the wine industry, place a disproportionate burden on grapegrowers and ensure a larger future surplus of grapes;
the reduction in the demand for wine will also threaten the existence of many wine producers and reduce the range, quality and variety of wines offered in the market.
your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will reject any proposal for a sales tax or excise on Australian wine.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron, Mrs Child, Mr Dobie, Mr Fisher, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Mr Lloyd, Mr Lusher, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Porter.
Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That Federal funding of children's services which has been reduced by almost 50 per cent in real terms over the last five years should be restored forthwith to at least 1975-76 level in real terms so that children's services can be more equitably provided throughout Australia.
That Budget allocations for children's services be spent in full for the purposes designated.
That current plans to impose a means test on the users of child care services will place them out of the reach of the bulk of the users and should be dropped forthwith.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Anthony, Dr Edwards, Mr Keating, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Maher, Mr Ian Robinson and Mr Sainsbury.
Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of Australia in Parliament as assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia who respectfully showeth their anger and condemnation at the unrealistic low priority given to children's vacation programs and other children's services which has resulted in the withdrawal of funds from programs which provide an essential community service.

We' protest at the disastrous effects this will have on parents and children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government provide public funding for all children's services including vacation programs to ensure quality services are available for all children and parents who require it.
Further that funds be immediately released to prevent closure of vacation program for the 1981-82 Financial year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Birney, Mr Keating, Mr MacKellar, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Maher, Mr Ruddock and Mr Spender.
Petitions received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electricy developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South West of Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield, Mr Dobie, Mr MacKellar, Mr Maher, Mr Morris, Mr Spender and Mr West.
Petitions received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:
Ensure that the Government takes immediate action to restore the lost value of Family Allowances and to index them to cover future price rises,
Help single-income families by increasing the dependent spouse rebate to $1,392.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Birney, Mr Cadman, Mr Dobie, Mr Howard, Mr MacKellar and Mr Ruddock.
Petitions received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
l. That we are concerned that an increasing number of Australian families are facing financial burdens beyond their capacity to meet.
2. That we are concerned that the amount of financial assistance being afforded to families is inadequate.
3. That there has been no increase in family allowances for most families for some years.
4. That family allowances in all instances have declined in real value since 1976.

40 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Petitions

Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, will:
I. Ensure that there is an increase in family allowances in the 1982 Budget so that family allowances are at least restored to the real money value of their 1976 level;
2. Ensure that provision is made for the automatic and regular indexation of family allowances;
3. Ensure that proper consideration is given to the introduction of a Homemakers Allowance.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier, Mr N. A. Brown, Mrs Child, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McVeigh and Mr Scholes.
Petitions received.
Slaughter of Seal Pups
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the present hunt for harp seals in Canada is carried out in a cruel and inhuman manner.
That the population of harp seals has not been clearly shown to be increasing.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formally call on the Canadian Government to end the harp seal hunt and use its constitutional powers to halt the importation into Australia of products derived from the harp seal, Pagophilus groenlandicus.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown, Mrs Child, Mr Dawkins, Mr Les McMahon, Mr West and Mr Willis.
Petitions received.
Slaughter of Seal Pups
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the State of Victoria showeth that they wish the abolition of the Seal hunting in Canada and the banning of the import of Seal products from Canada into Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Australian Wine Industry
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) that wine is a beverage of moderation whose use especially in conjunction with food may be beneficial to the consumer.
(b) that per capita consumption of alcohol in Australia has stabilised at 9.6 litres per head, the same as the average over the past eight years.
(c) that the low retail price of wine in Australia has been brought about by a number of factors including an oversupply of grapes and grape products.
(d) that if the price of wine is increased due to factors outside the control of grape growers, wine makers and retailers, sales of wine will be reduced.
(e) that the consequent fall in the demand for grapes coupled with the reduced wine production will affect employment and incomes, particularly in rural areas.

(f) that Australian brandy continues to lose market share to other spirits.
Your petitioners therefore most humbly pray that the Government consider and appreciate the complexities of the widely-spread Australian Wine Industry and be aware that any Government impost will cause further imbalance between the supply of and the demand for grapes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Giles, Mr Hodges, Mr Hyde and Mr Jull.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins, Mr Howe and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly and Mr MacKellar.
Petitions received.
Sex Discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) that the Australian Government signed the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women in Copenhagen in 1980;
(b) that the Convention came into force on 3 September 1981;
(c) that Australian women suffer serious disadvantage in employment, education, accommodation, membership of licensed clubs, provision of goods and services including services relating to banking, insurance and the provision of grants, loans, credit or finance;
(d) that this disadvantage could be overcome by (i) making unlawful certain discrimination on the grounds of sex and marital status, (ii) eliminating discrimination on the ground of sex and marital status and (iii) promoting affirmative action for women in employment;
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament pass the Sex and Marital Status Discrimination Bill 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling, Mr Charles Jones, Mrs Kelly and Mr Ruddock.
Petitions received.

Petitions

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 41

Excise on Tobacco
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
that any increase in excise duty on cigarettes would be a further burden on smokers, would adversely affect employment in the tobacco manufacturing industry and aggravate the already high levels of inflation;
your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian government will reject any proposal for an increase in tobacco excise;
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Falconer, Mr Hawke and Mr Shipton.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposed sales tax of 2.5% on books, magazines and newspapers represents a tax on knowledge which should not be contemplated in a civilised country. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this proposed sales tax be withdrawn from the budget proposals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free, Mr Spender and Mr Viner.
Petitions received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the taxes of all Australians will be used to finance a dam that would flood the Lower Gordon and Franklin Rivers in South-West Tasmania. Your petitioners declare that the intrinsic values of this area, and the provision of funds from the taxes of all Australians, for the destruction of this area of the National Estate and of world heritage value, does make this a national issue. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government take all possible steps, including financial and legal steps and fulfil its responsibilities under the Australian Heritage Act to prevent the destruction of this area of the National Estate, and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier and Mr Falconer.
Petitions received.
Funding for Independent Schools in the Australian Capital Territory
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned on behalf of concerned citizens respectfully showeth:
'that it is important that there be freedom of choice in education in the Australian Capital Territory'.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Federal Government provides adequate funding for Independent

Schools in the Australian Capital Territory and more particularly for the establishment of a Third Grammar School in Canberra.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier and Mr Lusher.
Petitions received.
Family Planning Association of Victoria
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the Family Planning Association of Victoria.
In particular that:
Federal government continue to provide funding to the Family Planning Association of Victoria for clinical services to meet the growing demands of the community.
Increased funding be provided to the Family Planning Association of Victoria's Training, Education and Research Unit for educational services to the community.
All funding be provided on a triennial basis to enable cost-effective long term planning.
The federal government grant the Family Planning Association of Victoria exemption from sales tax and allow donations to be tax deductable.
That we, the undersigned, support the expansion of family planning services to ensure that adequate contraceptive information is fully available to all sections of the community, with special consideration given to disadvantaged groups.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cohen and Mr Hawke.
Petitions received.
Australian Film Commission
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that while generous tax concessions benefit established sectors of the now internationally acclaimed Australian film industry, other vital film activities, which are ineligible for tax concessions, have had to be severely curtailed due to the lack of funds available to the Creative Development Branch of the Australian Film Commission.
The Commission's Creative Development Branch is responsible for funding low budget films in order to develop new creative talent and ideas for the film industry to draw upon, it assists activities of major national significance such as the Australian Film Awards and the National Film Theatre, and it supports Film Festivals and film organisations in almost every State. All these aspects of the Commission's Creative Development work have suffered as a result of inflation eroding the Creative Development Branch's budget by over 40 per cent over the past five years.
Therefore your petitioners call upon the Federal Parliament to provide the Australian Film Corporation with at least a 50 per cent increase in the Budget for its Creative Development Branch in the coming financial year. This would be an essential first step towards ensuring the continuation of a viable and developing Australian film culture and film industry.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross and Mr Barry Jones.
Petitions received.

42 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Petitions

Immigration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens showeth:
That we protest at breakdowns in our Restrictive Immigration policy which, many senior members of our parliament had vigorously supported in their past promises to the Australian people.
We urge the Government to accede, not only to the wishes of the majority, as expressed in all public opinion polls, but also to act in accordance with their own statements. For example:
I. We want one Australian people, one Australian nation.--- Mr McMahon.
2. The avoidance of difficult social problems following an influx of people having different standards of living.ALP policy 72.
3. I believe we should do all in our power to prevent the buildup of ethnic groups within Australia.-Mr MacKellar.
4. Our policies reflect the firm and unshakeable determination of the Government to maintain a homogenous society, a society that is essentially undivided and free of avoidable tensions.-Dr Forbes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie and Mr Howard.
Petitions received.
Telephone Exchange, Moree
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Centre at Moree will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
The loss of personal service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people
The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available if this service is moved to a larger centre
The loss of personal service being given to people in extremely emergent conditions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Telecommunications Commission implementing any plan which will do away with the above services and go against the wishes of the Australian people.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHunt.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, Cooma
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Centre at Cooma will place in jeopardy the existing services to Telephone Subscribers in the district by:
The loss of personal service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.

The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available if this service is moved to a larger centre.
The loss of service being given to people in extremely emergent conditions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Telecommunications Commission implementing any plan which will do away with the above services and go against the wishes of the Australian people.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sainsbury.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned electors respectfully showeth:
The Old Age Pension is granted, according to the Constitution of the Land, Federal Parliament, and the people, conditionally to all citizens, who were non serving persons in the Forces, on reaching 65 years of age.
We of the Defence Forces, past and present, are entitled to the above mentioned pension five years earlier, i.e. at 60 years of age.
An unconditional pension is granted to people who did not risk their life and limbs at any war.
We wish to ask the Minister for Veteran's Affairs, why, we ex Defence Forces are not entitled to a no means test at 65 years of age?
This means that a non serving citizen, on retirement at 65 years age, only has to wait 5 years to be free of the means test, as against the Veterans waiting 10 years for the same privilege.
Those people who are interested, regarding this matter, and wish to draw this subject to our present Federal Government's attention, please sign below.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you, our Honourable Member will bring this matter to the Minister for Veteran Affairs attention and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Charles Jones and Mr Keating.
Petitions received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Cowper respectfully showeth:
The Old Age Pension is granted, according to the Constitution of the Land, Federal Parliament, and the people, conditionally to all citizens, who were Non-Serving Persons in the Forces, on reaching 65 years of age.
We of the Defence Forces, past and present, are entitled to the above mentioned pension five years earlier, i.e. at 60 years of age.
An unconditional pension is granted to people who did not risk their life and limbs at any war.
We wish to ask the Minister for Veteran's Affairs, why, we ex-Defence Forces are not entitled to a no means test at 65 years of age?
This means that a non-serving citizen, on retirement at 65 years of age, only has to wait 5 years to be free of the means test, as against the Veterans waiting 10 years for the same privilege.

Petitions

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 43

Those people who are interested, regarding this matter, and wish to draw this subject to our present Federal Government's attention, please sign below.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you, our Honourable Member will bring this matter to the Minister for Veterans' Affairs attention and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Robinson.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, Tweed Heads
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Tweed Heads will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Anthony.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, Bowral
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Bowral will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrBaume.
Petition received.
Anti-discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That currently discrimination in the provision of work, in appointment to jobs and in promotion exists in Australia on particular grounds including, inter alia, grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status, pregnancy and/or sex;
That currently discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits is exercised against particular groups of individuals-in particular, against married women.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employment of individuals under federal awards, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to sex and/or marital status.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Birney.
Petition received.
Registration Fee for Periodicals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We, the undersigned, respectfully ask that the Australian Government request Australia Post to review the recently introduced annual registration fee for periodicals.
With many periodicals produced for distribution to members in small numbers only, this new impost, together with the recent increases in postage rates, considerably adds to the administrative costs of small clubs and organisers, whose activities are non profit, and are directly involved in communityactivities.
Accordingly, we earnestly request this review, with a view to smaller clubs and organisations, at least, being exempted from the requirements of annual registration.
We thank you in anticipation of your support.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bungey.
Petition received.
Telephone Exhange, Windsor
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth.

44 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Petitions

That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Windsor will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cadman.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth concern over Plant Variety Rights (PVR) legislation.
We agree that:
(I) PVR will aggravate the free exchange of genetic material for plant breeding.
(2) PVR will not enhance Australia's access to improved plant varieties developed overseas but will encourage the dumping of unsuitable varieties on the Australian market.
(3) PVR will restrict the public plant breeding program to basic research for exploitation by private enterprise and discourage breeding for disease and pest resistant varieties.
(4) PVR will lead to the domination of the seed industry by foreign interest not responsible to the Australian people.
(5) The proprietary rights granted by PVR will encourage the introduction of seed distribution and marketing monopolies and lead to seed price increases.
Your petitioners therefore pray that Parliament:
(I) refrain from enacting any legislation on PVR,
(2) calls for a public enquiry into the impact of existing overseas PVR schemes on the Australian seed industry and the international seed trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Chapman.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the Ex-Servicemen's and Women's Pension Association is a body formed for the express purpose of obtaining a service pension for all ex-service personnel at sixty years of age for men and fifty-five years of age for women regardless of where they served during the 1939-45 war.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in parliament assembled should give urgent consideration to a favourable decision to the granting of the Service Pension to all Ex-Service Personnel who served their Country in time of need and who did not serve overseas through no fault of their own. The Service Pension is presently only granted to Returned Ex-Service Personnel.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth; that we deplore the fact that the unemployed are not allowed or encouraged to make significant earnings over and above their unemployment benefits without substantial loss of their unemployment benefits.
We are very concerned that the allowable earnings for unemployment beneficiaries remains unchanged at the 1969 level-$3 for under 18 years and $6 for over 18 years.
This discrimination is a further example of the governments harsh and insensitive treatment towards the unemployed and their families, and creates unnecessary divisions within Australian society.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in parliament assembled should decide to provide all the unemployed with the right to earn at least $30 over and above the unemployment benefit before they suffer a reduction in their benefit.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Proposed Student Loans Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the introduction of a comprehensive student loans scheme will:

Petitions

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 45

I. Restrict Access to EducationPeople from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from studying by the prospect of incurring large debts. These people, if they enrol, will be forced to amass loan debts. Richer students do not face this handicap.
2. Undermine the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme-TEAS should cover the basic living costs of students. Currently the scheme only assists 38% of full time students and the maximum level of TEAS is a mere $49.67. Government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced.
3. Disadvantage Women-Women students would be disadvantaged by a loans scheme as they have a lesser ability to repay loan debts, because on average women earn less and have a higher unemployment rate.
4. Disadvantage Mature-Age Students-Usually mature age students forego income to study and already have large financial commitments. They could not return to study if it meant incurring substantial debts.
5. Distort Educational Choices-Mounting loan debts would force students into studying shorter courses or not continuing with post-graduate study.
6. Result in Massive Attrition Rates-Students will attempt to undertake extensive part-time work or overload courses to minimise their loans. Increased failure rates will result forcing students to 'drop-out' rather than continuing study and increase their debts.
7. Cause Administrative & Financial DifficultiesOverseas experience shows high default rates will occur on student loans. Government money will be channelled away from TEAS to paying off banks. The government will also bear the administrative burden of pursuing defaulters.
Therefore, the proposed student loan scheme wilrhave disastrous effects on tertiary education, which we believe benefits the whole community, not just the individual student.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The House of Representatives will reject the introduction of a student loans scheme. And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever humbly pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Australia Day
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of (undersigned citizens of Australia) respectfully showeth:
That a public holiday was proclaimed on the first day of February 1982, to celebrate Australia Day which is in fact on the twenty-sixth day of January.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australia Day public holiday be proclaimed on the twenty-sixth day of January, so that Australia Day can be celebrated on Australia Day.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDean.
Petition received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth the possibility of the Government of Tasmania damming the Franklin River. Your petitioners the below humbly pray that the Federal Government of Australia intervenes to prevent this damming and your petitioner as in duty will ever pray.
by Mr Falconer. Petition received.
Telephone Exchanges, Victoria
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchanges in Victoria will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers by:
I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher. Petition received.
Slaughter of Marine Mammals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that:
I. Since the Australian Whale Protection Act 1980 provides for the banning of importation into Australia of all whale by-products, and
2. the Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the international banning of whaling,
3. then consistent with (I) and (2), this Government should immediately legislate to ban the importation of all marine mammal by-products, including the harp seal of Canada, and
4. through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly, the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an international ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that consistent with legislation on whaling, this Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products and support an international ban on slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

46 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Petitions

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That Moreton Island has been listed on the Register of the National Estate because of its exceptional scientific, ecological, heritage and recreational values; and
(2) That any sand mining of Moreton Island will result in the destruction of the exceptional scientific, ecological, heritage and recreational values of the Island; and
(3) That Moreton Island has been the subject of detailed investigation resulting in the adoption of a Management Plan by the Brisbane City Council the main aims of which are to conserve in its natural state the quality of its scenery and natural environment and to enhance public enjoyment of it for recreation purposes; and
(4) That Moreton Island represents the last significant area of wilderness close to Brisbane; and
(5) That there is an acute deficiency of National Parks within a 150 kilometre radius of Brisbane; and
(6) That Moreton Island contains Aboriginal Relics of immense scientific and cultural importance; and
(7) That the Island represents a major potential tourist resource specifically because of its unspoiled natural scenic attractions; and
(8) That public opinion actively demonstrated over a number of years clearly indicates that most citizens of Brisbane are strongly opposed to any sand mining on the Island, and desire that the whole of Moreton Island with the exception only of existing Townships, Tourist Resort, Airstrips and Lighthouse Reserve should be declared a National Park.
Your petitioners. therefore. humbly pray that the Parliament of Australia will:
(a) accept the wishes of the petitioners and the citizens of Brisbane generally and take whatever action is necessary and available to it to prevent sand mining of any description taking place on Moreton Island; and
(b) request the Government of the State of Queensland to take immediate action to declare the whole of Moreton Island to be a National Park with the exception only of existing Townships, Tourist Resort, Airstrips and Lighthouse Reserve.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received,
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That (a) the export of live animals for slaughter overseas, and (b) the shipment of live horses to Japan sentences such animals to cruel and inhumane treatment in the export process and at the hands of foreign importers.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ban the export of live animals for food and allow only carcass trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose; and
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all government, industry and educational research laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received,
Telephone Exchange, Condobolin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Condobolin will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hunt.
Petition received.

Petitions

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 47

Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That animal welfare organisations playa vital role in the community in caring for animals and lessening the burden on governments and government authorities charged with the task of dealing with neglected or unwanted animals.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that donations made to animal welfare charities be allowed as tax deductions to remove the unjust tax anomaly which discriminates against charitable animal welfare organisations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Broadcasting Licences
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Family Radio Ltd represents the largest single interest group in the community-i.e. Christians-who do not have a voice in public broadcasting commensurate with their representation.
That prime time access to existing broadcasts by Christian groups is virtually non-existent, and access at other times is fast disappearing.
That, by comparison with other capitals, Brisbane is entitled to at least one more category'S' FM broadcasting licence.
That there appears to be no prospect of the release of further category'S' FM licences in the near future for Brisbane.
That satisfactory fulfillment of the aims of family radio and its expansion can only be achieved by broadcasting in its own right under licence.
That Family Radio has a responsibility to the large support groups which have contributed substantially to its development, to achieve the aims in broadcasting and community work for which it was established.
That there is an urgent need for the kind of service and support that Family Radio can provide to other community groups through the particular type of integrated programming proposed by the company under a full-time licence.
And that pruned government resources are obviously insufficient to advance the development of public broadcasting as originally intended. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will support Family Radio's application for a broadcasting licence and will enable more category'S' FM licences to be made available in Brisbane.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrJull.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the amount of income permitted to pensioners before the loss of SOc in each dollar of pension for each extra dollar of income has not changed since 1972 although the CPI has risen by 161 per cent in that time;

That the amount of income permitted to pensioners before fringe benefits are disallowed has not altered since 1979 although the CPI has risen by 20 per cent in that time; and
That pensioners are people who, while employed, payed taxes and contributed to compulsory superannuation schemes.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:
Increase both the amount of income permitted to pensioners before disallowance of fringe benefits and the amount allowed before the amount of pension received is reduced, to a realistic level; and also link those cut-off points to the CPI.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Keating.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, Young
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Young will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lusher.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, Lithgow
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Lithgow will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
1. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.

48 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Petitions

We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received.
Slaughter of Seal Pups
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
that we seek the end to the barbarous slaughter of defenceless seal pups within the Dominion of Canada.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will take every action possible to stop the slaughter of defenceless seal pups.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrMaher.
Petition received.
Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth objection to the Metric system and request the Government to restore the Imperial system.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Millar.
Petition received.
Australian Taxation Office, Adelaide
To the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled:
We the undersigned citizens of Australia working in the Australian Taxation Office, Adelaide respectfully showeth that the planned withdrawal of cafeteria services will cause hardship in that there are insufficient other food suppliers in the vicinity of our place of employment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ensure that the existing service will be retained until the planned permanent facility is introduced.
by Mr Newman.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, Muswellbrook
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humbled petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Muswellbrook will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:

I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr O'Keefe.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, Mudgee
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Mudgee will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr O'Keefe.
Petition received.
Abortion
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth; that we support your efforts to strengthen our family and community life.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will:
I. Cease paying out taxpayers money for unlawful abortion procedures.
2. Eliminate subsidies for abortion referral centres.

Petitions

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 49

3. Ensure that Australia's Human Rights Charter will include rights for unborn Australians primarily the right to life.
4. Introduce further benefits for pregnant women to assist them in continuing with their pregnancy.
5. Obtain each year from each of the State Attorneys General: (a) written details as to the reasons for which procedures were carried out under item 6469 of the Medical Benefits Schedule,
6. (b) Declaration that no procedures in respect of which a claim is made within the Health Insurance Act are unlawful abortions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Robinson.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, 8ega
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Bega will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sainsbury.
Petition received.
Slaughter of Seal Pups
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the Citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth that the Federal Government protest in the strongest terms possible at the slaughter of baby seals as allowed by the Government of Canada.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that steps be taken to end this slaughter of baby seals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.

Communist Organisations
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the citizens of Australia totally reject communism and call upon the Government to:-
(a) Ban all communist organisations; and,
(b) Prohibit communists from holding any position in any industrial organisation, government department or local government and standing for Parliament.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Shipton.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, Inverell
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the manual assistance telephone exchange at Inverell will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:-
I. The loss of local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is removed to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to halt the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair.
Petition received.
Immigration
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia respectfully showeth.
That we protest at the continual refusal of the Commonwealth Government to seek the opinion of the Australian people as to whether or not we should remain a homogeneous European society, and that, against the advice of all public opinion polls it continues to dismantle the trouble free and cohesive structure of the Australian way of life; as it continues to promote and mislead the people on the alleged benefits of a multi-racial society.
That the Government seeks immediately to increase the percentage of Australians of British, Irish and other Caucasian background so that the traditions, heritage and the way of life of our people shall not be destroyed.

50 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Petitions

That Mr Grassby be dismissed as Commissioner for Community Relations as his racial bias renders him unsuitable to hold this position.
That the position of Commissioner for Community relations be phased out as the need diminishes with an increase in the content of British. Irish and Caucasian people in the Australian population.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Spender.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with home building. clothing. footwear, books and newspapers. wrapping for food.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament to exempt these items from the proposed Sales Tax as requested by the Senate to avoid such taxes on necessities of life becoming a further burden on home builders. families and children or inhibiting the free How of information through books and newspapers or reducing employment opportunities for people in the industries concerned and beyond.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Spender.
Petition received.
Funeral Fund for Pensioners
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
We request that a Commonwealth Funeral Fund for pensioners be established; and
that the Federal Government, in the next proposed increase in pensions in November 1982. consider withholding fifty cents per fortnight from each pension payable as a contribution towards such a fund; and.
that the Federal Government subsidise this amount on a dollar for dollar basis to ensure a decent funeral for all pensioners.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the government will help to alleviate the worry of the costs of a funeral by establishing this fund.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Tambling.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we strongly condemn the Commonwealth Liberal Government for its inhumane policies. implemented in May 1981. of transferring funds for public health to private enterprise.
We point out that resultant severe cuts in funding to Public Hospitals. Community Health and Ambulance Services have

caused enormous unnecessary suffering and hardship for people who must use these facilities.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government immediately restore the previous level of funding and introduce a genuine National Health Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrWest.
Petition received.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Subsidy
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Dawson respectfully showeth that in respect of-
( I) the current electricity supply crisis in Australia, and
(2) the one million household and business Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) users in rural and provincial Australia who are already paying considerably more for their gas than those ~ustralians connected to natural gas (primarily located in capital cities) and who will be further disadvantaged if the Comonwealth Government does not renew the LPG subsidy of $80 a tonne which expires in March 1983.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will extend the LPG subsidy for a further three years and include a specific appropriation in the 1982 Budget so the subsidy can continue uninterrupted throughout the 1982/83 financial year.
And your p~titioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite.
Petition received.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Subsidy
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Casey respectfully showeth that in respect-
(I) The current electricity supply crisis in Australia, and
(2) the one million household and business Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) users in rural and provincial Australia who are already paying considerably more for their gas than those Australians, mostly in capital cities, who are connected to natural gas and who will be further disadvantaged if the Commonwealth Government does not renew the LPG subsidy of $80 a tonne which expires in March 1983.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will extend the LPG subsidy for a further three years and include a specific appropriation in the 1982 Budget so the subsidy can continue uninterrupted throughout the 1982/83 financial year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Falconer.
Petition received.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Subsidy
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Hume respectfully showeth that in respect of-
(I) the current electricity supply crisis in Australia, and
(2) the one million household and business Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) users in rural and provinical

Petitions

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 51

Australia who are already paying considerably more for their gas than those Australians connected to natural gas (primarily located in capital cities) and who will be further disadvantaged if the Commonwealth Government does not renew the LPG subsidy of $80 a tonne which expires in march 1983.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will extend the L.P.G. Subsidy for a further three years and include a speciOc appropriation in the 1982 Budget so the subsidy can continue uninterrupted throughout the 1982/83 financial year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lusher.
Petition received.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Subsidy
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Gippsland showeth that in respect---
(I) The current electricity supply crisis in Australia, and
(2) The one million household and business Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) users in rural and provincial Australia who are already paying considerably more for their gas than those Australians, mostly in capital cities, who are connected to natural gas and who will be further disadvantaged if the Commonwealth Government does not renew the LPG subsidy of $80 a tonne which expires in march 1983.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will extend the LPG subsidy for a further three years and include a specific appropriation in the 1982 Budget so the subsidy can continue uninterrupted throughout the 1982/3 financial year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrNixon.
Petition received.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Subsidy
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of New England respectfully showeth:
That the removal of the current $80/tonne subsidy in the traditional LPG market would create significant economic hardship among consumers who do not consider conversion to other fuels either practical or desirable.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the subsidy be extended for a further 3 year term from April I 1983.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair.
Petition received.
National Highway, North Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of North Queensland respectfully showeth
that the National Highway is the responsibility of the Federal Government,
the Bruce Highway in North Queensland is of inferior standard for a National Highway,

Queensland has suffered a 15% disadvantage over other states during the past ten years in road funding,
and the state of the Highway is deteriorating as maintenance expenditure is insufficient to maintain even the present standard.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will allocate sufficient expenditure, to raise the standard of the National Highway in North Queensland to Department of Transport standards, in conjunction with the Queensland Government, within ten years.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite and Mr Dean.
Petitions received.

Institute of Early Childhood Development
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives:
The humble petition of citizens of Victoria showeth that at a general meeting concern was expressed as to the necessity to retain the Institute of Early Childhood Development as an autonomous institution.
Your petitioners therefore pray that you would make note of the following resolution passed at a public meeting held in Melbourne on August 12, 198 I.
'We request that the Federal Government continue funding the Institute of Early Childhood Development as an autonomous specialist institution recognising that it is unique in its capacity to serve the needs of the early childhood field in Victoria and throughout Australia.'
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr N. A. Brown.
Petition received.

Institute of Early Childhood Development
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the State of Victoria showeth that the Federal Government intends merging the 'Institute of Early Childhood Development' with another body.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government continue funding the 'Institute of Early Childhood Development' as an autonomous specialist institution, recognising that it is unique in its capacity to serve the needs of the early childhood field in Victoria and therefore Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHawke.
Petition received.

Prosperine Post Office, Queensland

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-

ition of the undersigned electors of the Dawson Electorate of

North Queensland respectfully showeth:

.

that Post Offices are the responsibility of the Federal Government,

the Prosperine Post Office has inadequate access for a large number of the community,

Mothers with prams, babes in arms and toddlers, invalid and old age pensioners, and paraplegics, are further incapacitated by the steep gradient of the Post Office steps.

52 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Petitions

Your petitioners humbly pray that Parliament will allocate sufficient funds to allow tenders to be called for the design and erection of a ramp in a suitable place adjacent to the Post Office for the unlimited access by the Prosperine community and its visitors, within the next 12 months.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite.
Petition received.
Pensions of Italian Immigrants
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned residents of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Australian Government take urgent steps to formulate and approve a Social Security Agreement with the Italian Government based on the rights and the needs of Italian immigrant workers in Australia.
Moreover wit h the present petition we request that the following important questions related to the pensions of Italian immigrants be urgently resolved within such an agreement; in particular we request:
1. That Italian immigrants who have gained the right to Australian pensions and are no longer resident in Australia be given the opportunity to apply for and obtain the peflsion without having to return to Australia.
2. That periods of residence in Australia of less than ten years presently required by the Australian legislation be consider~d for some entitlement to the Australian pension.
3. That the issue concerning the unfair reduction applied to the pension of Australian residents who are receiving an Italian pension be resolved.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth that your petitioners are outraged and disturbed by the exportation of live animals for slaughter to overseas:
I. That, as a people of a democratic society, we urge the Australian Government to ban, the export of live animals for slaughter overseas.
2. That the export of live horses to Japan for slaughter for human consumption be banned on the grounds that it is cruel and unnecessary.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Slaughter ofSeal Pups
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens o[ Victoria respectfully showeth that your petitioners are outraged and disturbed by the inhumane slaughter of baby harp seals off the coasts of Newfoundland and in particular, the Gulf of St. Lawrence and the Magdelen Islands.

I. That, as a people of a democratic society, we urge the Australian Government to halt all imports of seal products.
2. That we can be assured that the murdering of harp seals be discontinued in all forms at the real and perilous threat of the extinction of yet another Arctic animal species.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government take heed of their petitioners' protest, and give seals the right to life.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.

Pensions

To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.

The humble petition of the undersigned pensioners of Cobram respectfully showeth that the following are adding to the unbearable burden already incurred by the pensioners of this country:

I. the news that the hospital charges are to be further

increased,

-

2. the information that a further increase is forthcoming in our electricity supply,

3. allowing the foreign investors with their money to control our economy, and the daily standard of living of every citizen in this country, and this by seeking the highest interest on their money and by capitalising on the needs and deprivation of human decency of every citizen in Australia.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that prices and charges be controlled to protect our standard of living when our pensions are adjusted to the CP Index which is always six months in arrears.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by MrLloyd.

Petition received.

Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Hume respectfully showeth that the present system for PAVE taxpayers is inequitable and the needs of the single income family is of particular concern.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that a more equitable taxation system for PAYE taxpayers be immediately legislated and that the needs of the single income family be considered in this legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lusher.
Petitions received.

Australian Manufacturing Industry

The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembed:
The Petition of the undersigned employees of Luke Refrigeration Products (A Division of Luke Limited) respectfully showeth that we are concerned about those Members of Parliament referred to as the 'dries'.

Tariff Proposals

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 53

Your Petitioners therefore ask that we be heard regarding the increasing publicity given to these so called "dries" in the Government and their views on reducing support for Australian manufacturing industry.
Your Petitioners completely oppose moves by the 'dries' to force the Government to back away from its support of manufacturing.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
TARIFF PROPOSALS
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (5.23)-1 move:
Customs Tariff Proposals Nos 13,14, 15,I6and 17 (1982).
The Customs Tariff Proposals I have just tabled relate to proposed alterations to the Customs Tariff Act 1966. Proposals Nos 13, 14 and 15 (1982) formally place before Parliament, as required by Law, tariff changes made by Gazette notice during the last recess. Proposals No. 13 which operates from 1 June 1982 contains changes resulting from the Government's decision on recommendations made by the Industries Assistance Commission in its report on preparations, extracts and juices of meat. The Government has accepted the Commission's recommendations except in relation to canned ham, canned poultry and frozen cooked turkey roll. A general rate of 15 per cent will apply to canned ham with imports from developing countries being entitled to admission under tariff quota to an initial level of 900 tonnes at a rate of 5 per cent. Imports in excess of that level from developing countries will be dutiable at the general tariff rate. Canned poultry, frozen cooked turkey roll, meat extracts and meat juices will be dutiable at minimum rates. All other goods under reference will be dutiable at \0 per cent general and free from developing countries.
Proposals No. 14 which operates from 17 June 1982 contains changes resulting from the Government's decision on recommendations made by the lAC in its report on miscellaneous manufacturing.
Group A:
Articles of stone, plaster, cement, asbestos, mica and similar materials (excluding certain refractory products)
GroupE:
Ceramics. In respect of certain insulating materials the lAC recommended a rate of 15 per cent. The Government has decided that the duties will be phased down to this level over a two-year period to allow for a more stable adjustment within the industry.

The Government has accepted the lAC's recommendations that:
Goods of asphalt, bitumen or pitch be dutiable at 25 per cent reducing to 15 per cent after 2 years.
Certain friction materials be dutiable at 25 per cent;
Sanitary fixtures be dutiable at 20 per cent;
Certain goods of stone, slate, abrasive materials, plastering materials, asbestos cement goods, mica and certain ceramic goods be dutiable at 15 per cent;
Goods of cement and certain non-refractory construction products be dutiable at 10 per cent;
Other goods under reference continue to be dutiable at minimum rates.
Proposals No. 15 (1982) which operates from 1 July 1982 contains tariff changes resulting from the Government's decision on recommendations by the lAC in its report on miscellaneous textile products.
Mr Barry Jones-Does that cover Tasmania?
Mr HODGMAN-Indeed it does. The Government has accepted the Commission's recommendations except in respect of embroidery and articles of knitted or crocheted fabrics, elastic or rubberised. These latter goods are receiving further consideration by the Government. The Commission's recommendation to apply a duty of $2.25 per square metre to fabric not meeting the requirement of being embroidered over 10 per cent or more of its area has not been accepted. Embroidery will be defined specifically for tariff purposes and will attract a duty rate of 10 per cent with fabrics falling outside the definition attracting the duties applicable to the base fabric.
The Commission commented in its report that the effectiveness of assistance arrangements for a number of sectors of the textile industry could be eroded by the substitution of similar products imported at lower rates of duty. The Government has decided that imports of coated bonded fibre fabrics, certain double side coated polyolefin fabrics and tarpaulins, chenille fabrics and fabrics of flax or ramie will be closely monitored. If the level of assistance is being seriously eroded appropriate action will be taken by the Government, as it always does. Also incorporated in these Proposals are the developing country quota arrangements for 1982-83 and provision for a new tariff quota permitting duty free entry for specific amounts of sawn Caribbean pine of Forum Islands origin.

54 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Tariff Proposals

Proposals Nos 16 and 17 (1982) are new. Proposals No. 16 which operates from 27 May 1982 is an administrative change which restores phasing rates which were deleted from the Customs Tariff as a result of a drafting error.
Proposals No. 17, which operates from 20 July 1982, implements the Government's decision taken as part of its consideration of the Crawford report on the revitalisation of Australian shipping to remove the 2 per cent revenue duty applying to ships. A comprehensive summary setting out the nature of the changes has been prepared and is being circulated to honourable members. I commend the Proposals to the House.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (5.29)-1 would like to make one or two remarks before I move to adjourn the debate because this type of debate never comes back to the Parliament.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-The honourable member had better be very careful about this matter.
Mr SCHOLES-Mr Deputy Speaker, this is not a Bill; therefore, there is no obligation for an automatic adjournment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-That is true.
Mr SCHOLES-I want to draw the Government's attention to the fact that it is possible that the rather cumbersome and slow methods by which duty arrangements are made cannot, in the current circumstances, operate to protect employment in the Australian work place. There is evidence of widespread dumping, due to economic recessions outside Australia, and threats to Australian industry which require urgent consideration and urgent action. I am aware of a textile and the International Harvester factory in my electorate where 2,000 employees have disappeared. I am sure that the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) has similar problems in Tasmania with respect to both textile and other manufacturing processes. I hope that the Government can bring about a situation in which, as a matter of urgency, consideration of the problems in these areas is made without undue delay. The situation at the moment is that in Victoria and New South Wales, mainly in protected industries, up to 100 people a day are being retrenched. I seek leave to continue my remarks later.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (5.31 )-On behalf of my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) and for the information of

honourable members, I present the Industries Assistance Commission reports on miscellaneous textile products, preparations, extracts and juices of meat, miscellaneous manufacturing Group A, articles of stone, plaster, cement, asbestos mica and similar materials, excluding certain refractory products, Group E ceramics.
DISCHARGE OF TARIFF PROPOSALS
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (5.32)-1 ask leave of the House to move a motion to discharge certain Customs Tariff Proposals which were moved earlier in the session and which constitute part of Order of the Day No. 20. These Proposals were incorporated in the Customs Tariff Amendment Bill 1982 which has now been assented to.
Leave granted.
Mr HODGMAN-I thank the House. I move:
That Customs Tariff Proposals Nos 6 and 7 and Nos 13 to 15 (1981) and Customs Tariff Proposals Nos I to 5 (1982) constituting part of Order'of the Day No. 20, Government business, be discharged.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 29 April, on motion by Sir James Killen:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I make a suggestion that it may meet the convenience of the House to have a cognate debate covering this Bill and the Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 1982 as they are related measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, that course will be followed.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (5.33)-These Bills are the culmination of probably one of the longest and most protracted examinations of a piece of legislation in Australian history. The Bills modernise-but do not necessarily completely modernise-the various laws which have applied to the Australian defence forces for disciplinary and other purposes and also other laws, which in the past have been subject to serious misunderstandings and complexities, in respect of relationships between civilians and the defence forces. It is, as was stated to me, a major improvement on the existing law. Therefore the Opposition does

Defence Force Discipline Bill

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 55

not propose either to oppose the Bill or to seek to delay significantly its passage. There are matters in respect of the Bill which we will raise in debate and it is my intention, at the Committee stage, to move an amendment~it can be done only at that stage~which would require the then Minister to appoint a board of review, after the Bill has been operative for three years, to examine its operation and make a report to the Parliament within a year of its appointment.
If one looks at the history of this legislation one will find that it is extraordinarily difficult to obtain agreement on a review of this sort of legislation and to have that agreement brought before the Parliament. For the record I indicate that rather traumatic passage this piece of legislation is currently bringing to a conclusion. An inquiry into punishment and trial of military offences was ordered by the then Minister for Defence immediately following the conclusion of World War II. Mr Justice Reed delivered a report to the then Minister in 1946.
This Bill represents the legislative outcome of an initiative which was taken over 30 years ago. Through a series of delays, reviews, and I think, periods of pigeon-holing, the current military code or laws which cover discipline and other related matters in the various defence forces have remained in operation for a period which would not have been tolerated in the civil law of any State or in any comparable country. The law as amended or as replaced by this legislation takes out such offences as those related to beating of the drums and other matters which only now similarly exists, as far as I can see, in the Commonwealth Electoral Act which has a similar dating process because of its lack of cleaning-up.
In this particular case some of the matters which still exist, and which will exist until this Bill becomes law, are of far more serious consequence. We have a case on record, for example, of an officer charged with an offence and found not guilty being re-charged under the existing law. This particular case was never tried because of ministerial intervention. Also there was the case of Papua New Guinea civilians being convicted and sentenced to death by an army officer during World War II who had no authority or jurisdiction over those civilians whatsoever. This proposed law clarifies that position and fairly specifically indicates where jurisdiction starts and ends and sets out, to a reasonable extent, the arrangements which exist between military law and civilian populations.
I will refer to the matter relating to civilian power and military assistance to the civilian

power. The proposed new law is far better than that which now prevails but it is lacking in clarity. Certainly, in our opinion it does not give adequate cover to Service personnel in respect of protecting their position where they are in fact involved in activities of assistance to the civilian power. We believe that it would be absolutely essential that total clarity should exist in this area. There is one other part of the Bill in which the common law is applied and where there is some doubt about the meaning of its application. I hope that the Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) will in his response to the second reading debate or during the Committee stage of the Bill set out quite clearly what applications of the common law are meant by clause 10 of the Bill and that he will specify to what extent that applies.
In the areas of criminal matters the Australian Capital Territory law is applied. That is a considerable improvement on the application of the variety of laws which had existed before. It does constitute one problem which in the future may have to be reviewed. At present the Australian Capital Territory law is the province of the Commonwealth Parliament and therefore represents the view of the Commonwealth Parliament on what the civil law should be. It is possible and probable that within a very short number of years Australian Capital Territory law may be made by persons representing the residents of the Australian Capital Territory, as is now the case in the various States. One would not be sure whether it would then be appropriate to apply that law to a Commonwealth activity. It may well be that we would continue to do so but it is an area where some future consideration may be necessary in order to ensure that the law as it applies to the defence forces is a law which would have been and which is approved by this Parliament.
A second problem~as we see it~exists in clause 12 of the Bill. In that clause there is an onus of proof reversal which while existing in other Commonwealth law seems to be inappropriate, given the general application of common law and other legal aspects in respect of a person's defence. Under that clause of the Bill it is the defence which must prove its case rather than the prosecution. That clause is substantially in respect of a plea of insanity and a plea that the offence was committed under a pre-existing or an old law.
Sir James KilIen~That is the case under the code and at common law.
Mr SCHOLES~1t is in a clause of the Bill at the moment. We suggest that this is not in line with modern legal practice. The matter will be argued further during the Committee stage and

56 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

certainly will be subject to an amendment, I think, in the Senate. We are merely pointing out that we believe that the onus of proof should never rest with the defendant in the case of a serious charge.
I draw attention to a number of other areas of the Bill. In the provisions for summary offences and other trials the Bill now requires that a pleading should be made either guilty or not guilty by the Service personnel. There is also a limitation of paid legal advice to the legal office of the defence forces. I think the first matter that one would be entitled to raise is that if legal advice is limited to the defence forces some provision for independent legal advice is necessary. It is also necessary that the serviceman should have access to legal advice at the time of charging, which is critical in any action taken against an individual, and also prior to any requirement to plead or the making of a decision which is of legal consequence to the person who is charged.
There are a number of areas of the Bill where decisions have to be made in respect of the future conduct of the case which rest with the defendant as opposed to the person who is prosecuting. I will point to one area which concerns the requirement that the defendant will determine whether a commanding officer or the person conducting a summary offences hearing will in fact pass sentence or whether the case will be referred to a magistrate or to some other area for sentencing. At that stage if legal advice has not been available or is not available the person who is making the pleading is doing so usually without full knowledge of the consequences of the pleadings which will be made. It would seem that legal advice should be available to the person concerned in the first instance in respect of the fact that the consequences of a plea of guilty or not guilty should be clearly known to the person who is charged and in the second instance in respect of the consequences of a request that sentencing should be passed to another area from where the charge has been heard.
One other area of some concern is in regard to the fact that the Act allows that a conviction may be entered but no punishment recorded. At this stage the Bill does not provide-it is a matter which one would think current legal practice should suggest should apply-for a conviction to be found but not recorded. It is possible for technical offences of some limited consequence to take place and it is legal practice in civilian courts that convictions can in fact be entered without being recorded on a person's record. We ask that that be looked at. It is an option which I think ought to be available to a sentencing authority.

Where the case is of such significance that the person hearing the case does not want to enter a conviction or some other reason is apparent, that option should be open to that person. I do not think it should be a mandatory provision in a Bill that a conviction be recorded in cases where a conviction is obvious but need not necessarily be shown on a person's record. It is one of those situations in which, 20 years later, a conviction on the record would not reflect the circumstances at the time it was entered and it could be to a person's serious disadvantage.
We think there is need for some modification of the requirements in the Bill that bar the Commonwealth Ombudsman or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal from in any way involving themselves in a review of the proceedings or those matters related to the proceedings of a military tribunal. The situation suggested in the Bill is such that all proceedings will be reviewed by a reviewing authority. I do not believe it would be unreasonable in circumstances where it was felt that the reviewing authority particularly or the conduct of the case in general were contrary to proper practices for the Ombudsman's office or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to have the right to review the case. I would not suggest that they should have the right to reverse a finding or to quash a trial but certainly they should have the right to advise on proceedings which have been conducted. It is an area in which one would think that a change in the present situation would not adversely affect the applications of the Bill.
It is a very large and complex piece of legislation. It constitutes a major advance in the law in Australia and it is an even greater step forward in respect of the military law in Australia. The Bill constitutes what is practically a totally new area of law. There will be and are areas of some concern. I presume the Minister has had representations-I certainly have-claiming that it discriminates against homosexuals. I cannot find examples in the Bill to show that that is true. But there are some areas of the Bill, especially in the application of Australian Capital Territory law, where some discrimination could be seen. We do not propose to move in that area because I think the Bill is, in fact, relatively fair. Actually, it discriminates against all sexual activities because it makes them an offence on all military property. That is something I hope never to have to police. In respect of clause 61, I am told that it is possible that there may be some degree of discrimination. If so, one would hope that that could be cleared up. Certainly, there could be discrimination in other clauses of the Bill but those provisions are of an administrative nature rather than a legal

Defence Force Discipline Bill

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 57

nature and are not consequent upon the provisions of this Bill.
In the Committee stage, I will be moving an amendment which is extraordinarily long for the purpose for which it was drafted. Nevertheless, the purpose of the amendment is to require that, after a period of operation of three years, the Minister shall appoint a board of review to examine the operations of the Act and to make a report thereon. It requires that that report come to both Houses of the Parliament. In proposing to move that amendment, we are also accepting that some parts of the Bill, which we will probably move to amend at this stage, will remain operative for a reasonable period. But we believe that a set of laws which is totally new, whose application has not been tried or tested and which may be found to have deficiencies, should be examined as a matter of automatic consequence after a reasonable period of operation. It is an amendment which I think the Government could and should accept. If one looks at the traumatic history of getting this Bill into the Parliament, one can see that the first draft of the Bill was presented 27 years after the first inquiry and this Bill has arrived 9 years after the first draft. I am not blaming anyone for that. Obviously Ministers of both parties were involved. Obviously it is an area in which very significant disagreements have existed over the years. It is probably a tribute to the former Minister that the Bill is in the House at all. It is probably a tribute to, I think, Lance Barnard that the legislation again started its tortuous progress towards this House in 1972-73 when he ordered the matter to be brought to a head.
The Opposition is not opposing the Bill. There are a number of aspects of the Bill which we think probably could do with modernising. We do not intend to try to move the necessary amendments at this stage. We would hate to think that we have sent this Bill on another 30-year cycle before it comes back to this Parliament. The Bill improves military law materially. One hopes it can be passed through this Parliament expeditiously with the amendment agreed to so that a review takes place after three years of operation.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (5.52)-1 particularly welcome the Defence Force Discipline Bill as it brings about several major reforms. Let me mention five of them. Firstly, it Australianises the military law. That is, it replaces British law with new and more appropriate Australian law. Secondly, it modernises our military law which, until now, has often been notoriously out of date. Thirdly, it provides a uniform code for the three armed Services. Fourthly, it simplifies the military

law and its rules and procedures. Fifthly, it provides more lenient penalties in line with the reforming tendencies in civil criminal codes. Achieving the first of these three reformsAustralianising, modernising and uniformity-is significant in itself. The different laws formerly applying to the three Services have been complicated enough, but the situation has been further complicated by a mixture of British and Australian law where the British law has been already repealed in the United Kingdom itself.
All three Services have been subjected to these anomalies, but the Royal Australian Air Force has had to put up with the greatest mixture of anomaly and antiquity. It has been subject to three codes. The first is the United Kingdom Air Force Act of 1917. This Act is the United Kingdom Army Act of 1881 applied to the Royal Air Force. It was replaced by new legislation in Britain in 1955, but it still applies in Australia, as in force on 15 September 1939, as modified by Australian Air Force Regulations. But that is not enough. Secondly, the United Kingdom Kings Regulations and Air Council Instructions for the Air Force, which ceased to apply in Britain in 1953, continue to apply in Australia, as in force on 18 July 1940, subject, however, to some modifications made by our own Air Force Regulations. Thirdly, the United Kingdom rules for procedure of 1933 still apply to the RAAF as in force on 31 December 1956, although they have ceased to apply in Britain. Moreover, as well as Australian Air Force Regulations, certain provisions of the Australian Defence Act of 1903 also apply to the RAAF. Sometimes they parallel the United Kingdom Law and yet at other times they replace it.
It is easy to make fun out of the quaint archaicisms to be found in the codes that this Bill will replace. One is the offence of having taken a ship as a prize and failing to send the papers to a prize court-an offence taking one back to the days of Horatio Hornblower. To end this tangle of confusion, obscurity and archaicism is a definite achievement. More to the point, however, is the modernisation and rationalisation that the new code will bring about in matters essential to service discipline.
In place of the old tri-Service codes, which laid down vague offences of conduct 'calculated to prejudice both good order and discipline', a new uniform provision covers conduct likely to prejudice the discipline of the Defence Force or to bring it into disrepute. This rationalises and modernises the previous codes yet still meets the requirements of service discipline. The penalties under the new code are more lenient-three months gaol as a maximum penalty instead of the

58 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Defence Force Discipline Bill

old penalties, which were cashiering for Army and Air Force officers and two years imprisonment for Naval officers and for other ranks in all three Services. The demands of discipline are still upheld, despite the lenient penalty in the new code, because under this code it is now possible to charge offenders under clause 60, covering 'prejudicial conduct', with offences covered by other clauses of the Bill. This replaces rather contradictory pr0visions between the three Services over this point in the old codes.
One piece of updating in the Bill is the section covering narcotics-clause 59. There was no specific mention of narcotics in the old mixed codes. Clause 59 is in line with the approach of the rest of the Bill in that it prefers, where possible, to refer matters to civil courts. Therefore, the general principle of clause 59 is that narcotics offences committed by Defence Force personnel in Australia will be dealt with by the civil courts of the land. However, the Bill in this clause, as elsewhere, seeks to make the law of the Australian Capital Territory the standard of reference for Defence Force law and in the matter of possession of small amounts of cannabis or the use of cannabis inside or outside Australia it prescribes the same kind of lenient penalties for these offences that obtain under Australian Capital Territory law; that is, a fine of $1 00 maximum.
Similar considerations apply to the Bill's approach to homosexuality. I noted what the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) had to say on this matter, but I am as surprised as he appears to have been concerning criticisms. Clause 61 of the Bill follows Australian Capital Territory law-the Law Reform (Sexual Behaviour) Ordinance of 1976-in not making any offence out of the conduct of non-incestuous consenting adults in private. Under clause 3 (14) the concept of privacy does not apply to Service premises-other than married quarters-Service ships, aircraft or vehicles.
Turning to the question of how a uniform triservice code will benefit the discipline and morale of all the armed Services, mention should be made of the Bill's approach to the offence of mutiny. Clause 20 of the Bill not only clarifies and modernises but also replaces different definitions of mutiny among the Services by a single rationalised definition of the offence. Under the old codes there is no statutory offence of mutiny in Army or Air Force law, although in general mutiny has been taken to be collective insubordination or the combination of two or more persons to resist lawful military authority or induce others to do so. The Navy, on the other hand, has had a statutory definition of mutiny. This not only encompasses

such conduct as the Army and Air Force codes seem to cover but also deals with conduct subversive of discipline or with the object of avoiding duty or service against the enemy or conduct which impedes the performance of duty or service in the Navy or co-operating forces. The Bill in fact both simplifies and makes the law more definite in this area as well as ensuring a unified approach throughout the armed Services. Care is taken to distinguish between conduct intended to overthrow authority and conduct which is merely the expression of discontent and which is not directed towards the general overthrowal of lawful authority. The latter kind of conduct is to be covered under the Bill's provisions regarding disobedience to lawful commands-that is, under clause 27. I seek leave to continue my remarks later.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
DISTRIBUTION OF BUDGET PAPERS
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8.0)-Mr Speaker, may I ask whether you have discussed the matter of distribution of the Budget Papers? I understand that senators have been distributed with Budget Papers. Members of the House of Representatives are denied this until the finish of the Budget Speech. I think members of the House of Representatives are treated quite unfairly compared with members of the other chamber. Has the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in fact arranged for the Budget Papers to be distributed?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Corio raised this matter last year. The matter was considered and I had a response at that time by the Leader of the House. I have not pursued the matter since.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation for proposed expenditure announced.
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (8.2)- I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
In doing so, I present the Budget for 1982-83.
INTRODUCTION
The past year has been an extremely difficult one for the Australian economy.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 59

The international recession is now hitting us hard. Our overseas markets have shrunk. Economic growth has faltered. Unemployment is rising. Inflation remains far too high. Interest rates are hurting many of us.
Whilst much of this is due to the state of the world economy, the excessive growth of wages in Australia has made matters worse.
At a time when Australian industries should be more competitive we have made ourselves less competitive.
These developments have affected all Australian families.
To some, the past year has meant either the loss of a job or job insecurity.
To those paying off a home, the past year has seen unwelcome increases in interest rates.
To those Australians who live in many parts of our rural areas, the added burden of a widespread drought has compounded other difficulties.
In many parts of Australia major increases in electricity and other State charges have added to the burden of balancing the family budget.
Prospects for a rapid recovery in the world economy are at best very faint.
It is therefore unrealistic to expect a major recovery in the Australian economy to occur in the near future. There are no quick, easy solutions to our present problems.
Such a background has made the framing of this Budget by far the most difficult since the present Government took office.
On the one hand it was necessary to recognise that present economic conditions cause real hardship to many Australians.
On the other hand, we must never lose sight of the need to maintain an economic strategy which is responsible and which effectively addresses those economic developments which have contributed to our present situation.
The Government has accordingly endeavoured to balance these two considerations in the fairest and most responsible way possible.
In short, we have done all we can to provide relief, assistance and incentive within the confines of a responsible economic policy.
This has necessarily meant some increase in the size of the overall Budget deficit compared with last year.
But the outcome-a deficit of $1 ,674m-is only one per cent of gross domestic product and produces a domestic surplus of $230m.

The Government is confident that this deficit can be financed in a non-inflationary manner.
The principal features of this Budget are:
some personal tax relief and other assistance specifically designed to give maximum help to Australian families especially those on lower and middle incomes;
interest relief for people paying off their home;
a shift in emphasis towards capital works expenditure, including a special roads program, with beneficial employment consequences;
increased assistance for pensioners; the introduction of a new Family Income Supplement to help certain low income families; an increase in job training opportunities and other help for the unemployed; and some increases in indirect taxation and a modest broadening of the indirect tax base.
These items should be looked at in conjunction with the major incentives provided to Australian industry by the measures announced by the Prime Minister a few weeks ago.
ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
Few predicted the extent of the present world recession.
For a period we in Australia were fortunate not to feel its full effects.
Our economic policies and relative energy endowments created a more favourable investment climate in Australia than in most other countries. This sustained our economic growth beyond that of others.
However, the continued deterioration of economic activity around the world with all its implications for trade and commodity and energy prices ultimately affected our exports.
It also dampened enthusiasm for a number of mineral and energy related projects.
These adverse international influences were compounded by a significant worsening on the domestic wages front.
The need for maximum wage restraint has therefore been much in the Government's mind in framing this Budget.
Further progress on this front must be achieved if we are to become more competitive as a nation, thus reaping in full the benefits of a revival of the world economy when it comes.
The plain, inescapable fact is that Australia has priced herself out of many world markets.

60 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

For example, last year wage levels in this country grew by some 3 or 4 per cent more than the rate of inflation. By comparison recent wage settlements in West Germany, the United States and the United Kingdom, countries that rank among our major trading partners, have been around or less than the rates of inflation in those countries.
Unless our relative performance is improved, our living standards will suffer.
This problem can only be solved through a total community commitment.
The recent tripartite discussions between the Government, employers and the unions have already made a valuable contribution in this context.
For its part the Government will continue to follow those policies which create the right general economic environment for wage restraint.
As a major employer the Government has recently sought a significant degree of wage restraint in respect of its own employees.
There have already been a number of private sector and State government responses to this lead which the Government welcomes.
The unions too have a major role to play. All of us must become more conscious of the appalling consequences in terms of more unemployment which flow from excessive wage rises.
The Government welcomes recent statements by some trade union leaders acknowledging the importance of wage restraint.
The taxation relief and other assistance, particularly for families, contained in this Budget should be taken account of by wage and salary earners in making their wage claims.
THE OUTCOME FOR 1981-82
For the year as a whole both production and employment grew more slowly than in the previous year-and more slowly than expected at the time of last year's Budget.
Nevertheless, private business fixed investment still grew very strongly in real terms. Real personal consumption expenditure rose by 3t per cent; however, private dwelling investment fell by 3 per cent.
Exports remained flat and imports rose strongly.
Gross domestic product rose by 3 per cent and non-farm product by 2* per cent.

Many of these figures, however, disguise the marked slowdown in activity which occurred during the course of 1981-82 as the effects of the international recession and adverse wage developments began to take their toll on the Australian economy.
As a result, non-farm product grew at an annual rate of only one quarter of one per cent during the second half of 1981-82.
For 1981-82 as a whole, average weekly earnings appear to have risen by about 14 per cent.
That figure would have been serious enough. However, it conceals the jump in average weekly earnings at an estimated annual rate of around 20 per cent between the December and June quarters.
It also conceals the fact that, during the year, shorter working hours added further to labour costs.
All of this was occurring at a time when overseas wage and price inflation was coming down.
In consequence, Australia's rate of wage and price inflation moved sharply above those of our major trading partners and the competitiveness of much of our industry was severely eroded, despite considerable depreciation of our exchange rate.
Over the year to June 1982 Australia's inflation rate as measured by the Consumer Price Index was 10.7 per cent-almost 2 per cent above the rate over the previous twelve months and some 4 per cent above the average for our major OECD trading partners.
The profit share fell in the first half of 1982 to the average level of 1974-75.
Employers reacted quickly by pruning their labour forces, and unemployment, which had been gradually rising over the second half of 1981, has increased sharply so far in 1982.
Interest rates in Australia were extremely high during 1981-82 in both real and nominal terms, reflecting in a major way interest rates abroad.
Our high interest rates also reflected, however, domestic influences including the increased demand for funds.
The Commonwealth demands on financial markets were again lower but other levels of government continued to increase theirs.
Corporate sector borrowing also remained strong, even while the growth of private investment was slowing, since the squeeze on profits and cash flows increased the corporate sector's need to borrow for working capital purposes.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 61

THE BUDGET OUTCOME FOR 1981-82
The overall Budget deficit in 1981-82 was $549m, the lowest since 1973-74. The deficit represented about 0.4 per cent of gross domestic product, the lowest such proportion since 1971-72.
The outcome, however, was $453m higher than the Budget estimate, due entirely to outlays being one per cent higher than estimated at Budget time.
Contributing to the overrun on outlays were greater than expected increases in public sector wages and salaries, unemployment benefits and public debt interest.
Total receipts were marginally above the Budget estimate although there were variations in some of the main components.
In particular, net PAYE and other individuals' income tax collections were higher than predicted by $162m and $202m respectively, the latter reflecting our successful campaign against tax avoidance.
Indeed, 1981-82 and 1980-81 have been the only occasions in the past six years that provisional tax collections have exceeded Budget estimates.
OUTLAYS
I now turn to the main expenditure provisions of the Budget. Further details are provided in the accompanying Budget documents, particularly Statement No.3. Relevant Ministers will also be issuing more detailed statements.
Total outlays for 1982-83 are estimated to be $47067, an increase of 13.9 per cent on last year, or in real terms just over 2t per cent.
In putting together this Budget, the Government has placed considerable emphasis on capital expenditures.
This emphasis is evident not only in the funding provided for programs of assistance to the States and local authorities but also in the Commonwealth's own civil works program.
Major items in this field include increased funding for housing, particularly welfare housing, enhanced accommodation programs for the aged and disabled, a significantly increased roads program and expanded airport development.
The greater spending under these programs will enhance employment prospects in those sectors.

DEFENCE
The Government remains strongly committed to increasing defence preparedness and improving Australia's defence capability.
The $4622m which we are providing in the Budget for defence represents an increase of 11.8 per cent on 1981-82 and implies some further real growth.
The Budget provision is expected to represent about 2.9 per cent of gross domestic product, in line with our target of 3 per cent by 1984-85.
Further details will be provided to the Parliament by the Minister for Defence later in the year.
SOCIAL SECURITY AND WELFARE
The Government has decided on an extensive range of measures aimed at increased assistance to those most in need, particularly to pensioners and other social welfare beneficiaries, certain low income families and the handicapped.
The Government has also decided to increase family allowances in order to further assist Australian families.
Accordingly, total expenditure on social welfare is estimated to increase by $1774m or 15.4 per cent to $13 272m in 1982-83.
I will outline the more significant items here. Details of these and other measures will be provided in separate statements by the Ministers for Social Security and Veterans' Affairs.
Assistance/or Families
Family Allowances
The rates of family allowance for the first and second child will be increased by 50 per cent with effect from November 1982.
This follows the decision in last year's Budget to increase the rates of family allowance by 50 per cent for third and subsequent children.
The rate for the first child will be increased from $15.20 a month to $22.80 a month and the rate for the second child from $21.70 a month to $32.55 a month. A family with two or more children will therefore gain by $18.45 a month.
In all more than two million Australian families will benefit.
These changes are estimated to cost $250m in 1982-83 and $375m in a full year.
Family Income Supplement
Special consideration has also been given to the needs of families on low incomes.

62 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

To this end the Government has decided to introduce from May 1983 a tax free Family Income Supplement of $10 a week for each dependent child of a low income family not in receipt of social security type pensions or benefits.
This is the same rate of assistance per child paid for the children of pensioners and beneficiaries, and will ensure that low income working families with children are not disadvantaged by comparison with those on unemployment benefits.
The full rate of Supplement will be paid to families whose joint income does not exceed the income limit under the disadvantaged persons health care arrangements for a married couple without children. In November 1982, this limit will be $184 per week, and this amount is subject to further upward adjustment in May 1983.
Payments of the Supplement will be reduced by $1 for every $2 of income beyond that level of joint parental income.
The necessary administrative arrangements required to put a new benefit of this kind into operation will mean payments cannot commence until May 1983.
The Supplement is estimated to cost $3.5m in 1982-83 and $30m in a full year. The Minister for Social Security will announce further details.
Children's Services Program
The Government has undertaken a thorough review of the children's services program. As a result, total expenditure under that program will be increased by 28 per cent to $1 03m in 1982-83 and a number of innovations will be undertaken. These include:
an increase in the operational support grants to family day care schemes from $7 to $10 a week per child in full time care;
the development of an income test to determine eligibility for a fee rebate for pre-school day care for families in need; and the three year pilot Youth Services Scheme has been extended for one year to 30 June 1983 to enable final evaluation of the Scheme. Additional funds will be made available to increase assistance to existing projects for this period.
The Minister for Social Security will announce further details.
Indexation 0/ Pensions and Benefits
Basic pension and benefit rates will continue to be adjusted each November and May in line with movements in the consumer price index. In November the standard or single rate of social security pension, for example, will rise by $3.10 to

$77.25 a week, while the combined married rate will increase by $5.20 to $128.80 a week.
Later in this Speech, I shall announce details of a special tax rebate for pensioners designed to improve the relative position of pensioners with small non-pension incomes.
Rental Assistance/or Pensioners
The Government recognises the special problems faced by many pensioners in rented accommodation. Following an increase of $3 in the maximum rate of supplementary rental assistance in February of this year, from November 1982 it will be further increased by $2 a week to $10 a week.
This is estimated to cost an additional $16.7m in 1982-83 and about $24m in a full year.
Pension Income and Fringe Benefit Limits
The Government has decided to increase the levels of private income that pensioners and supporting parents can receive without any reduction in their pension. The levels were last increased in 1972. The new levels will increase by 50 per cent to $30 a week for single pensioners and by 45 per cent to $50 a week for pensioner couples from November 1982; higher levels apply where there are children.
This will mean, for example, that a married couple in receipt of an age pension will be able to receive a total gross income of $178.80 a week before their pension is diminished on the basis of 50 cents for each $1 of non-pension income in excess of $50 a week. The pension will not be totally withdrawn until their gross income reaches $307.60 a week. Comparable figures for a single pensioner are $107.25 and $184.50 a week.
The income limits for fringe benefit entitlement including pensioner health benefits are also to be raised. From November 1982, these will be increased by 35 per cent to $54 a week for single pensioners and by 32 per cent to $90 a week for pensioner couples. Additions to the limit for dependent children will be raised to a uniform $20 a week for each child.
These measures are estimated to cost $72.2m in 1982-83 and about $11 Om in a full year.
Unemployment and Sickness Benefits
The Government has decided on further measures to assist the unemployed.
The,non-indexed rate of unemployment benefit for persons 18 years and over without dependants will be increased from $58.10 a week to $64.40 a week and the rate of unemployment and sickness benefit for persons under 18 years will be raised

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 63

from $36 to $40 a week. Both increases will take effect from November 1982.
The income tests for unemployment and sickness benefits are to be standardised with an increased uniform 'free area' of $10 a week and an increase to $60 a week in the upper limit to the range of non-benefit income over which the benefit is reduced on a 50 per cent basis.
These measures are estimated to cost $68.1 m in 1982-83 and about $1 03m in a full year.
In addition, eligibility for pensioner health benefits has been extended to all sickness beneficiaries irrespective of income.
Assistance to the Handicapped For 1982-83, we have decided on a range of measures that will meet many of the concerns expressed by groups of the disabled.
The main initiatives are:
the introduction, from April 1983, of a nontaxable mobility allowance of $10 a week for severely handicapped people in employment or undertaking vocational training who are unable to use public transport;
a $12 a month increase in the rate of handicapped child's allowance, to $85 a month from November 1982; and
$750,000 to improve and extend regional services under the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service.
Accommodationfor the Aged or Disabled As already announced, additional capital funds will be made available for aged or disabled persons' accommodation. Over the next two years $170m will be provided for the program with $83m being allocated in 1982-83.
In addition, $37m and $14m will be spent over the next two years on capital facilities under the Handicapped Persons' Assistance Program and on senior citizens' centres; $18.5m and $7m respectively are to be spent in 1982-83.
Personal Care Subsidy We have decided to increase the personal care subsidy from $20 to $30 a week for each eligible person in hostel-type accommodation, backdated to July 1982.
The cost of this measure is estimated to be $12m in 1982-83.

Assistance to Veterans
New measures of particular importance to veterans include the following:
the disability pension will be totally disregarded in the income test for service pension and fringe benefits;
repatriation treatment benefits are to be extended to veterans of World War II who receive not less than 50 per cent disability pension plus a service pension;
service pension eligibility is to be extended, with effect from 3 February 1983, to Commonwealth and allied merchant mariners;
the disability pension at the 100 per cent general rate will be restored for pulmonary tuberculosis from 6 January 1983, for those veterans who were in receipt of the benefit prior to 2 November 1978;
the maximum rate of repatriation funeral benefit will be increased from $400 to $500 and the eligibility tests will be eased; and
there will be increases in many supplementary repatriation benefits.
These initiatives are expected to cost $14.5 million in 1982-83 and about $24m in a full year.
Assistancefor Aboriginals
The Budget provides $164m-a 12.4 per cent increase-for Aboriginal advancement programs administered by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. $51.4m of this is for the Aboriginal Development Commission.
In addition, other expenditure programs directed specifically to assisting Aboriginals, including programs funded under other portfolios, total about $1 07m.
HEALTH
The Budget provides $3379m for health services, an increase of 16 per cent on 1981-82.
Pharmaceutical Benefits
The Government has decided to introduce a three-tier Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme from I January 1983, to provide further benefits to pensioners and the disadvantaged.
These new arrangements will operate as follows:
those pensioners and beneficiaries who have been receiving their pharmaceutical benefits free of charge will continue to do so;
a new concessional contribution rate of $2.00 per benefit item will be introduced for health care card holders and their dependants and all pensioners not already entitled to free pharmaceuticals; and

64 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

the general patient contribution rate will rise from $3.20 to $4.00 per benefit item.
The expected net cost is $2.8m in 1982-83 and about $7m in a full year.
Payments to pharmacists for dispensing pharmaceutical benefit items were increased from I July at an estimated cost of $8m for this year. In addition, the Government has agreed to an increase in drug prices-3 per cent on the price to chemists plus 9 cents per benefit item-from I November 1982 with an estimated cost of $12.4m for 1982-83 and $24.8m in a full year.
EDUCATION
In 1982-83, total direct outlays on education are estimated to increase by 13.5 per cent to $3792 million.
Most of these funds-over $3000m-are being spent on the programs administered by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education and Schools Commissions. Details of the funding for these programs in 1983 have already been announced.
Student Assistance
In making its decisions in this area, the Government has had in mind the high level of youth unemployment, lower participation rates in education and the difficulties faced by many very low income families in meeting the cost of their children remaining at school or attending a tertiary institution.
The Government has therefore decided on a number of changes in student assistance programs for the 1983 academic year.
Allowances under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme and the Secondary Allowances Scheme will be increased by 20 per cent and allowances under other student assistance schemes by II per cent.
In 1983 the number of Commonwealth Postgraduate Awards will be increased by 100 to 900 and the basic allowance raised from '1)4620 to $6850 per annum, an increase of 48 per cent.
The income test requirements of the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme will be eased with the limits being increased by II per cent for 1983. In addition, the limits for the Secondary Allowances Scheme will be adjusted to the same level, an increase of over 44 per cent in limits for this Scheme.
The cost of these two Schemes is estimated to increase this financial year by $17m and the number of beneficiaries to increase by over 10 000 in 1983.

Student Loans Scheme
The foreshadowed Tertiary Student Loans Scheme will commence from the beginning of 1983.
Subject to a means test, loans of up to $1000 per year to a total of $8000 over the period of full time tertiary study will be available, with a generous interest rate subsidy and exemption from repayment for up to two years after completion of study.
Thereafter a repayment period of up to \0 years is provided for.
The Minister for Education will announce further details.
HOUSING ASSISTANCE
Over recent months the Government has announced significant improvements in housing assistance measures. The total of $571m provided for housing expenditure in this Budget includes:
a significant increase in welfare housing assistance to at least $333m-an increase of 27 per cent on 1981-82 outlays-which can be supplemented by additional funds nominated by the States through their works and housing programs; and
$147m, an increase of about 28 per cent over 1981-82, as grants to first home buyers.
In addition, $20m has been provided as the Commonwealth's contribution to a new Mortgage and Rent Relief Program to provide assistance to families facing severe financial hardship.
The Government has decided to ask the Reserve Bank of Australia to consider making a release of one percentage point from the Statutory Reserve Deposits it holds from the major trading banks for the special purpose of lending for housing. Any such release would, of course, be additional to the amount of $400m the major banks agreed to increase their home lending by earlier this year.
I shall be announcing further housing assistance measures later tonight.
EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING PROGRAMS
Increased unemployment, particularly amongst young Australians, which the current economic difficulties have produced, requires further emphasis on employment and job training programs.
Last financial year we spent $206m in this area. In 1982-83 this will be increased by 21 per cent to $250m.
We shall continue to give special weight to assistance programs for the young unemployed.

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 65

Employers will be encouraged to provide more opportunities for unemployed young people to obtain work experience and job skills and to become established in the work force.
Expenditure on assistance for work experience is to rise by $20m or 37 per cent to $74m in 1982-83. This will allow for over 74,000 new work experience placements in 1982-83 and increases of up to 36 per cent in the rate of subsidy to employers.
Support for the apprenticeship intake will also be maintained through significant increases in CRAFT rebates, with effect from the beginning of 1983. Total outlay on CRAFT in 1982-83 is estimated at $84m. This will enable employers to receive assistance in respect of some 111,000 apprentices in 1982-83, compared to 99,000 last year.
CULTURE AND RECREATION
The Budget provides $501m for culture and recreation activities in 1982-83.
The Australian Broadcasting Commission will receive $256m, which will permit some expansion of activity.
An amount of $12m has been provided for the installation of new transmitters and translators, including $1 m to commence a three year program for the extension of multicultural television.
The Special Broadcasting Service has also been allocated $26.2m in 1982-83.
Other expenditures of note are:
34m for the Australian Council including about $3.7m for the Australian Opera, more than $3m for the Elizabethan Theatre Trust orchestras and about $1.8m for the Australian Banet Foundation;
$15m for the Australian National Gallery, which is planned to open in October this year;
$26m for sports programs, which includes $4m for operating expenses of the Australian Institute of Sport, over $8m for payments to State and Territory governments to develop international sporting facilities, and assistance for sport and recreation for disabled people; and
an increase of over 50 per cent in expenditure on the Australian War Memorial. This includes a significant provision for the Memorial's permanent exhibition and its collection and very necessary repairs and maintenance to Memorial buildings.
FOREIGN AID
A total of $713m is provided for foreign aid expenditure in the Budget, an increase of $72m on last year's expenditure.

Priority will continue to be given to bilateral assistance to Papua New Guinea and countries in South-East Asia and the South Pacific region in addition to continuing support for various multilateral and regional organisations.
ASSISTANCE TO INDUSTRY
In his Statement of 19 July last, the Prime Minister announced major new incentives for Australia's manufacturing, mining and rural industries.
In particular, these included more generous depreciation provisions, a continuation of the Industrial Research and Development Scheme and a significant strengthening of the Export Market Development Scheme.
Depreciation allowances were also introduced for all new non-residential income producing buildings.
These measures were introduced in recognition of the subdued level of economic activity at present and the special need to make all sections of Australian industry as competitive as possible, particularly those striving to win export markets.
A revival of the fortunes of those Australian industries now experiencing difficulties and an expansion of job opportunities within those industries will depend very largely upon an improvement in general economic conditions, particularly at the international level. However, the measures announced by the Prime Minister will greatly enhance the ability of Australian industry to take part in a revival when general economic conditions do begin to pick up.
This year total Budget outlays for industry assistance and development are estimated to exceed $1 ,000m for the first time.
Rural Assistance
The extended drought in many parts of Australia has already had an extremely serious effect on large sections' of our rural industries which are so vital to our export earnings as a nation.
We have made an interest free advance of $1 Om to the New South Wales Government for drought relief purposes in that State. The Government has the drought situation under constant surveillance and stands ready to provide appropriate further assistance.
The Government's decision in 1980 to allow immediate write off of the cost of water storage facilities as a drought relief measure has been of considerable help to primary producers. Tax savings as a result of this to primary producers to end 1981-82 are estimated at more than $30m.

66 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Net payments from this year's Budget to rural industries are estimated to total $313m.
The Government will seek passage of the phosphate and nitrogenous fertilizer subsidy legislation in this Parliamentary session.
In view of the depressed conditions being experienced in the cattle and meat industries, the Government has decided to write off the industry debt in respect of the Brucellosis and Tuberculosis Eradication Campaign, estimated to be $23.Sm.
Charges under the Campaign of up to $4 per head will be levied from I October 1982 and reviewed annually to ensure contributions cover the industry's share of future costs.
Water Resources Programs
The Budget provides $41.7m for the National Water Resources Program, an increase of 27.S per cent on 1981-82 expenditure.
A further $6.Sm is expected to be provided in 1982-83 for the construction of the Burdekin Dam.
Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy Scheme
Total expenditure on this Scheme in 1981-82 amounted to some $148m.
The Government has in recent times become concerned that the Scheme could be the subject of some abuse and fraud which might have caused some of the significant cost increases which have occurred in the operation of the Scheme.
It has therefore been decided that the Scheme should be the subject of a thorough review. Pending the outcome of the review the Scheme will be amended to subsidise freight cost differentials in excess of I cent per litre instead of 0.44 cents per litre as previously applied.
Further details will be announced by the Minister for Industry and Commerce.
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION
Total Budget outlays on transport and communication are estimated to increase by 2S per cent to $1 ,47Sm.
Roads Assistance
Under the normal roads program the Commonwealth will provide $734 million to the States and the Northern Territory this financial year as part of our undertaking to provide a total of $3,6S0m for roads over the five years to 1984-8S.
In addition-and as a major initiative to bring about a lasting improvement in the road and transport system of the nation-the Government has decided to establish an Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program.

Its goals are to be achieved by 1988, our Bicentennial year.
The special Bicentennial Road Development Program will include national, arterial and local roads in all parts of Australia and also provide for upgrading elements of our urban transport network.
The priorities and allocations under this Program will be finally determined by the Commonwealth Government. It will be a fundamental requirement of the Program that the States and local government at least maintain in real terms their expenditure on roads and in other areas touched by the Program.
The Program will be entirely funded by a special surcharge on motor spirit and distillate. This will initially be set at 1 cent per litre, with expenditure under the Program totalling $IS0m in 1982-83. The surcharge will be increased on 1 July 1983 to 2 cents per litre.
The proceeds of this surcharge will be paid into a special trust fund so that none of those proceeds can be used for purposes other than the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program.
About $2,SOO million is expected to be provided under this Program over the period to 1988-89. Further details will be announced tonight by the Minister for Transport and Construction.
Air Navigation Charges
The Government has decided to increase air navigation charges for domestic trunk and regional airlines by 20 per cent and for the general aviation sector by 12 per cent, effective from 1 October 1982.
Additional recoveries of $8.4m in 1982-83 and $12.Sm in a full year are expected from these higher charges.
Charges for the international sector, where there is already full cost recovery, will remain unchanged.
Rail
Budget outlays are estimated to be $94. Sm for rail transport in 1982-83 of which $21.8m is allocated to mainline upgrading and $3m is provided for the continued planning of the proposed Alice Springs to Darwin railway.
Domestic Communications Satellite
A further equity contribution of $18m will be provided to AUSSAT Pty Ltd, which will own and operate the proposed domestic satellite communications system to be introduced in Australia

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 67

in 1985. It is planned that, in due course, the private sector will be invited to take up a substantial equity interest in AUSSAT Pty Ltd.
The New Australia Telescope
The work of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization has won world respect, not least in radio physics through the work of the radio telescope at Parkes.
The Government has now decided to fund the construction by CSIRO of a new radio telescope to cost a total of $25m to be known as the Australia Telescope and to be completed by our Bicentennial year 1988.
PAYMENTS TO THE STATES, NORTHERN TERRITORY AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENT
The major decisions affecting payments to the States have already been announced.
Total net payments to the States, the Northern Territory and local government, including all specific purpose payments, are estimated to increase by $1 ,956m or 13.9 per cent in 1982-83.
Special assistance totalling $105m for various capital purposes is also being provided to a number of States. This assistance is expected to have beneficial employment consequences. The details are:
$20m to Western Australia for sewage works in the Cockburn Sound area with $12.1 m being made available this year;
$lOm to Tasmania for tourist road development in 1982-83;
$IOm to South Australia for upgrading water supply facilities in 1982-83; and
$35m to Victoria, $20m to Queensland and $IOm to South Australia in 1982-83 for upgrading their transportation systems.
In this same general context it should be noted that removal of the $1 a tonne coal export levy, at a cost to revenue of $25m this year, will be of particular benefit to New South Wales, which is the source of the great bulk of export coal in this category.
CAPITAL WORKS
Taking direct capital expenditures together with capital grants and net advances, the total provided by the Budget for capital purposes in 1982-83 is over $4,000m, an increase of more than 17 per cent on similar outlays in 1981-82.
By far the major part of this amount will fund capital works.

Budget-Financed Civil Works
Some $336m in 1982-83 is for civil works financed directly from the Budget. This is an increase of $136m or 68 per cent on 1981-82 expenditures and will provide a boost to the building and construction industry.
Airports
Airport works approved for commencement in 1982-83 are estimated to cost a total of $355m over the next four years and $49m in 1982-83.
Included are major development works for Brisbane, Perth and Townsville airports and the upgrading of facilities at a number of other airports.
Also included is $12m under the Aerodrome Local Ownership Plan for the upgrading of a number of country airports in New South Wales and Queensland to permit the introduction of medium jet aircraft to those centres and for new developments associated with the transfer of Government airports to local ownership.
Total expenditure in 1982-83 under the Plan is estimated at $38m.
Other Civil Works
The Government has also decided to proceed in 1982-83 with major redevelopment works at Repatriation General Hospitals at Daw Park and Hollywood, extensions to the National Library, and the construction of an indoor sports training facility for the Australian Institute of Sport.
RECEIPTS
I turn now to the revenue proposals. Total receipts are estimated at $45,393m, an increase of 11.3 per cent on last year or, in real terms, of only 0.3 per cent. This is the smallest real rise in receipts for ten years.
A major factor in producing such a small rise in revenue collections is the impact of the slowdown in economic growth on collections of income and company taxes.
Revenue collections have also been affected by the taxation reductions in certain areas which I am about to announce.
As will be apparent from recent decisions and from other announcements contained in this Speech, the Government remains committed to effective measures against both tax avoidance and evasion.
In a separate statement tonight I shall indicate steps we shall take to recover unpaid Division 7 tax in 'bottom of the harbour' cases.

68 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Our past legislation has proved effective. The most recent evidence of this is the fact that the Commissioner of Taxation has informed the Government that this financial year it will not be necessary to make an adjustment to projected revenue collections to allow for tax avoidance losses in the way that has been done in the last several years.
Our continuing success on this front played no small part in making it possible to provide some personal tax relief in this Budget.
Personal Income Tax
We propose to make a substantial reduction in the personal income tax burden and, in so doing, give particular attention to those on low to average incomes and to the needs of families.
With these objectives in mind, three changes in the tax scales are proposed.
First the tax-free threshold is to be increased by $400 per annum, from $4,195 to $4,595.
This means that no tax will be payable until a taxpayer's annual income exceeds $4,595. As a result of this change alone about 300,000 pensioners and low income earners who would otherwise pay tax in 1982-83 will not now do so.
Secondly, the standard rate of tax is to be reduced from 32 per cent to 30 per cent.
Thirdly, the top of the standard rate step, namely the point above which a taxpayer commences to pay 46 per cent of each additional dollar he or she earns in tax, is to be increased from $17,894 to $19,500.
The most direct and highly beneficial consequence of this change is that many thousands of average wage and salary earners now have the incentive to earn additional income without fear of moving into a higher tax bracket.
This change will also mean that about 75 per cent of all Australian taxpayers will be on the new and lower standard rate after 1 November.

Single Income Families
To give additional help to single income families with dependent children it is proposed to increase the dependent spouse rebate by $200 per year, from $830 per annum to $1,030 per annum, where there are dependent (including student) children.
For a taxpayer on the average wage with a dependent wife and children, this particular measure will mean a further tax saving of $3.85 per week, additional to the saving of $7.65 arising from the general tax reductions outlined earlier.
These same levels of rebate will apply for a housekeeper or daughter-housekeeper where there are dependent children. The sole parent rebate will also be raised by $200, to $780 per annum.
Commencement Date and Cost
All of these changes will take effect from I November 1982 and will be reflected in PAYE instalments, and hence paypackets, from that date.
For assessment purposes, the rate scale applied to 1982-83 taxable incomes will be an average of one-third of the present scale and two-thirds of the new scale.
Similarly, the increase of $200 per annum in the rebates which I have mentioned will average $133 for the 1982-83 income year, reflecting the operation of the higher level for two-thirds of the year.
The cost of the various personal income tax measures I have mentioned is estimated at $1,570m in 1982-83 and $2,567m in a full year.
Net PAYE income tax collections will be 2 per cent lower in real terms this year than last.
Pensioner Rebate
Over the past year there has been growing concern amongst pensioners in Australia that, in the absence of corrective action, their pensions would increase to the point where the pension alone would become taxable.

The combined effect of these three measures will be to provide the largest proportionate tax reductions to those receiving lower taxable incomes.
Detailed tables illustrating these changes at various income levels are being provided.
For example, a taxpayer on average weekly earnings of about $344.60 will receive a boost in his take home pay of $7.65 as a result of the changes I have just explained.

One of the major reasons for our decision to increase the tax-free threshold to $4,595 per annum, or approximately $88 per week, was to stop this occurring.
However, in addition, we have decided to introduce a special pensioner rebate for income tax purposes. This will ensure that people wholly or mainly dependent on a taxable pension do not bear tax.

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 69

The maximum rebate will be $250 per annum. This means that a pensioner can have a total income including a pension of $5,429 per year without having to pay any tax. For every additional dollar of income that a pensioner has over and above $5,429 per year, the amount of that rebate will be reduced by 12t cents, so that by the time a pensioner's income reaches $7,429 the rebate will no longer be applicable.
The rebate will take effect from 1 November 1982 and, for assessment purposes, the level of 1982-83 maximum rebate will be $167, with corresponding shading-out provisions above $5,007.
Married pensioners will each be entitled to the same rebate as a single pensioner.
This rebate is estimated to cost $7m in 1982-83 and $36m in a full year.
It should be noted that the increased income to pensioners as a result of the combination of cash benefits and reductions in tax from November this year, ranges from up to $12.79 per week for a single pensioner to $17.08 per week for a couple, along with the extension of fringe benefit entitlements.
Non-resident Taxpayers
At present the first $4,195 of taxable income of non-resident as well as resident individuals is free of tax.
However, the reasons for freeing residents from tax on the lowest slice of income seldom have much relevance to non-residents, and there is already no tax free amount for withholding tax purposes.
It is therefore proposed to withdraw the effect of the zero rate from non-residents, other than those in receipt of taxable social security and repatriation payments, and subject that slice of income to tax at the standard rate.
This measure will have some anti-tax avoidance benefits and is in line with overseas practice.
This measure which, subject to some matters mentioned in Statement No.4, will take effect from tonight is estimated to yield $lm in 1982-83 and $15m in a full year.
Home Loan Interest Rebate
The Government has decided to provide some taxation relief to people who are paying off their home, irrespective of whether it is their first home, thus broadening in a significant way the housing interest relief which I announced on 18 March this year.
The new rebate will allow persons paying off their own home to claim (in 1982-83) a rebate at

the standard rate on the amount of interest they pay on their housing loan, from any source, over and above 10 per cent on up to $60,000 of mortgage or other loan arrangements.
For example, a taxpayer paying interest at 13.5 per cent on a mortgage from a savings bank of $25,000 would obtain a rebate of $5.05 per week.
Similarly, if a taxpayer had a building society mortgage of $30,000 at an interest rate of 15 per cent, the rebate would be $8.65 per week.
Eligibility for this scheme will, of course, be restricted to the sole or principal residence of a taxpayer.
Unlike the present scheme, the new rebate will not be limited to first home owners nor the first five years of home ownership, and the amount of rebate will not be subject to specified ceilings.
First home buyers will still be able to use the existing scheme, rather than the new scheme, where it confers the larger rebate.
PAYE instalments can be adjusted to allow for the rebate from 1 November 1982.
The rebates scheme already in place would, on its own, have cost $1 OOm in 1982-83 and $230m in a full year. It is estimated that the effect of the new measure will be to add $55m in 1982-83 and $185m in a full year, to the overall revenue cost.
Rebate on Dividend Income
It is a fundamental part of the philosophy of the Government parties that maximum encouragement be given to small investors.
As a result we have had under study for some time submissions from many suggesting that there should be some relief given from so-called double taxation of dividend income. This issue was the subject of recommendations by the Campbell Committee.
The Government has decided-as from 1982-83-to allow a rebate at the standard rate of tax on up to $1000 of dividends included in taxable income received by resident individual shareholders from resident companies. Certain exceptions are noted in Statement No.4.
This measure is estimated to cost $36m in 1982-83 and $75m in a full year.
Employee Share Acquisition Schemes
The Government has also received many representations to provide a greater incentive for schemes whereby employees can purchase shares in the companies which employ them.
The Government sees merit in this idea. We have therefore decided to provide an incentive

70 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

whereby employees will not be subject to tax on any benefits arising from the price at which shares are issued under an approved scheme.
The Government believes that this course of action will provide benefits to productivity and industrial harmony. There is much to commend the view that employees should feel an increasing stake in the fortunes of the companies employing them.
Guidelines for approved schemes will include the important requirements that the shares are offered to all employees on a non-discriminatory basis and that, at the time of allocation, the discount on market price does not exceed 15 per cent.
This is estimated to cost $5m in a full year, but will not affect revenue in 1982-83.
Retention Allowancefor Private Companies
The Government has previously indicated that it would examine further the distribution requirements on private companies under Division 7 of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
We now propose to increase the retention allowance for trading or business income by 10 per cent, ie from 70 to 80 per cent, for distributions from taxable incomes of 1981-82 and subsequent years.
This means that in the time it has been in office this Government will have increased the retention allowance for private companies from 50 per cent to 80 per cent.
No change is being made to the 10 per cent retention allowance for property income or to the rule that there is no retention allowance for dividends received by one private company from another.
This measure is estimated to cost $2m in 1982-83 and $30m in a full year and should be of considerable benefit to the small business sector.
Gift Provisions
A number of conservation organisations will be given access to the gift provisions of the income tax law. Full details of eligible organisations are provided in a separate release.
Company Groups
Both the Asprey and Campbell Committees expressed support for provisions which would allow losses by one company in a group to be offset against profits of others in the group, where there is effectively 100 per cent common ownership of the companies.

The Government proposes to introduce measures to give effect to such a provision, supported by various safeguarding and other technical provisions.
Tax Evasion through Cash Payments
In recent times, much of the debate on tax avoidance and evasion has tended to concentrate almost exclusively on sophisticated tax avoidance arrangements and has therefore largely ignored the enormous losses to revenue which occur through the so-called cash economy.
I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that as much if not more revenue is lost through outright evasion and non-declaration of income together than under artifical tax avoidance schemes.
Therefore as part of its ongoing policy against both tax avoidance and evasion the Government has taken a firm decision to introduce from I July 1983 a system of deducting at source an amount on account of tax in respect of certain payments for labour and services.
It will be separate from the normal PAYE system although it will operate like that system in respect of payments to which it applies.
There are certain industries where evasion poses particular problems.
An information paper on the proposed new system is being released tonight. The new system will be the subject of extensive discussion and consultation with relevant industry groups and representatives of the trade union movement.
Whilst the Government has taken a firm decision to launch the new system it wishes to fully consult affected groups regarding implementation.
The Government will take particular care when implementing this system to protect the separate status of sub-contractors. The thrust of the change is to ensure that the honest sub-contractor is not put at a competitive disadvantage.
The revenue effects of this measure will begin to be felt in 1983-84 and I am advised that the revenue gained in that year from these measures will be in the order of $500m.
Indirect Taxation
Although the overall taxation burden in Australia is relatively low amongst industrialised countries our reliance on direct personal taxation as a source of revenue is relatively high amongst those countries. The Government has always seen merit in gradually moving away from an overreliance on personal income tax as a source of revenue.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 71

This Budget contains significant net reductions in personal income tax and the opportunity has been taken to achieve a modest broadening and deepening of the indirect tax base.

The changed arrangements are estimated to yield a net increase in revenue of $161 m in 1982-83 at the previously existing excise rate of 5.155 cents per litre and $176m in a full year.

Sales Tax
Two measures are proposed in the sales tax area.
First, after tonight each of the three rates on goods at present taxable will be increased by 2t percentage points, raising an estimated $370m in 1982-83 and $490m in a full year.
Secondly, it is proposed that a number of goods which are at present exempt be made taxable as from I January 1983 at a rate of 7t per cent.
This broadening of the sales tax base is to include goods such as hand tools, construction equipment and manchester. It does not include what some have regarded as the 'necessities of life'.
Further details are given in Statement No. 4 and in the legislation being introduced tonight.
This extension of the sales tax base is estimated to yield $44m in 1982-83 and $1 05m in a full year.
Excises
I turn now to excises.
Off-Road Use ofDistillate
Exemption of excise duty on diesel fuel is allowed at present for all use off public roads.
The exemption arrangements have proved difficult to administer so as to prevent abuse.
There is also some evidence that because of price advantages excise-exempt distillate is being used for purposes such as heating and power generation for which other fuels would be more appropriate.
The concession also ensures certain competitive advantages, for example, rail transport as against road transport.
As from tonight, all diesel fuel will bear the full rate of excise duty, irrespective of its end use.
We shall however introduce a system to allow users to claim rebates of this excise in respect of certain categories of off-road end use-broadly, domestic use, hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes and in the agricultural, mining, fishing and forestry industries.
The legislation will contain provisions allowing claims to be made in respect of diesel fuel purchased from tonight in the specified end uses.
The Minister for Industry and Commerce will advise the Parliament of further details.

Beer and Tobacco Excise
Excise rates on beer and tobacco products have not been increased since 1978; the real rates of such duties during this period have declined by about 25 per cent.
Beer and tobacco products excise rates will increase by approximately 15 per cent and 20 per cent respectively with effect from tonight.
The increase in excise on beer-only the fourth in twenty-four years-will be by 8 cents to 60 cents per litre.
While retail price effects will depend on mark-up practices in the industry, the increase in the price of a glass of beer as a result of the rate increase could be 3 or 4 cents.
The measure is estimated to yield an additional $113m in 1982-83 and $135m in a full year.
Excise rates on tobacco products will rise by approximately 20 per cent to $29.70 per kilogram for cigarettes, $15.1 0 for manufactured tobacco and $25.34 for cigars.
These measures are estimated to raise about $98m in 1982-83 and $125m in a full year and could raise the retail price of a packet of 20 cigarettes by about 12-14 cents.
There will be no increases this year in the rates of excise on potable spirits.
However, some spirits are subject to sales tax and will therefore be affected by the general sales tax increases I announced earlier.
For each of the excise increases announced tonight, there will be commensurate increases in the corresponding customs duties on imports.
Tax on Bank Transactions
Consistent with the Government's desire to broaden the indirect tax base, it is proposed to introduce a tax on certain bank transactions, with effect from 1 January 1983.
The tax will apply to all debits to bank accounts that are subject to operation by cheque or like payment instrument, whether or not the particular debit arises from a cheque (or like) transaction.
Four rates of tax will apply, ranging from 10 cents on debits of less than $100, to $1 on debits of $5000 or more.
Full details will be given in the legislation.

72 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

This measure is estimated to raise $80 million in 1982-83 and $200 million in a full year.
All these measures are detailed in Statement No.4.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty
Several amendments of a technical nature are proposed for stamp duties in the Australian Capital Territory, with the aim of removing anomalies and bringing the ACT duties more into line with those of the States.
Their revenue effect is negligible.
THE BUDGET'S IMPACT ON FAMILIES
As I have already said, the Government is particularly concerned at the effect of current economic circumstances on average Australian families.
The taxation and other assistance measures of a general character contained in the Budget have been designed to give maximum help to the generality of Australian families.
Thus, in a genuine sense, this Budget deserves the description of a family Budget.
Let me illustrate by referring to the impact of this Budget on a family comprising a sole breadwinner with a dependent spouse and two dependent children, who in 1982-83 will have an income of $300 per week.
Let us also assume that the person is paying off the family home and has a mortgage liability of $25 000 at an interest rate of 13t per cent.
This family will receive the following main benefits as a result of the Budget.
The personal tax changes from I November will mean an extra $10.54 per week.
The home loan interest rebate will mean an extra $5.05 per week.
The increase in family allowances will mean an extra $4.25 per week.
The total benefit from these measures will therefore be some $19.84 per week to this family.
If we assume that this famiily has a consumption pattern similar to the weightings for the CPI and spends all of its disposable income, the direct effect on it of indirect taxes in this Budget could be about $3 per week.
Therefore, the net weekly benefits for this family of this Budget would be about $16.84 per week.
Let me stress again that the above is an average example only and subject to qualification on that account.

However, it does illustrate the substantial family benefits contained in this Budget.
Detailed tables illustrating some of the Budget's effects on families in different situations will be made available.
BUDGET OVERVIEW
Total outlays in 1982-83 are estimated to increase by 13.9 per cent to $47 067m; this is an increase of 2.6 per cent in real terms.
Total receipts are estimated to increase by 11.3 per cent in 1982-83 to $45 393m; this is an increase of 0.3 per cent in real terms.
The overall Budget deficit is therefore estimated at $1674m, an increase of $1125m on the outcome for 1981-82.
After allowance for transactions abroad, there will be an estimated domestic Budget surplus of $230m.
ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
In framing the Budget the Government has tried to give relief and assistance to those in the community who most need it within the confines of a Budget which is economically responsible.
This Budget does not represent a change in our economic objectives.
It should not be seen as lessening our commitment to achieve a substantial and sustained reduction in inflation.
Although this year's deficit is bigger than last year's outcome, it remains at only I per cent of gross domestic product.
For only the third time in the last eight years a domestic surplus is being budgeted for.
The Government is intent that the deficit will be financed in a non-inflationary manner.
Our armoury of monetary policy instruments has recently been greatly improved.
As a result of recent Loan Council decisions regarding the setting of the interest rate on Australian Savings Bonds and the move to a tender system for selling Treasury Bonds, we now have much greater freedom than in the past to use those instruments in the achievement of our monetaryobjectives.
Interest rates on each of the three types of Commonwealth security can now vary with the requirements of the market so as to ensure adequate sales to the private sector.
In line with those requirements, we have already increased the rate of interest on Australian Savings Bonds and conducted the first, quite successful, Treasury Bond tender.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 73

In last year's Budget, I announced an M3 projection of 10 to 11 per cent over the course of 1981-82.
The outcome, at 11.3 per cent, was very close to that projection.
On a number of occasions I have expressed reservations concerning the June on June basis of measurement.
It is prone to erratic and unpredictable shortterm factors, particularly in the closing months of the year, which can give a misleading indication of underlying monetary developments.
This year's projection will therefore be expressed as an annual average growth rate; that is, in terms of the movement in the average level of M3 between one financial year and the next.
The Government in fact gave serious thought this year to formally abandoning the announcement of a monetary projection.
Quite apart from anything else, there are many who would argue that M3 is a less than representative measure of overall credit and monetary conditions and that a complete assessment of the monetary situation necessitates a review of a range of aggregates.
But because a projection is generally seen by the market as important to expectations and as a useful indication of the Government's intentions, we decided to retain it.
However, I would want to make it clear that the projected range is in fact a projection only and should not be taken as a firm target.
It should not, as some would wish to make it, become a formal measure of the success or failure of monetary policy.
Against this background, the Government will be seeking to restrain the growth of financial aggregates to a degree consistent with growth in M3 within the range of 9-11 per cent for 1982-83 as a whole.
Monetary policy will be directed at enhancing the recent signs of slowing in the growth in wages and encouraging settlements in the major wage agreements in the months ahead that will provide a basis for improving business sector profitability and thus arresting the recent sharp deterioration in the employment situation.
A more market responsive system of wage determination could also help produce wage outcomes closer to the capacity of individual firms, and hence the economy, to bear.
Notwithstanding the initial steps that have been taken, we remain well short of such a system

and the Government will be seeking to achieve further progress in this direction during 1982-83.
As it is, present indications are that average weekly earnings in 1982-83 as a whole could rise by 12 per cent.
In this regard it should be noted that when allowance is made for increases affecting 1982-83 already determined, further increases of only about 6 per cent during the remainder of this financial year are consistent with the 12 per cent assumption.
Such an outcome would be below the increase in 1981-82 and would entail some slowing from now on but it would still be well above what is required for resumption of sustained employment growth.
The Consumer Price Index in 1982-83 as a whole could increase at a rate of about lOt per cent.
The direct price effects of the revenue measures announced this evening amount to about one per cent-so that, those aside, the underlying rate of 9t to 10 per cent is much the same as in 1981-82.
With continuing uncertainty abroad and at home, it is more than usually difficult to forecast the Australian economic outlook with any confidence.
That said, I have to add that barring an unexpectedly rapid improvement in the world economy, or a sharp drop in business costs, it is difficult to envisage any real growth in domestic non-farm product in 1982-83 as a whole.
Business fixed investment, which has grown at record real rates in recent years, and which during that time has been the single most important feature distinguishing the Australian economy from its overseas counterparts, could well decline a little in 1982-83.
In addition, and notwithstanding the personal tax reductions announced tonight, personal consumption expenditure in 1982-83 is likely to grow considerably more slowly than the 3t per cent rate recorded in 1981-82, at about I t per cent.
Even with the measures announced both last March and this evening, real private dwelling investment is still forecast to decline faster in 1982-83 than in the previous year.
Among other factors, an adequate supply of private housing finance will be critically influenced by the extent to which specialist housing financing institutions are able to offer competitive interest rates on their deposits.
Farm production is, as always, subject to considerable uncertainties but, given the severe

74 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

nature of the present drought, will decline in 1982-83 from the previous year.
On the basis of this outlook, there is unlikely to be any growth in employment in 1982-83 so that, with the labour force continuing to grow, unemployment therefore seems likely to increase.
The outlook for the balance of payments will reflect the developing outlooks both at home and overseas.
The prospect of some growth in world trade should result in a modest increase in export volumes in 1982-83, while import volumes may remain broadly unchanged.
After taking account of some increase in the invisibles deficit, the current account deficit may be broadly similar to that in 1981-82.
As always, that deficit will need to be financed by capital inflow, principally on private account; monetary policy settings will need to be tailored accordingly.
In those circumstances a surplus on private sector foreign exchange transactions of around $1500m is expected.
CONCLUSION
This Budget represents the endeavour of the Government to provide a fair and workable response to the very difficult economic problems which Australia faces at the present time.
We have not been insensitive to the fact that many Australian families need help.
We have also not been insensitive to the fact that many young people, especially those out of

work, might need special help at a time when job opportunities are declining.
We believe that help to these groups and others is being provided in this Budget.
However, we have not ignored the compelling necessity to maintain an anti-inflationary economic strategy. To abandon that strategy would be to condemn the Australian economy to much greater travail than it presently experiences.
We have not put this Budget together in isolation from the views expressed to us by different sections of the Australian community.
We have endeavoured to structure personal taxation relief in a way which meets the reasonable aspirations of the average Australian wage earner.
We have been aware that the level of taxation, particularly for the PAYE taxpayer, influences wage and salary claims.
In a very real sense we believe the taxation and other family assistance provided by this Budget provides a basis for the exercise of wage restraint across the broad spectrum of the Australian workforce.
If this restraint can be achieved, a major blow will have been struck for the cause of economic recovery in Australia and many jobs will be saved in the process.
I commend this Budget to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hayden) adjourned.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 75

CONTENTS

Preface Statement

Title Summary of the 1982~83 Budget

Page 77
79

2

The Budget and the Economy

85

3

Estimates of Outlays, 1982~83

137

4

Estimates of Receipts, 1982~83

307

5

Budget Outcome, 1981 ~82

363

6

Budget and Other Public Sector Transactions Since 1972~73

377

Appendix Coverage and Classification of Information in Statements

421

Notes:

(a) Figures in tables and, generally, in the text have been rounded. Discrepancies in tables between totals and sums of components are due to rounding.

(b) In the tables showing receipts and outlays, the sign in front of the 'change' reflects the impact of the change on the aggregate concerned. In outlay tables, for example, this means that a reduction in a credit from one year to the next will be prefixed by a ( +) sign while an increase in a credit will be prefixed by a negative ( -) sign.

(c) The following notations are used:

NEC /nec not elsewhere classified

amounts of less than $50 000

nil

$m

$million

%

percent

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 75

CONTENTS

Preface Statement

Title Summary of the 1982~83 Budget

Page 77
79

2

The Budget and the Economy

85

3

Estimates of Outlays, 1982~83

137

4

Estimates of Receipts, 1982~83

307

5

Budget Outcome, 1981 ~82

363

6

Budget and Other Public Sector Transactions Since 1972~73

377

Appendix Coverage and Classification of Information in Statements

421

Notes:

(a) Figures in tables and, generally, in the text have been rounded. Discrepancies in tables between totals and sums of components are due to rounding.

(b) In the tables showing receipts and outlays, the sign in front of the 'change' reflects the impact of the change on the aggregate concerned. In outlay tables, for example, this means that a reduction in a credit from one year to the next will be prefixed by a ( +) sign while an increase in a credit will be prefixed by a negative ( -) sign.

(c) The following notations are used:

NEC /nec not elsewhere classified

amounts of less than $50 000

nil

$m

$million

%

percent

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 77

PREFACE

This Paper is presented in association with the Budget Speech, with which it should be read. It provides a range of explanatory and supporting material, and serves to put the Budget into a broader economic context.
The Paper is divided into a number of Statements, as follows:
STATEMENT No.1: SUMMARY OF THE 1982-83 BUDGET-outlines the key Budget aggregates in broad functional and national accounting terms.
STATEMENT No.2: THE BUDGET AND THE ECONOMY-reviews the main domestic and international economic developments during 1981-82, outlines the role of the 1982-83 Budget in the Government's overall economic strategy and presents an assessment of the economic outlook for 1982-83.
STATEMENT No.3: ESTIMATES OF OUTLAYS 1982-83-contains detailed estimates and explanation of Budget outlays in functional form and comparative figures on actual results for the two previous years.
STATEMENT No.4: ESTIMATES OF RECEIPTS 1982-83-contains details of the revenue estimates, summarises new revenue proposals and shows their estimated effects on receipts in 1982-83 and in a full year; appendices include details of taxation expenditures.
STATEMENT No.5: BUDGET OUTCOME 1981-82-summarises the Budget outcome for 1981-82 and discusses, for each major function block and each major receipt category, the difference between the Budget estimates and actual outcome as well as, in the case of receipts, from the 1980-81 outcome. It also details how the 1981-82 Budget deficit was financed.
STATEMENT No.6: BUDGET AND OTHER PUBLIC SECTOR TRANSACTIONS SINCE 1972-73-provides an historical series of Budget data by functional and national accounting classification. It also provides data on the relationship between the Commonwealth Budget and other parts of the public sector, and on the overall public sector borrowing requirement.
APPENDIX: discusses the functional and national accounts classifications of Budget transactions and explains the structure of the functional classification in detail.

OTHER BUDGET PAPERS
Budget Statements is one of a series of Budget Papers, the purpose of which is to provide information supplementary to that in the Budget Speech. A full list of the series is printed on the inside cover of this Paper.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 77

PREFACE

This Paper is presented in association with the Budget Speech, with which it should be read. It provides a range of explanatory and supporting material, and serves to put the Budget into a broader economic context.
The Paper is divided into a number of Statements, as follows:
STATEMENT No.1: SUMMARY OF THE 1982-83 BUDGET-outlines the key Budget aggregates in broad functional and national accounting terms.
STATEMENT No.2: THE BUDGET AND THE ECONOMY-reviews the main domestic and international economic developments during 1981-82, outlines the role of the 1982-83 Budget in the Government's overall economic strategy and presents an assessment of the economic outlook for 1982-83.
STATEMENT No.3: ESTIMATES OF OUTLAYS 1982-83-contains detailed estimates and explanation of Budget outlays in functional form and comparative figures on actual results for the two previous years.
STATEMENT No.4: ESTIMATES OF RECEIPTS 1982-83-contains details of the revenue estimates, summarises new revenue proposals and shows their estimated effects on receipts in 1982-83 and in a full year; appendices include details of taxation expenditures.
STATEMENT No.5: BUDGET OUTCOME 1981-82-summarises the Budget outcome for 1981-82 and discusses, for each major function block and each major receipt category, the difference between the Budget estimates and actual outcome as well as, in the case of receipts, from the 1980-81 outcome. It also details how the 1981-82 Budget deficit was financed.
STATEMENT No.6: BUDGET AND OTHER PUBLIC SECTOR TRANSACTIONS SINCE 1972-73-provides an historical series of Budget data by functional and national accounting classification. It also provides data on the relationship between the Commonwealth Budget and other parts of the public sector, and on the overall public sector borrowing requirement.
APPENDIX: discusses the functional and national accounts classifications of Budget transactions and explains the structure of the functional classification in detail.

OTHER BUDGET PAPERS
Budget Statements is one of a series of Budget Papers, the purpose of which is to provide information supplementary to that in the Budget Speech. A full list of the series is printed on the inside cover of this Paper.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 79

STATEMENT NO. I-SUMMARY OF THE 1982-83 BUDGET
BUDGET AGGREGATES
The key Budget aggregates for 1982-83 are summarised in the following table, together with comparable data for 1981-82:

Outlays Receipts
Deficit Overseas Deficit
Domestic Surplus

1981-82

Actual

Change on 1980-81

$m
41339 40790

$m
+5048 +5609

%
+13.9 +15.9

549 1468

560 - 88

918 + 472

Estimate
$m 47067 45393
1674 1904
230

1982-83

Change on 1981-82

$m
+5728 +4603

%
+13.9 + 11.3

+1125 + 437
- 688

The projected increase in total Budget outlays for 1982-83 is 13.9% in money terms, the same as in 1981-82. In real terms, the increases become 2.6% in 1982-83 and 2.0% in 1981-82. The comparisons are affected by the fact that 1981-82 contained an additional payday for public service wages and salaries and certain pensions and benefits. If outlays figures for 1981-82 are adjusted to remove the costs of the additional payday, the rate of growth of outlays in 1982-83 rises to 15% and that for 1981-82 becomes 12.8%; in real terms, the increases on this basis are 3.6% in 1982-83 and 1.1 % in 1981-82.
As a proportion of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Budget outlays are projected to increase from 27.9% in 1981-82 to 28.7% in 1982-83, reflecting the real growth in outlays combined with the expectation of no real growth in GDP.
Total receipts are estimated to increase by 11.3% in 1982-83 compared with an increase of 15.9% in 1981-82. Strong growth is forecast in 1982-83 for sales tax and excise duty revenues, reflecting measures announced in the Budget. Personal income tax revenues are estimated to increase by 10% in 1982-83 reflecting the effects of Budget measures and projected lower earnings and employment growth.
The Budget deficit for 1982-83 is estimated at $1674m, an increase of $1125m on the deficit recorded in 1981-82. The deficit on overseas transactions is estimated to increase by $437m to $1904m, mainly because of increased payments for defence equipment and increased public debt interest payments. The Budget domestic surplus is, therefore, estimated to decrease by $688m to $230m.

OUTLAYS
The following table shows outlays in 1981-82 and 1982-83 classified according to broad economic types of expenditure:

80 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

BUDGET OUTLAYS-BY ECONOMIC TYPE

1981-82

1982-83

Actual

Change on 1980-81 Estimate

Change on 1981-82

Net Expenditure on Goods and Services--
Defence Other Current Expenditure Capital Expenditure

$m

$m

3832 4677
421

+ 528 + 728
21

%
+16.0 +184 - 4.7

$m

$m

4257 5267
568

+ 425 + 591 + 146

%
+ 11.1 +12.6 +34.7

Total

8930 +1235

+16.0

10092 +1161

+13.0

Transfer Payments and Net Advances
To the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities
Personal Benefit Payments(a) Interest Paid Transfers Overseas Net Advances (other than to
States and NT)(b) Other(c)

14043 13342 2881
667
388 1088

+1124 +1903 + 320 + 92
+ 186 + 189

+ 8.7 +16.6 +12.5 +15.9
+924 +21.0

15999 15447 3243
728
294 1265

+1956 +2105 + 362 + 61
94 + 176

+13.9 +15.8 +12.6 + 9.1
-24.2 +16.2

Total

32409 +3813

+13.3

36975 +4566

+14.1

TOTAL OUTLAYS

41 339 +5048

+13.9

47067 +5728

+13.9

(a) Includes unfunded employee retirement benefits. (b) Includes net advances to Commonwealth authorities, the public and overseas. (c) Consists of subsidies, grants for private capital purposes and purchases of existing assets.

The occurrence of an additional payday in 1981-82 affects the year to year comparisons in a number of categories. For example, a significant part of the decline in the projected rate of growth in 1982-83 for both defence and other current expenditure on goods and services is explained by this effect.
Other features of this table are:
- continued high growth in personal benefit payments, which reflects growth in beneficiary numbers and the benefit measures announced in the Budget Speech. If the 1981-82 outlay on this item is adjusted for the payday effect, the growth in 1981-82 would be reduced to 14.4% and the projected growth in 1982-83 would be further increased, to around 18%;
- strong growth in total transfers and advances to the States, the NT and local authorities, which reflects growth in both general revenue and specific purpose assistance~particularly in the case of the latter, rapid growth for housing and roads;
- rapid growth in direct Budget-financed capital expenditure, which mainly reflects increased expenditures for airports and other aviation works and higher expenditure on the construction of the new Parliament House; and
- a decline in net advances (other than to the States and NT), which is mainly the result of repayments by the Australian Industry Development Corporation, the Australian Shipping Commission and the Commonwealth Development Bank.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 81

Estimates of outlays 10 1982-83, classified by major functions, are set out and explained in detail in Statement No.3. The table below summarises the figures for 1982-83 and 1981-82 by function:

BUDGET OUTLAYS-BY FUNCTION

1981~82

1982~83

Change on

Actual

1980~81

Estimate

Proportion
of Total Change on 1981 ~82 Outlays

$m

%

$m

$m

%

%

Defence

4135

+16.5

4622 + 487

+ 11.8

9.8

Education

3341

+14.0

3792 + 452

+13.5

8.1

Health

2912

-20.2

3379 + 466

+16.0

7.2

Social Security and Welfare

11498

+15.9

13272 +1774

+ 15.4

28.2

Housing

458

+34.3

571 + 113

+24.6

1.2

Urban and Regional Development

nec and the Environment

77

-30.4

113 + 36

+45.9

0.2

Culture and Recreation

483

+20.7

SOl

+ 18

+ 3.7

J.1

Economic Services

2757

+16.2

3221 + 464

+16.8

6.8

General Public Services

2887

+16.2

3189 + 302

+10.5

6.8

Not Allocated to Function-

Payments to or for the States.

NT and Local Government

Authorities nec

9908

+24.3

10 953 +1045

+10.5

23.3

Public Debt Interest

2881

+12.5

3243 + 362

+12.6

6.9

Allowance for Prospective

Wage and Salary Increases

(Non-Defence)

(a)

(a)

210 + 210

n.a.

0.4

TOTAL OUTLAYS

41339

+13.9

47067 +5728

+13.9

100.0

(a) Amounts actually spent on increases in wages and salaries in past years are recorded under relevant functional headings.

Features of this table include the following:
- sustained high growth in outlays on social security and welfare, due to indexation of pensions and benefits, an increase in beneficiary numbers and the effect of new measures announced in the Budget;
- rapid growth in outlays on health, mainly reflecting increased Commonwealth expenditure on medical, pharmaceutical and nursing home benefits;
- a high growth in outlays on economic services arising from a number of factors including increased payments to the States for roads, increased expenditure on airports and associated aviation works, loans to Queensland for the sugar industry and special payments to Queensland and South Australia for transport;
- continuation of the high rate of growth in outlays for housing which reflects a range of recent Government initiatives in this area, including the introduction of new schemes of assistance for first home-buyers and increased welfare housing assistance; and
- increased outlays on urban and regional development reflecting mainly a reduction (compared with 1981-82) in expected repayments of earlier advances in respect of State land commissions and a special payment to Western Australia for sewerage works.

82 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

A table showing a cross classification of estimated Budget outlays in 1982-83 by function and economic type is presented below.

OUTLAYS BY FUNCTION AND ECONOMIC TYPE

Expenditure on Goods and Services
Current Capital

Personal Benefit
Payments

Other Transfer Payments

Grants and Net Advances to or
for States and Local Government
Authorities

Net Advances
to Other Sectors

Defence Education Health Social Security and Welfare Housing Urban and Regional Development nec
and the Environment Culture and Recreation Economic Services General Public Services Not Allocated to Function

$m 4257
359 181 522 -I
45 442 727 2183 210

$m

$m

294

17

288

32

2334

7 12485

6

9

42

202

41

252

5

$m 63
3 10 102 148
10 3 966 687 3243

$m

$m

9

} 125

222

104

52

298

120

48

14

1226

59

I

62

10 953

TOTAL OUTLAYS

9524

568

15447

5236

15999

294

Total Outlays
$m 4622 3792 3379 13272
571
113 501 3221 3189 14406
47067

RECEIPTS
Total receipts in 1982-83 are estimated at $45 393m, an increase of 11.3% over actual receipts in 1981-82. In the absence of the measures announced in and immediately prior to the Budget, revenues would have increased by 10.8% to $45 188m. Those measures and the receipts estimates are discussed in detail in Statement No.4.
The table below summarises actual receipts in 1981-82 and estimated receipts in 1982-83:

BUDGET RECEIPTS-SUMMARY

Taxation RevenueCustoms Duty Excise DutyCrude Oil and LPG Other Sales Tax Income TaxIndividuals (net) Companies Withholding Tax Special Tax to Recover Evaded Company and Division 7 Tax Tax on Certain Bank Transactions Other General Taxation
Total Taxation Revenue Other Receipts
TOTAL RECEIPTS

1981-82

Change on Actual 1980-81 Estimate

$m

%

$m

2156

+14.4

2244

3163 2830 2854

+ 1.8 + 3.8 +35.8

3287 3434 3629

21224 5053 205

+21.0 + 7.6 +27.4

23346 5000
231

255

80

298

+20.3

328

37784 3006

+16.4 +10.7

41834 3559

40790

+15.9

45393

1982-83

Proportion of Total
Change on 1981-82 Receipts

$m

%

%

+ 88 + 4.1

4.9

+ 124 + 3.9

7.2

+ 604 +21.3

7.6

+ 775 + 27.1

8.0

+2122 + 10.0

51.5

53

1.0

11.0

+ 26 + 12.6

0.5

+ 255

n.a.

0.6

+ 80

n.a.

0.2

+ 30 + 10.0

0.7

+4050 + 10.7

92.2

+ 553 + 18.4

7.8

+4603 + 11.3

100.0

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 83

Measures announced in and immediately prior to the Budget to help combat tax avoidance and evasion, including an increase in the penalty for the late payment of tax, are expected to increase receipts by around $870m in 1982-83.
Individual income tax. collections are expected to increase by 10% in 1982-83, compared with 21 % in the previous year. This primarily reflects measures announced in the Budget but also some slowing in growth in average earnings and employment projected for 1982-83.
Largely on account of discretionary changes announced in the Budget, sales tax collections are expected to grow rapidly in 1982-83, although at a lower rate than in the previous year. Excise duties, other than on crude oil and LPG, are expected to increase by 21.3% in 1982-83, primarily as a result of Budget measures.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 83

Measures announced in and immediately prior to the Budget to help combat tax avoidance and evasion, including an increase in the penalty for the late payment of tax, are expected to increase receipts by around $870m in 1982-83.
Individual income tax. collections are expected to increase by 10% in 1982-83, compared with 21 % in the previous year. This primarily reflects measures announced in the Budget but also some slowing in growth in average earnings and employment projected for 1982-83.
Largely on account of discretionary changes announced in the Budget, sales tax collections are expected to grow rapidly in 1982-83, although at a lower rate than in the previous year. Excise duties, other than on crude oil and LPG, are expected to increase by 21.3% in 1982-83, primarily as a result of Budget measures.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 85

STATEMENT No.2-THE BUDGET AND THE ECONOMY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction

Page 86

Part I Review of Economic Developments in 1981-82-

Production and Demand

87

Labour Market

93

Prices . . . . .

96

Incomes and Labour Costs

96

Fiscal Conditions .

102

Monetary Conditions

104

Balance of Payments

112

The Exchange Rate

116

International Economic Conditions

118

Part II Policy Issues-

Background

121

External Constraints

121

Interest Rates

123

Relative Inflation Rates and International Competitiveness

124

Domestic Labour Costs .

124

Other Considerations

127

Part III The Economic Outlook-

Background

129

Forecasting Framework

129

General Outlook

130

Expenditures

131

Balance of Payments

133

Monetary Conditions

133

Gross Domestic Product

134

Labour Market

135

Incomes and Prices

135

Overview

136

86 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

STATEMENT No.2-THE BUDGET AND THE ECONOMY

Introduction
The past year has seen a marked turnaround in the Australian economy. After the strong growth recorded in 1980-81, non-farm activity weakened substantially during 1981-82; employment growth slackened and unemployment rose sharply.
The downturn in 1981-82 derived from the continuation, and intensification, of problems already apparent in 1980-81. Those problems were addressed in some detail in last year's Statement No.2, particularly in Part II thereof. At that stage they were presented as risks to the continuation of the strong growth then underway. In the event, those risks became realities and growth, and the future outlook for the economy, suffered accordingly. Economic conditions have therefore changed but the underlying problems have not. The curbing of inflation and the correction of other fundamental imbalances in the economy are still the necessary pre-requisites for re-establishing economic stability and sustainable growth.
Australia now faces more daunting economic prospects than for several years, with the possibility of prolonged recession overseas and high inflation and weak activity at home. The sooner we can overcome our domestic economic problems, most immediately that of bringing wages and other conditions of employment more into line with the capacity of the economy to meet them, the more ready we shall be to weather the international recession and to take advantage of any strengthening in overseas activity when it occurs.
This Statement develops these themes in three parts: Part I reviews domestic and international economic developments during 1981-82; Part II comments on some of the central problems for policy; and Part III presents an assessment of the economic outlook for 1982-83. Unless otherwise noted, values of goods and services are expressed in constant price (real) terms, with growth rates for half years based on seasonally adjusted data and expressed as annual rates.

PART I: REVIEW OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN 1981-82
It often happens, particularly in periods of rapid change, that various aspects of the economy can exhibit differing, or even apparently conflicting, trends. It is the task of economic assessment to attempt to bring these diverse elements together to provide a more or less coherent picture; in so doing reliance must be placed on the available statistics supplemented by other evidence and informed judgment. In this process the limitations on the accuracy and representativeness of individual statistics, and the likelihood of revision as further data become available, need to be kept firmly in mind. The difficulties tend to be greatest in periods when economic conditions are changing quickly, when some of the traditional procedures and assumptions adopted in making statistical estimates may have heavier than usual qualifications attaching to them.
As has been mentioned in Statement No.2 in previous years, the preliminary national accounts estimates have exhibited considerable variability and have proved subject to major revision. Particular qualifications relate to the quarterly estimates, and while the problems are reduced somewhat by the use of half-yearly figures, as is done in this Statement, considerable caution still needs to be exercised, especially in relation to the timing of movements in the aggregates.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 87

Production and Demand
Table 1 shows alternative estimates of gross domestic product based on information relating to incomes and expenditure. Both sets of estimates show very strong growth in 1980-81 with some slowing over the course of the year, the slowing being more marked in the expenditure-based estimates.
The income-based estimates suggest that this slowing continued into 1981-82, whereas the expenditure-based figures suggest some strengthening in the early part of 1981-82 followed by a much sharper decline later in the year. On either measure, nonfarm product increased by substantially less in 1981-82 as a whole than in 1980-8l. Reflecting improved seasonal conditions, farm product recovered strongly so that the slowing in the growth of total gross domestic product was less marked, falling to 3.0 per cent on the conventional income-based estimate (from 3.7 per cent in 1980-81) and rising slightly to 2.7 per cent on the expenditure-based estimate (from 2.6 per cent).

Table 1: Gross Domestic Product (Constant 1979-80 prices)

Gross non-farm product

Gross domestic product

Expenditure-

Income-based

based

estimate(a) estimate(b)

Gross farm product

Expenditure-

Income-based

based

estimate (a) estimate(b)

Year197374 197475 1975-76 1976 77 1977-78 197879 197980 1980-81 1981-82
Halfyear(c) 1980-81 I II 1981 82 I II

Change on previous period (per cent)

4.1

2.1

6.6

0.8

2.0

11.8

2.0

3.4

7.7

2.8

3.1

2.5

1.1

0.6

- 1.8

3.7

4.8

19.5

2.1

2.9

-11.2

4.7

3.5

-11.1

2.3

2.0

15.5

4.3

2.4

1.4

2.6

2.3

3.7

2.8

3.0

0.9

0.4

4.8

5.7

1.2

1.8

3.7

2.6

3.0

2.7

6.8

6.5

-17.9

4.3

0.8

- 5.2

2.0

4.7

33.9

0.2

-2.3

9.7

5.1

4.8

3.8

0.5

3.7

6.2

0.7

-1.6

(a) Income-based estimate as published. (b) Expenditure-based estimate derived by the subtraction of the statistical discrepancy from (a). (e) Seasonally adjusted, annual rates.
In view of the uncertainties affecting the preliminary national accounts, analysis based on them is necessarily tentative. Nevertheless taking account of all the data currently available, including other relevant economic indicators, it is clear that, as in 1980-81, the major sources of the growth in domestic demand in 1981-82 were private business fixed investment and private consumption. However a larger part of the increase in demand was met by imports rather than by domestic production. Exports fell in the first half year but recovered strongly in the second half and overall made no contribution to growth for the year as a whole. Associated with these contrasting domestic and external developments, stock accumulation contributed to the growth in demand, strongly so in the first half of the year.
Details of the growth in major components of expenditure on gross domestic product in recent years are shown in Chart 1. Table 2 shows the contributions of the various expenditure categories to the growth of total demand, and the sources (domestic and external) of supply.

88 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Chart I - Growth in Components of Expenditure on Gross Domestic Product ($m, constant 1979-80 prices, seasonally adjusted)

1979-80

I

II

1980-81

I

II

Private C()n~UmplI0n (A)

1981-82

I

II

1979-80

I

II

1980-81

I

II

1981-82

I

II

2000 Total Dome),!1c Final ExpcndltuTc(F)

1800 1600 1400 1200 1000 800 600 400 200

-200

Private Investment in Non-Dwelling
~r"'"'''~"''i'-ICI >
I -200
-400

Total Private Final Domestic Demand (D)

1600

W

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200 I')

1000 Exports(G)
800 600 400 200
o
-200 -400 -600
Increase In Stocks (H) 1200 1000 800 600 400
200
o
-200 -400 -600

1979-80

I

II

1980-81

I

II

Grms Domestic Product *
2000

19H I-M2

I

II

1800

1600

1400 1200

1000

800

600 400

200
O~~~~--LL~~~L-~r

-200

-Two estimates arc shown for the growth oj GDP. The shaded bar IS the published (Income based) estimate The unshadcd bar is an expenditure based esllmate (equal to (J) in the Identity) whIch excludes the change 10 the statistical dIscrepancy

Farm and Non-farm Product" 2000 1800

1600

1400 1200

1000

800

600

400

200
Ol+-~~~~~~~~L-~~

-200

-400

**The gross farm and non-farm product estimates art

lOcome based (i.e. they include the dIscrepancy)

~ Non-farm Product

fZI F arm Product

Impons(l) 800 600 400 200
o
-200 -400

Identities D~A+B+C

F~D+E J~F+G+H-I

(a) Adjusted t~ remove the impact on the estimates of the sale to the private sector of a portion of the Eranng power station: see discussion In text below.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 89

Table 2: Contributions to Changes in Demand and Supply (Constant 1979-80 prices)

Demand

Supply

Final domestic demand

Private con-
sumption

Private fixed
investment

Public final
expenditure

'fotal

Exports

Change in
stocks

Statistical
discreTotal pancy demand

GOP

ImTotal ports supply

Year1978 79 1979-80 1980-81 198182
Half year (c)1980-81 I
II 198182 I
II

Percentage points contribution to growth in total demand or supply (a)

1.7

1.2

0.2 3.2 0.9

2.0 -0.8

5.3

4.0

1.3

5.3

1.0

0.1

0.1

1.2

1.1 -0.9 -0.6 0.9

1.0 -0.1

0.9

1.5

2.1

0.8 4.5 -0.8 -0.2

0.9 4.4

3.1

1.3 4.4

1.8 (b) 1.4 (b)0.3

3.5

0.8

0.3

4.5

2.5

2.0

4.5

0.8

1.4

0.7

2.9 -0.8

0.5

0.1

2.8

2.1

0.7 2.8

0.7

0.9

0.1

1.8

-0.9~

1.4

2.3

1.6

0.7

2.3

1.2 (b) 1.2 (b)O.4

2.7 -0.6

1.7 -1.0

2.7

1.5

1.2

2.7

0.6 (b) -0.5 (b) -0.3 -0.3

1.2 -0.8

1.0

l.l

0.3

0.8

1.1

(a) Calculated according to the formula Xt = (at - at_I) x IOOjDt_l; where Xt is the estimate appearing in the table for period t and at is the constant price value of the aggregate concerned in period t and Dt_1 is total demand or supply in period t-I.
(b) Adjusted to remove the impact on the estimates of the sale to the private sector of a portion of the Eraring power station; see discussion in text below.
(e) Seasonally adjusted, not at annual rates.
Private consumption expenditure is estimated to have increased by a relatively strong 3.6 per cent in 1981-82, although it slowed in the second half of the year. The growth in consumption expenditure over the year was influenced by a large increase in real household income, offset to some extent by increased income tax payments and a rise in the saving ratio (see Table 3). The rise in the saving ratio in the last two years (abstracting from the effects of short-term movements in farm incomes) appears to have reflected the usual lags in the response by households to real income growth and, more recently, some loss of consumer confidence and increased uncertainty in the face of increased inflationary pressures and a weakening labour market. Higher interest rates may also have contributed.
Interpretation of private and government fixed investment expenditure is complicated by recent sales of capital assets by the public sector to the private sector, notably the sale of a portion of the Eraring power station announced in December 1981. The Statistician treats such sales as reductions in public sector investment and additions to private sector investment. Given the nature and the very large size of the Eraring transaction, the following discussion, except where indicated, is based on approximate adjustments to the published data for private and public investment expenditure to remove the effects of this sale (but not, because of data deficiencies, other similar sales) in order to provide a better indication of underlying trends. As noted, the adjustment is far from complete and some part of the growth in private sector investment in recent years would represent public sector investment under leasing arrangements.
Private gross fixed investment in non-dwelling construction and equipment, as recorded, grew by 18.8 per cent in 1981-82; on an adjusted basis (see above) it grew by 14.9 per cent, at the upper end of the range of increase of 10-15 per cent projected in last year's Budget papers. Investment was particularly vigorous in the first half of the

90 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Table 3: Determinants of Consumption

Real household
income
(a)
Change on previous period
(per cent)

Income tax
ratio
(b)
(per cent)

Real household disposable
Income
(a)
Change on previous period
(per cent)

Saving ratio (e)
(per cent)

'Adjusted' saving ratio (d)

Real private
consumption
(a)

(per cent)

Change on previous period
(per cent)

YearAverage 1969 70 to 1972-73 197374 1974 75 1975-76 1976 77 1977-78 1978 79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82
Hal f year Ul--
1980-81 I II
1981-82 I II

(e) 6.4

12.1

(e) 6.5

11.2

10.8

(e) 4.4

9.5

12.9

8.2

16.3

13.4

5.3

5.6

14.6

3.7

16.9

16.6

3.0

0.9

14.9

0.6

14.8

15.1

3.1

2.3

15.6

1.4

13.9

14.0

2.5

0.9

15.5

0.8

13.5

13.8

1.4

2.2

14.7

3.5

13.7

11.4

3.3

0.9

15.6

0.1

12.1

10.2

1.9

4.4

15.9

3.9

12.9

12.4

3.0

5.0

16.8

3.7

13.0

13.1

3.6

6.9

15.5

2.8

16.2

6.5

16.0

4.8

17.3

6.8

13.4

12.3

3.3

0.9

12.5

12.5

2.9

6.8

13.4

13.0

4.6

1.2

13.0

13.4

2.3

(a) Deflated by the implicit price deflator of private final consumption expenditure. (b) Ratio of income tax paid to household income. (c) Ratio of household saving to household disposable income. (d) Saving ratio derived from the ratio of private consumption to adjusted household disposable income in which farm income is
replaced by its sixteen quarter moving average so as to reduce the effect of year to year swings in farm income. The 'adjusted' ratio is an alternative to the 'non-farm' saving ratio which has been used in recent years in Statement No.2. Both seek to abstract from the volatility in farm income which tends not to be reflected in farm consumption. The 'adjusted' saving ratio is more consistent in its concept and for that reason has been adopted although, in practice, the two measures do not differ greatly. (e) Average growth in the three years to 1972-73.
Ul Seasonally adjusted, annual rates.
year but fell slightly in the second half (see Chart 2). Again on an adjusted basis, nondwelling construction expenditure increased by 15.9 per cent in 1981-82, while expenditure on plant and equipment increased by 14.5 per cent. As indicated in Table 4, much of the growth in private non-dwelling gross fixed investment over recent years has occurred in the resource related sectors. Investment in the mining and basic metal products industries in 1981-82 was, in real terms, roughly three times its 1977-78 level. The surge in investment over recent years has taken total private gross fixed investment in non-dwelling contruction and equipment as a proportion of GDP to a level in 1981-82 similar to that in the late sixties and early seventies (see Chart 2).
A number of factors combined to produce the marked slowing in investment in the second half of 1981-82. They included revised assessments of export market prospects in the light of the continued weakness in international activity and the softness in international energy prices, high interest rates both at home and abroad and the intensification of domestic wage cost pressures accompanied by a sharp fall in profitability and cash flow and a marked deterioration in business confidence. These latter influences have yet to be fully reflected in investment expenditure.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 91

Chart 2 - Private Gross Fixed Non-Dwelling Construction and Equipment Investment
$m 9000 Levels of Investment (a)
(b) 8000

7000

6000

5000 4000

Equipment Investment

3000

2000

Non-Dwelling

(b) ....-

-- ___ - ...... ------'....... ____ --____ Construction Investment

/-'---

~--------;/-----~-~-

1000

Ratio of Private Gross Fixed Non-Dwelling Construction and Equipment

per cent 14 Investment to Gross Domestic Product (per cent) (a)

(b)

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

I II I II I II I II I II I II I II I II I II I II I II I II I II

69-70

71-72

73-74

75-76

77-78

79-80

81-82

(a) Based on seasonally adjusted constant price data.

(b) Adjusted to remove the impact on the estimates of the sale to the private sector of a portion of the Eraring power station.
Private investment in dwellings is estimated to have declined by a little over 3 per cent in 1981-82. A good deal of the growth in dwelling investment over recent years appears to have come from retirement housing, housing associated with resource projects and accommodation in resort areas. These draw much of their finance from sources other than the major housing finance lenders. Accordingly, since about 1975-76 there has been a much weaker correlation than previously between total private dwelling commencements and housing finance approvals to individuals from the major lenders (see Chart 3). That said, a decline in the availability of finance from the traditional

92 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Table 4: New Fixed Capital Expenditure by Private Enterprises in Selected Industries (Current prices)

Manufacturing

Basic Other Total

Other

metal manumanuFinance selected

Mining products facturing facturing

(a) industries

Year-
1978~79 1979~80 1980~81 1981~82(b)
197879 1979 80 1980 81 1981 82(e)

Percentage of total

12.9

3.7

23.8

27.6

36.6

22.9

11.6

5.7

21.5

27.2

39.8

21.4

14.6

9.1

19.9

29.0

36.4

20.0

18.2

11.3

17.1

28.3

33.1

20.3

Change on previous year (per cent)

42

28

14

15

31

16

-5

62

-4

5

15

-I

74

119

27

46

26

29

54

51

4

19

19

27

(a) Finance. insurance. real estate and business services (includes leasing to other sectors). (b) Includes expectations data for the June quarter. (e) Includes expectations data for the June quarter for the two years of the calculation.

Chart 3 - Forward Indicators of Private Dwelling Construction Activity (a)

Dwelling units
ooas

50

(b) 'r""The number of local

government private

\ dwelling building

\ approvals

\

40

\

\

\

30

I

Total
100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
24 6 38 26

20

10

The number of finance

approvals to individuals

for the construction or

purchase of new dwellings

by major lenders (e)

'. .-1-' -- '-""-~-""-~'--"'-

I

""

The number of finance approvals to
individuals for the construction or
purchase of new dwellings by all
significant lenders (t)

6970 7071 7172 72-73 73-74 7475 7576. 76-77 77-78 78-79 79-80 80-81 81-82
(a) Seasonally adjusted. thousands of dwelling units. (b) Break in commencements and approvals series due to changes in the definition afnon-house
dwellings from the June quarter 1973. (c) Break in commencements series due to the change from a census to a survey collection
method from the September quarter 1980. (d) Break in commencements series due to changes in the method of processing of survey returns
from the September quarter 1981. (e) Major lenders are defined as savings banks. trading banks and permanent building societies:
these finance approvals relate only to purchases of dwellings for owner occupation. (f) All significant lenders are defined as the major lenders plus terminating building
societies. finance companies. government authorities and departments. insurance companies and credit unions: finance approvals relate only to purchases of dwellings for owner occupation.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 93

housing financiers appears to have been a major factor in the slowing in dwelling commencements and investment over the course of 1981-82. The slowing also appears to have reflected increased building costs, uncertainties about future interest rates and some downward revisions to expectations of capital gain in this sector following considerable speculative activity in 1980-81.
Government final expenditure on goods and services fell by 0.5 per cent in 1981-82 as recorded by the Statistician, but increased by 1.5 per cent after adjusting for the Eraring transaction, somewhat below the growth recorded in 1980-81. Commonwealth capital expenditure declined by 1.2 per cent while consumption expenditure increased by 1.7 per cent, the latter figure partly reflecting an extra payday for public service salaries falling within the financial year. On an adjusted basis, State and local government consumption rose by 3.4 per cent while capital expenditures fell by 1.7 per cent. Further details are provided in the section on fiscal conditions and in Statement No.6.
Exports of goods and services rose by only 0.3 per cent in 1981-82, following a fall of 4.9 per cent in 1980-81. Favourable seasonal conditions led to increases in cereals exports in the second half of the year but demand for other commodities was generally sluggish. Total exports declined in the first half of the year at an annual rate of 8.2 per cent, contributing substantially to the slowing in non-farm product during that period.
Imports of goods and services rose by 12.5 per cent in 1981-82 after an increase of 8.6 per cent in 1980-81. Although the rate of increase in imports slowed in the second half year, import penetration continued to increase. The high level of imports in 1981-82 partly reflected strong growth in private consumption and business fixed investment in the first half of the year and the high import content of investment in plant and equipment. It also reflected increased domestic labour costs and some associated weakening in domestic price competitiveness.
Movements in stocks contributed about 0.8 percentage points to the growth of total demand in 1981-82; large increases in both farm and non-farm stocks in the first half of the year were partly offset by a slowing in stock building in the second half. These changes had the effect of delaying, to some extent, the impact on production of the slowing in final demand during the first half of the year and intensifying the impact in the second half.

Labour Market
The slowing in domestic production during 1981-82 was fairly quickly transmitted to the labour market. Employment growth began to ease early in the year and seasonally adjusted employment declined after March 1982 (see Chart 4 and Table 5). The available data suggest that the falls in employment towards the end of the year were particularly marked in the metal products industry and in the mining and construction sectors, in each of which wage and other cost increases (eg, reductions in standard weekly hours of work) had been particularly large. Reflecting these developments, the level of total employment was by June 1982 virtually unchanged from the level in June 1981. For the year as a whole, average male employment increased by 0.9 per cent, married female employment by 1.3 per cent and the employment of other females by 2.8 per cent. Total employment increased by 1.2 per cent in 1981-82 compared with increases of 2.3 per cent in 1979-80 and 2.7 per cent in 1980-81.

94 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Chart 4 - Labour Market Aggregates (seasonally adjusted)
OOO's 7000

6900

6800 6700

Civilian Labour Force

6600 6500

6400

6300

Civilian Employed Persons

6200

6100

6000

5900
Labour Force Participation Rate (The labour force as a percentage of the civilian population aged 15 and over)

per cent 62.0
61.6

61.2

Unemployment Rate (The number of unemployed as a percentage of the civilian labour force)
6.2 5.8 5.4

M

S DM

S DM

S DM

S DMJ

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 95

Labour force growth also slowed during 1981-82 as thdabour force participation rate fell, no doubt reflecting weaker labour market conditions. Recorded unemployment rose substantially over the year; in June 1982 the seasonally adjusted level of unemployment stood at 460 500 or 6.7 per cent of the labour force, compared with 360800 or 5.3 per cent in June 1981. The increase in unemployment was more marked in the second half of 1981-82 following the major lift in wage and other associated cost levels which occurred towards the end of calendar 1981 and early in calendar 1982.
Junior employment was particularly weak, declining by 6.3 per cent over the year to the June quarter 1982. This decline was accompanied by a 2.8 per cent fall in the junior labour force, due to a 0.7 per cent fall in the junior population and, more importantly, a 1.4 percentage point fall in the junior labour force participation rate. As a consequence the junior unemployment rate rose from 13.9 per cent in the June quarter 1981 to 17.1 per cent in the June quarter 1982, about the same rate as in the June quarter 1979. The deterioration in the employment situation for juniors relative to adults in 1981-82 reversed the trend of the preceding year when junior employment growth was stronger than for adults. The recent trends reflect the greater exposure of juniors to changing labour market conditions, because of their higher turnover rate and the inflexibility (and inflated level relative to those of adult workers) of junior award wage rates.
Table 5: Labour Market Indicators

Year-- 1977-78(a) 1978-79(a) 1979-80(b) 1980-81 (b) 1981-82(b)
Quarter(b) (c)1980-81-Sept. Dec. Mar. June 1981-82Sept. Dec. Mar. June

Labour force

Employment

Unemployment

Junior labour market

Total

Participation
rate

Males Females

Total

Unem-

ployment

Level

rate

Unemploy-

Employ-

ment

ment

rate

Change on previous period
(per cent)

(per cent)

Change on previous period (per cent)

('OOOs)

(per cent)

Change on a year earlier
(per cent) (per cent)

1.3

61.5 -0.2

1.1

0.2

394.6

6.2

1.8

17.9

0.6

60.8

0.2

1.0

0.4

404.0

6.3

0.1

17.3

2.1

61.1

1.8

3.2

2.3

403.9

6.1

2.1

17.5

2.4

61.4

2.1

3.8

2.7

392.8

5.9

4.5

16.2

1.6

61.1

0.9

1.9

1.2

419.7

6.2

-3.3

16.7

1.0 0.1 0.3 0.4
0.8 0.1 0.6 -0.1

61.6

0.8

1.7

61.4

0.6 -0.4

61.3

0.6

0.5

61.2

0.4

1.0

61.3

0.3

0.7

61.1

~0.4

0.5

61.1

0.4

0.1

60.7 -0.4 -0.7

1.2 0.3 0.5 0.6
0.5
0.2 -0.5

410.0 398.9 391.3 372.1
393.2 403.4 429.7 450.1

6.2

(d)6.1 (d)16.3

6.0

(d)4.6 (d)17.0

5.8

(d)3.8 (d) 17.4

5.5

(d)3.5 (d)13.9

5.8

(d) .. (d) 14.4

5.9 (d)-2.6 (d)l6.4

6.3 (d)-4.0 (d)18.8

6.6 (d)-6.3 (d) 17.1

(a) Based on average of August, November, February and May observations.
(b) Based on average of the monthly observations for the period. (c) Seasonally adjusted. (d) Not seasonally adjusted.

96 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Prices
The rise in final domestic expenditure prices slowed a little in 1981-82 compared with 1980-81, although there was an acceleration over the course of the year. The implicit deflator of domestic final expenditure rose by 10.0 per cent, compared with 10.2 per cent in 1980-81, and the increase in the deflator of private final consumption expenditure eased back marginally, from 9.3 per cent in 1980-81 to 9.1 per cent in 1981-82. The consumer price index was an exception to this pattern, increasing by 10.4 per cent in 1981-82 compared with 9.4 per cent in 1980-81, due mainly to the larger impact on this index of changes in health care financing arrangements introduced during the year.
The easing in the rate of increase in final domestic expenditure prices in the year appears to have reflected a decline in import prices in the first half of the year and the price constraints this imposed on import competing goods, together with a sharp fall in the prices of farm products. However, the restraining influence of import prices was less in the second half of the year when, reflecting the depreciation of the exchange rate from August 1981 on, import prices grew at an annual rate of 9.9 per cent. For the year as a whole the deflator for imports rose by only 2.6 per cent while the deflator for gross farm product fell by almost 10 per cent.
On the other hand, the deflator for gross non-farm product-a broad measure of the domestic component of inflation-accelerated in 1981-82, increasing by 11.6 per cent, compared with 10.0 per cent in 1980-81. The acceleration was more marked over the course of the year; the deflator increased at an annual rate of 14.0 per cent in the second half of 1981-82. This acceleration was primarily due to large increases in wages and other labour costs which were, however, partly absorbed (so far as their effects upon final prices were concerned) by sharp reductions in profit margins.
The price index of articles produced by manufacturing increased by 7.8 per cent in 1981-82, compared with 11.0 per cent in 1980-81. Part of the slowing in the index early in the year can be attributed to small rises in material input prices, particularly animal prices; the price index of materials used in manufacturing increased by only 1.6 per cent in 1981-82. However, not all sectors of manufacturing benefited equally from weak input prices and in many areas a severe profit squeeze emerged, particularly in the metal products sector where very high increases in labour costs occurred in an environment exposed to international competition. There were, as well, indications of a pick-up in material input price increases in the second half of 1981-82.
Movements in selected prices are shown in Chart 5, while details of a range of price measures are set out in Table 6.
Incomes and Labour Costs
There are some difficulties in interpreting the earnings statistics since the introduction of a new sample survey-based average weekly earnings series in the September quarter 1981. The Statistician has indicated that the new series can be linked with the old male unit series but the limited (one quarter) overlap between the two and lack of experience in interpreting the new series suggest that the data need to be regarded with caution at this stage. That said, it is clear that the momentum of wage increases, which built up in 1980-81, intensified during 1981-82. Average weekly earnings for male employees are estimated to have increased by 14.8 per cent in 1981-82, rising at an annual rate of about 13 per cent in the first half of the financial year and by about 21 per cent in the second half. This followed increases in average weekly earnings per employed male unit of 13.5 per cent in 1980-81 and 9.9 per cent in 1979-80 and reflected a bunching of wage increases in the last two months of 1981 and early in 1982.

Table 6: Prices

::g:t...
..g...

....
~.

c-

Half year(a)

;::

~

Year

1980-81

1981-82

~

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

II

II ......

'-

Change on previous period (per cent)

Consumer price index(b)-

All groups

13.0 13.8

9.5

8.2 10.1

9.4 10.4

9.3

10.9

10.4

Food (weight of 21.3 per cent)(c)

9.9 11.7 10.9 11.5 14.0 10.3

8.6

8.5 10.5

5.0

All Groups excluding hospital and medical services (weight of95.7 per

cent)(c)

15.7 11.4

9.0

9.1

10.2

9.5

9.6

9.5 10.0

9.0

Implicit price deftators(d)-

Private final consumption expenditure Private gross fixed capital expenditure

15.8 11.7

9.3

9.0 10.1

9.3

9.1

8.8

9.1

9.9

15.9 11.8

9.5

7.8

9.3 10.9

9.8

9.3

8.9 13.0

Total domestic final demand

15.8 11.8

9.2

8.2 10.0 10.2 10.0

9.1

9.8 10.9

Non-farm exports of goods and services(e)

15.7 14.8

5.6

4.2 20.7

6.8

7.4

3.0 10.7

4.9

Imports of goods and services Gross non-farm product Gross farm product Gross domestic product Sectoral Indexes-

11.6 15.7 14.1

9.8 17.5

9.0

2.6

3.1

-\.I

9.9 -.j

16.8 -6.3

11.3

8.2

8.7 --4.6

6.7 38.2

9.6 29.2

10.0 11.6 10.3 11.2 14.0 7.7 -9.9 -11.6 --4.5 -18.8

;J>
$::=

15.3 11.0

7.7

7.8 11.0

9.9 10.3

9.0

10.1

11.9

~

~

Manufacturing industry-" Materials used Articles produced

9.3

14.9

8.9 25.3 29.3

9.8

1.6

3.6 -0.7

4.2

'-0 00

12.5 10.7

8.6 11.0 15.8 11.0

7.8

8.2

6.8

9.3

IV

Building materials used in-

:;0

House building

13.5 11.9

8.2

6.4 13.0 13.6

9.9

8.8

8.9

12.8

tIl

Other building

15.1

11.7

8.4

7.4 (/) 12.9 12.9 11.1

9.3

9.8

15.3

'"1:l :;0

tIl

(a) Annual rates.

Vl
tIl

(b) Weighted average of eight capital cities for 1981-82 and for half yearly data; weighted average of six State capital cities for annual data up to and including 1980-81.

Z

(c) Weights shown are those used in the recently introduced tenth series of the CPI. (d) Half year calculations based on seasonally adjusted data. (e) Exports of non-farm goods and all services.

-l ;J>
:-<l

(/) Based on linkage of new series to old series at July 1979.

tIl

Vl

'-0
-.j

98 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Chart 5 - Price Indicators (percentage changes at annual rates; implicit

per cent

price deflators) (a)

25

20

15

IO

\/

\/

-5

II

II

II

197778

197879

1979-80

(a) Based on seasonally adjusted data. (b) Includes non-Farm goods and all export services.

II 1980-81

II 1981-82

Average earnings on a national accounts basis are estimated to have increased by 13.3 per cent in 1981-82 and also to have accelerated markedly over the course of the year (see Table 7). After allowance for the uncertainties in the presently available indicators, the various figures suggest an increase in overall average earnings in 1981-82 of around 14 per cent; an increase of that order would be consistent with PAYE tax receipts.
This outcome is a little higher than expected last Budget time; moreover wage increases under some major awards and agreements were substantially higher than 14 per cent and the timing of increases played an important part in the overall outcome.
The timing of wage increases during the year was greatly influenced by institutional factors. By mid-1981, industrial disputation had become widespread, pressures for wage increases outside the wage indexation guidelines had built up and substantial increases had been occurring in over-award payments. With these factors in mind, and with the wage indexation system clearly discredited, whether as a basis for wage determination in Australia or, even more clearly, as a contribution to the solution of the country's economic problems, the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission abandoned the wage indexation system on 31 July 1981. Although this was followed by a brief pause in wage claims, bargaining soon resumed on a case-by-case basis. The last quarter of 1981 was marked by a very high level of industrial disputation, followed by a number of major settlements involving increases in wages and reductions in standard working hours.
In February 1982 the Commission commenced a National Wage Case hearing on claims by the ACTU and other organisations seeking the extension to other wage earners of wage increases granted under agreements reached since the abandonment of wage indexation, on the grounds that these increases were sufficiently pervasive and

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 99

Table 7: Wage Rates and Earnings

Average weekly earnings

Average Full-time adult

male male ordinary

awards(a)

time(b)

Total males
(c)

Average earnings (national accounts basis)(d)

Average Average real

real male

earnings

weekly (national

earnings accounts

(c)(e) basis)(d) (/)

Year1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82
Half year(g)1980-81 1 II 1981-82 1 11

Change on previous period (per cent)

17.6

n.a.

16.2

31.0

29.0

25.4

15.0

16.5

14.4

13.0

12.4

12.4

9.3

9.8

9.9

6.4

7.7

7.7

8.7

9.4

9.9

10.7

14.2

13.5

11.6

(g) 13.8

(g) 14.8

18.0

3.7

28.2

6.4

15.2

-1.2

12.8

0.6

9.9

0.5

7.4

-1.2

9.3

-0.2

13.1

3.8

13.3

(g)5.2

5.2 8.9 -0.5 0.9 0.6 -1.5 -0.7 3.5 3.8

10.6

16.8

15.8

14.9

6.3

5.4

10.6

10.6

11.2

12.1

2.2

3.0

10.5

13.0

13.4

11.8

4.0

2.6

14.5

18.5

21.1

16.7

10.0

6.0

(a) Growth rates are based on weighted average figures centred on the middle of the period. (b) For the September quarter 1981 and earlier periods the full-time adult male ordinary time weekly earn-
ings figures are based on estimates of full-time non-managerial adult male weekly earnings derived from payroll tax and other returns for the whole quarter. From the December quarter 1981 the estimates are based on a new survey of private and government employers and relate to average ordinary time weekly earnings of all full-time adult male employees for a pay period around the middle of each quarter. (c) For the September quarter 1981 and earlier periods the total male weekly earnings figures are based on the former payroll tax based series on a so-called 'male units basis'. From the December quarter 1981 the estimates are based on the new survey and relate to total average weekly earnings for all males. (d) Non-farm wages, salaries and supplements per non-farm wage and salary earner. (e) Nominal values of average weekly earnings deflated by the implicit price deflator of private final consumption expenditure to provide an indicator of real wages as 'income'. (/) Deflated by the implicit price deflator of private final consumption expenditure. (g) Growth rates are at annual rates and use seasonally adjusted data for the 'old' average weekly earnings series and the average earnings series on a national accounts basi,; the average male awards series and the 'new' average weekly earnings series are not seasonally adjusted.

similar in amount to have established a new so-called 'community wage standard'. This approach was rejected by the Commission in its Decision on 14 May 1982 and the negotiation and arbitration of claims continued thereafter on a case-by-case basis. At the same time the Commission decided to convene a meeting of the parties on 17 August 1982 to consider a possible program to discuss future principles of wage determination.
In 1981-82, as in 1980-81, wages rose considerably faster than prices; that is, there was in both years a marked rise in real wage incomes. Average weekly earnings for male employees grew by 5.2 per cent in 1981-82 when deflated by the implicit price deflator for private final consumption expenditure-the largest increase since 1974-75. Movements In average weekly earnings and the consumer price index are compared in Chart 6.
The increases in labour costs that resulted from increases in wage rates were aggravated in a number of areas by reductions in standard working hours. In some cases, the introduction of shorter standard working hours was accompanied by agreements on

100 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

Chart 6 - Prices and Earnings (percentage change on a year earlier)
per cent 30

25

20

/',\

15

//-
/'

\ \~

11

\v

10

/
I

I

/ Consumer Price Index

MJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJ

1973

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

(a) From the December quarter 1981 survey based estimates of average weekly earnings for all male employees have been linked to the old 'male units' series.

(b) Up to and including the June quarter 1981 based on the six State capital cities Consumer Price Index and on the eight capital cities index thereafter.

changes in working practices to provide offsetting reductions in costs or increased productivity. The overall effects of these offsets are open to question; what is clear, however, is that industries which took (or were forced by industrial action into taking) the lead in wage increases and reductions in hours have since suffered particularly sharp falls in profitability and employment.

Table 8 provides details of movements in average real labour costs, average labour productivity and average real unit labour costs for the non-farm sector of the economy over recent years. It shows that the rapid growth in average real labour costs in 1981-82 significantly exceeded growth in average labour productivity; consequently real unit labour costs increased, particularly in the second half of the year.

Increases in both unit wage costs and prices in Australia since early in 1981 have been greater than those recorded in our major trading partners. Chart 7 suggests that, even after allowance for exchange rate changes, Australian industry faced generally stronger competition from overseas producers in 1981-82 than in the preceding few years.
These labour cost developments were instrumental in producing a sizable downturn in profitability. While this cannot be measured directly on the basis of currently available statistics, some indication of the magnitude of the downturn can be gained from the change in the share of non-farm product represented by the gross operating surplus of trading enterprise companies and financial enterprises. This share declined from 14.7 per cent in the second half of 1980-81 to 13.1 per cent in the second half of 1981-82 (see Chart 8). Gross operating surplus includes depreciation, interest, direct taxes, royalties and land rent, as well as profits, although it is calculated after the stock valUation adjustment. Particularly in view of the increases that occurred in interest rates over this period, the fall in the profit share is likely to have been even more marked than these comparisons suggest.

The growth of non-farm unincorporated enterprise income slowed noticeably to 7.3 per cent in 1981-82 compared with 9.6 per cent in 1980-81.

Appropriation Bill (No, 1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES lOl

Chart 7 - Indexes of Unit Wage Cost and Price Trends in Australia Relative to Major Trading Partner Countries - Adjusted for Exchange Rate Changes (1979-80 = 100)
140

130

~

1\

120

1\

i'J \

/

\

I

I

\/

110

,... j

'./

/
I

100

/ Unit wage cost

_, based (a)(c)

,.... ........_ / - /

90

I

/

80

1971-72

1973-74

197576

1977-78

1979-80

1981-82

(a) The unit wage cost index is the ratio of unit wage costs in the non-farm sector of the Australian economy to the weighted average of the exchange rate adjusted unit wage cost indexes estimated for the manufacturing sectors of Australia's four major trading partners in the OECD.
(b) The CPI based index is the ratio of the Australian consumer price index to the weighted average of the exchange rate adjusted consumer price indexes of Australia's four major trading partners in the OECD.
(c) The weights used are based on the share of Australia's imports from US, Japan, UK and West Germany. Observations are quarterly averages. A rise (fall) on this graph implies a deterioration (improvement) in Australia's inflation performance relative to our four major OECD trading partners after adjusting for exchange rate changes.

~hart 8 - Income Shares (per cent of non-farm GDP at factor cost) (a)

per cent

70

Wages (b)

68

66

64

62

18 Gross Operating Surplus of Trading Companies and Financial Enterprises (c)
16

14 12

II I II

II

II

II

II I II

II

II

73-74 74-75 75-76 76-77 77-78 78-79 79-80 80-81 81-82

(a) Seasonally adjusted.
(b) The ratio of non-farm wages, salaries and supplements to gross non-farm product at factor cost.
(c) The ratio of the gross operating surplus of trading enterprise companies and financial enterprises (less imputed bank service charge) to gross non-farm product at factor cost.

102 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Table 8: Indexes of Average Real Labour Costs, Productivity and Real Unit Labour Costs for the Non-farm Sector
(Base: Average 1966-67 to 1972-73 = 100)

Average real Average labour

labour costs (a) productivity (b)

(I)

(2)

Real unit labour costs (3 = I -;. 2)

Year1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976 77 1977-78 197879 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82
Half year (e)1981-82 I II

112

III

101

117

112

105

126

114

III

127

118

108

131

122

108

133

123

108

132

126

105

132

126

105

136

129

106

141

132

107

139

131

106

142

132

108

(a) Non-farm wages, salaries and supplements (and payroll tax), deflated by the implicit price deflator of gross non-farm product, per hour worked by non-farm wage and salary earners.
(b) Gross non-farm product at average 1979-80 prices per hour worked by persons employed in the nonfarm sector.
(e) Seasonally adjusted.
Fiscal Conditions
The Commonwealth Budget deficit in 1981-82 was $549m, $453m above the Budget estimate and equivalent to 0.4 per cent of GOP. This compares with a deficit of $111 Om in 1980-81 (0.9 per cent of GOP). The 1981-82 result represented a continuation of the consistent downward trend in the deficit, relative to GOP, since 1977-78.
In 1981-82, Budget outlays increased by 2 per cent in real terms (adjusting current price data by the implicit price deflator for gross non-farm product). In current prices, outlays in 1981-82 were $463m or 1.1 per cent above the Budget estimate. The higher than expected increase in outlays (which accounted for all of the increase in the Budget deficit over the initial estimates) reflected large public sector wage settlements (despite some absorption), higher than expected payments for unemployment benefits and public debt interest, and a number of post-Budget decisions affecting expenditures. About one percentage point of the real growth in 1981-82 was accounted for by an additional payday for public service salaries and for some major pensions and benefits. The 1981-82 result followed a 4.2 per cent real increase in outlays in 1980-81. In the previous four years, real Budget outlays had increased at an average annual rate of less than one per cent.
1981-82 Budget receipts increased by 15.9 per cent (3.9 per cent in real terms), in line with the Budget estimate. As a result, the ratio of Budget receipts to GOP is estimated to have increased by one half of a percentage point to 27.5 per cent, compared with a ratio ranging between 25 and 26 per cent in the period 1975-76 to 1979-80. The increase in 1981-82 collections was led by a 36 per cent rise in sales tax receipts, reflecting discretionary action to correct anomalies and inconsistencies in the sales tax schedules and to increase existing rates. Personal tax receipts also increased strongly (by 21 per cent) and reached a record 52 per cent of total Budget receipts.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 103

State and local government outlays, as recorded, declined by one per cent in real terms in 1981-82 and as a proportion of GOP declined to 19.8 per cent from 20.3 per cent in 1980-81 (see Table 9). However, the data were affected by the sale of a portion of the Eraring power station to the private sector (see Statement No.6) and, adjusting for this, State and local government sector outlays are estimated to have grown in real terms by about 1.3 per cent in 1981-82 and, as a proportion of GOP, remained broadly unchanged from 1980-81. The steady decline in the relative importance of Commonwealth assistance in funding State and local government outlays, evident since the mid 1970s, continued in 1981-82. State and Northern Territory semi-government and local authority borrowings approved by the Loan Council increased by 7.7 per cent in 1981-82 compared with 11.1 per cent in 1980-81 and 17.3 per cent in 1979-80. Including the funding for Eraring, net financing by State and local government authorities outside Loan Council borrowing programs is estimated to have increased by about 37 per cent to slightly more than $1 OOOm in 1981-82. In each of the three years prior to 1980-81, net funding from such sources is thought to have been less than $100m.
As a percentage of GOP, the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR) is estimated to have declined from 3.6 per cent in 1980-81 to 2.7 per cent in 1981-82, with both the Commonwealth and the State and local government sectors contributing to the reduction (see Table 10). However, the reduction in the State and local government sector PSBR ratio was attributable to the Eraring and other similar transactions; after adjustment for Eraring, the estimated (total) PSBR in 1981-82 was equivalent to about 3.2 per cent of GOP. On this basis, the decline in 1981-82 in the PSBR as a percentage of GOP was entirely attributable-as in every other year since 1977-78-to the decline in the Commonwealth Budget deficit.
Table 9: Public Sector Outlays as a Percentage of Gross Domestic Product

State and local government sector outlays

Financed by

Common-

wealth Common-

sector

wealth

Own

outlays(a) assistance(b)

funds

(per cent) (per cent) (per cent)

(I)

(2)

( 3)

Total (per cent)
(4)

Interest payments
to Commonwealth(c) (per cent)
(5)

Total(d) (per cent)
(6)

Year-1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979 80 1980-81 1981-82(p)

24.6

8.1

8.4

16.6

29.4

10.4

9.0

19.4

30.6

11.6

8.5

20.1

30.3

10.8

9.2

20.0

31.1

Il.l

9.9

21.0

29.5

10.6

9.7

20.3

29.0

10.1

9.9

20.0

29.0

9.9

10.4

20.3

29.2

9.5

10.3

19.8

1.4

31.6

1.3

37.1

1.2

37.9

1.2

38.2

1.3

39.6

1.3

38.0

1.2

37.7

1.2

38.2

1.2

38.3

(a) Budget and non-Budget sector. The latter comprises mainly capital expenditure. (b) Direct assistance from the Commonwealth Budget. (c) Interest payments on specific purpose advances and on securities allocated to the States under the
Financial Agreement from the Commonwealth. These are the only transfers from the State and local government sector to the Commonwealth. (d) Net of all transfers between Commonwealth and State and local government sectors. Column 6 is equal to column I plus column 3 less column 5. (p) Preliminary.

104 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Table 10: Public Sector Borrowing Requirement(a)

Commonwealth sector

State and local government sector(b)

Percentage

$m

of GOP

Percentage

$m

of GOP

Total

Percentage

$m

of GOP

Year 1973 74 1974-75 197576 1976-77 1977 78 1978 79 1979 80 1980-81 1981 82(p)

352 2516 3528 3028 3850 3619 2458 I 520 1050

0.7

460

4.1

932

4.8

456

3.6 1025

4.3 1617

3.5 1934

2.1 2229

1.2 3189

0.7 2978

0.9 1.5 0.6 1.2 1.8 1.9 1.9
(e)2.4
2.0

812 3447 3984 4055 5467 5554 4685 4708 4027

1.6 5.6 5.5 4.9 6.1 5.4 4.1
(e)3.6
2.7

(a) Total public sector outlays less receipts; net advances to other sectors by the public sector are treated as outlays. This measure differs from the measure of net borrowing by the public sector used in Chart 9, in which net advances are treated as lending.
(b) The figures for the deficit of the State and local government sector shown here do not include advances from the Commonwealth Budget; they therefore indicate the residual borrowing requirement of the sector.
(c) Break in series; see text. (p) Preliminary.
Monetary Conditions
Monetary developments during 1981-82 were marked by a continuing strong domestic demand for finance, significant changes in the sources of finance and sharp increases in interest rates. Growth in monetary aggregates was more restrained than in recent years.
(i) Sectoral borrowing and lending
Lying behind financial developments in 1981-82 were further marked changes in the real resource demands by the main sectors. Chart 9 illustrates these developments by graphing, for each of the last twelve years, the net lending or borrowing by the main sectors as a proportion of GOP.
There was a further substantial increase in net borrowing by the corporate sector during 1981-82, reflecting the continuing strong growth in business fixed investment, sizeable stock accumulation and, as the year progressed, sharply reduced business profitability and hence cash flow to meet those investment needs.
Public sector net borrowing declined (in parallel with the movement in the PSBR discussed above) but, as the household sector did not increase its net lending, there was a further increase in the call upon resources from abroad represented by a widening in the current account deficit of the balance of payments.
The latter real resource flows from overseas were financed by the corporate sector and, to a much lesser extent, public sector borrowing abroad, at a time when interest rates in some overseas countries, particularly in the United States, were at relatively high levels. This concurrence of events played a major part in the sizeable increases in domestic interest rates, although the latter were also affected by deteriorating inflationary expectations and increased pressures on financial markets within Australia. In effect, higher interest rates reflected the need to finance the larger deficit on current account.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 105

Chart 9 - Net Lending and Borrowing by Sector (per cent of Gross Domestic Product) (a)

percent
I
o

Corporate Trading Enterprises

-I

-2

-3

-4

(b)

Public Authorities
o
-I
-2
(b)
-3 -4 -5 -6
Households (Includes Unincorporated Enterprises) 8
6
4
2
o
Overseas 6
4
2
o
-I -2
1970-7171-72 72-7373-74 74-75 75-7676-7777-78 78-79 79-80 80-81 81-82 (a) Based on National Accounts data and Treasury estimates. Positive (upward) bars on these
charts represent net lending while negative (downward) bars represent net borrowing. (b) Adjusted to remove the impact on the estimates of the sale to the private sector of a portion
of the Eraring power station.

106 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

(ii) Growth in the financial aggregates
Conditions in financial markets, monetary growth, and the degree of monetary restraint can be assessed by the use of a wide range of indicators. Reflecting the basic approach to monetary policy, there is usually concentration on growth in financial aggregates but other indicators, including nominal and 'real' interest rates, are also monitored. Particularly in a more regulated financial system, there are dangers in focusing too heavily on a single indicator whose performance may be partly due to the effects of regulation.
The volume of money measure M3 has been the summary indicator adopted for the Government's public presentation of its monetary objectives. In the 1981-82 Budget Speech the Treasurer indicated that the Government would be seeking to restrain growth in the monetary aggregates to a degree consistent with growth in M3 of 10 to 11 per cent over the course of 1981-82. In the event growth in M3 was very close to this projection at 11.3 per cent during 1981-82, compared with 12.7 per cent during 1980-81 and 12.3 per cent during 1979-80. Most of the following focuses upon the reasons for that outcome but reference is also made to other indicators of financial conditions.
The major factors in the formation of movements in the money supply during recent years are set out in Table 11. Chart 10 illustrates annual percentage point contributions of selected major formation factors to the growth rate of the money supply in recent years.
As in 1980-81, the Commonwealth Budget recorded a domestic surplus in 1981-82, assisting in the restraint of growth in the monetary aggregates. The domestic surplus of $919m, while considerably less than envisaged at Budget time, still exceeded the 1980-81 surplus of $446m. Moreover, Budget outlays in 1981-82 included a public service wage and pension payment of about $400m on 30 June 1982 which was not fully recorded in the accounts of the banking system, and hence in the money supply, until early in 1982-83. Particularly when this is taken into account, the monetary impact of the Budget in 1981-82 was appreciably more restraining than in the previous financial year. As in previous financial years there was a marked seasonality in the domestic Budget balance, primarily reflecting the seasonality in the payment of company and provisional taxes.
The surplus on private sector foreign exchange transactions in 1981-82 was some $350m less than that suggested at Budget time. The net impact of this and the smaller than intended domestic Budget surplus was to add slightly more to primary liquidity than was then expected. Sales of Commonwealth Government securities to the nonbank sector are the principal means of preventing growth in primary liquidity from contributing to undesirable expansion of the monetary aggregates. Despite the considerable sales of Treasury bonds, total sales to the non-bank sector were on the whole weak in 1981-82 as a result of the significant run off in holdings of Australian Savings Bonds.
Chart 11 shows cumulative movements in non-bank holdings of the three classes of Commonwealth Government securities and of non-bank take-up overall during 1981-82 as well as the cumulative movement of private sector liquidity. Total non-bank holdings of Commonwealth Government securities fell by $121m over the year and it was only in February and March that cumulative non-bank take-up was significantly positive. The decline for the year was the first since 1973-74; the outcome in 1980-81 was an increase of $534m. The fall in total non-bank holdings of Commonwealth Government securities in 1981-82 was made up of a fall of $141m in holdings of Treasury notes, an increase of $742m in holdings of Treasury bonds and a fall of $722m in holdings of Australian Savings Bonds.

Table 11: Formation of Movements in the Volume of Money (a) ($m)
Year

1980-81

~

1981-82

.~.g...
....

~.

Sept.

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

qtr

Dec. qtr

Mar. qtr

June qtr

Sept.

Year

qtr

Dec. qtr

Mar. June qtr qtr(p)

Year
(P)

c-
;:

Budget deficit ( +) or surplus ( -)

3310 3455 2033 2488 1746

421 -3545 I 110 2361 2012

36 -3860

549 ~

Less Budget overseas deficit Budget domestic deficit Private sector foreign exchange
transactions (b)

972 2338
-1182

1222 2233
-252

1468 565
978

360 2128
-73

361 1385
870

350

485 1556

71 -4030 -446

364 1997

369

329

406 1468

1643 -293 -4266 -919

~

......

'--

655 1351 2803 -792 -136

416 2971 2459

Change in SRD Accounts of all trading

banks (increase (-))

970 -392 -260 -38 -79 -318 -32 -467 -13 -106 -61 -80 -260

Change in Rural Credit advances

-108

78 -284 -68

57

119

6

114 -106

74

121 -86

4

Other factors (c)

-235 -250

12

380 -147

128

89

450

139 -152

221

40

250

Balancing item (d)

-100

315

157 -1389 -243

391 I 176 -65 -1430 -290

III

784 -828

CHANGE IN PRIVATE SECTOR LGS

ASSETS (e)

1683 1732 I 168

940 1843 1046 -1440 2389 -205 1033

515 -637

706

Plus Change in loans and advances:

Major trading banks

I 336 1528 2502

265

836

162

906 2169

705

637

406

634 2382

Other trading banks

341

442

247

33

163

82

166

444

112

175

348

127

762

Savings banks

1205 1288 1287

402

425

328

319 1475

392

631

274

161

1458

-.J

Less Change in non-bank holdings of Com-

)-

monwealth Government securities

1247

720

741

196

294

184 -140

534 -114

183

268 -457 -121 s::

Less Change in Government and inler-bank

(JQ
s::

deposits

-189

27 -53 -59

60

157 -200 -42 -24 -22

277

35

266

;!?

Plus Other factors (j) CHANGE IN VOLUME OF
MONEY (M3) (g)

-620 2887

383 4626

866 5382

406 -127 1909 2786

-51 1226

16

243

434

280

182

307 6228 1576 2595 1 180

226 933

1 121 6284

'"00
tv

(a) Average weekly figures basis except for private sector foreign exchange transactions, Budget deficit, Budget overseas deficit, Budget domestic deficit, and change in non-

:m::e

bank holdings of Commonwealth Government securities, which are on a last day basis, and change in private sector LGS assets which is partly last day. Not seasonally adjusted.

:"m:":Ce

(b) This item represents the direct contribution to private sector LGS Assets from overseas sources, including borrowings by semi-government authorities. It is defined as net mtil

official monetary movements adjusted to exclude Commonwealth Government budgetary and financing transactions overseas.

Z

(c) Includes Reserve Bank transactions in commercial bills, changes in other loans and advances and miscellaneous accounts.

>-l
)-

(d) This item is largely due to the different time bases used.

>-l

(e) Defined as change in banking sector LGS Assets (the sum of its holdings of notes, coin, cash with Reserve Bank, Treasury notes and other Commonwealth Government securities) plus change in holdings of the public of currency, deposits with Reserve Bank and Commonwealth Government securities.

m=2

(j) Defined as change in other assets and liabilities of banks less change in other banking institutions' LGS assets.

til

(g) Defined as change in holdings of the public of notes and coin plus change in deposits of the public with banks (including deposits with the Reserve Bank).

(p) Preliminary.

0

-.J

108 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Chart 10 - Selected Major Factors in the Formation of Movements in the Volume of Money (M3) (percentage point contribution)

percentage points

Domestic Budget Deficit

10

o+-. ., .. .~~,..r
-5

Change in Non-Bank Holdings of Commonwealth Government Securities 5
o
-5
Loans and Advances of Banks 15 10
o
Total Domestic Sources of Money Growth 15 10 5 0 + - _ . - ,_ _ _
-5
Private Sector Foreign Exchange Transactions 15 10
o
-5
Volume of Money (M3) 25 20 15 10
o
1970-7171-72 72-73 73-74 74-75 75-76 76-77 77-78 78-79 79-80 80-81 81-82

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 109

Chart 11 - Cumulative Changes in Private Sector Holdings of LGS Assets and Non-Bank Holdings of Commonwealth Government Securities (a)

Cumulative Change in Non-Bank Holdings of Treasury Notes, ASBs and

Treasury Bonds

$m

750

_ _ _ Treasury Bonds

___ Treasury Notes _____ ASBs

"I '

II " ,

I

'

250

I

\

I

\

I

\

O~~_ _~~~~~_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~/_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~\_ __ _

/

/

-250

----:...-\-\-----'"-?/--/-/-------

V

'- ---,,_ ..........- ...... ,

'-, _ -750~ ___________~__________~____________r________'_-_---- '

Cumulative Change in Private Sector Holdings ofLGS Assets and Non-Bank Holdings of Commonwealth Government Securities.
$m 1500
_ _ _ Private Sector Holdings ofLGS Assets _____ Non-Bank Holdings of Commonwealth
Government Securities
1000

500 /'"
",'" \,
" /
" O~______________~~"'_'_-_-_-~__-__-_-_-~~"'"~,_'"_________~_______ "-, '---

_ -500~------~--~---- _______r - _________r_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~

JUN

SEP

DEC

MAR

JUN

1981

1982

(a) Cumulative changes to month shown.

110 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

While the larger contribution of Treasury bonds to non-bank take-up was a welcome development, these sales were largely achieved in the period mid-September to mid-November 1981 and again in May 1982. Activity in the bond market was fairly subdued for most of the rest of the year. The net take-up of Australian Savings Bonds was negative in every month of the financial year except July 1981 with the loss of funds much greater in the second half year. These developments meant that heavy reliance had to be placed upon Treasury note sales to support monetary policy, particularly during the early months of calendar 1982. That Treasury notes are a highly liquid and therefore unsatisfactory instrument for anything other than seasonal liquidity management purposes is evident from the very sharp fall in non-bank holdings which occurred in the April/May period once private sector liquidity came under the usual seasonal pressures. The poor overall non-bank take-up in 1981-82, particularly by the household sector, meant that there was a ready supply of liquidity to financial institutions, especially some non-banks, to support rapid growth in their lending throughout the year.
The major trading banks were asked early in the financial year by the Reserve Bank to restrain the collective growth in their loans, advances and bills discounted over the year to June 1982 to 12 per cent. In the event, the banks met the Reserve Bank's request and held financing in these forms to $2382m, or to an increase of 12.1 per cent, despite the significant increase in the overdraft usage ratio which increased by 2.7 percentage points between June 1981 and June 1982-refiecting the fact that during various periods in the year trading bank overdrafts were a relatively cheap source of finance.
However, while the growth in the major trading banks' loans, advances and bills discounted during 1981-82 was consistent with the Reserve Bank's lending guidance, there was much more rapid growth in their other forms of financing. Bills outstanding against major trading bank 'bill name' facilities (under which the banks accept or endorse bills on behalf of their customers) increased by 37.1 per cent during 1981-82 and holdings of other securities (including the banks' equity in leveraged leasing arrangements) increased by 86.1 per cent.
On 29 June 1982 the Reserve Bank announced the cessation of quantitative lending guidance for the major trading banks, a move indicative of a growing preference for reduced reliance on direct controls and more reliance on open-market operations as a technique of monetary management.
Deposits with the major trading banks increased by $351Om, or 13.5 per cent, during the year to June 1982. This increase was recorded almost entirely in fixed deposits, which grew by 22.9 per cent over the year. The disparity between the growth in current and fixed deposits can be attributed, in large part, to higher fixed deposit interest rates since the deregulation of those rates in December 1980 and, more recently, to relaxation of regulations restraining the banks' ability to offer shorter term fixed deposits. Because of this disparity, the narrower monetary aggregate, Ml, grew by only 1.6 per cent over the year to June 1982. Major trading bank fixed deposits are included in each of the measured monetary aggregates except Ml, so that the disparity between the major trading banks' current and fixed deposit growth rates had the effect ofreducing the growth of M 1 while leaving the growth of the other aggregates unaffected.
The growth in loans, advances and bills discounted by the other trading banks (which include three State-owned banks and four small private banks) showed a very marked acceleration in 1981-82. Loans and advances of the other trading banks increased by $762m, or 22.9 per cent, over the year to June 1982 with over half of this increase being accounted for by one State-owned bank.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 111

The growth of total loans and advances outstanding of savings banks, at a little over 11 per cent in the year to June 1982, was relatively modest. As deposits, however, grew by an even more modest 7.8 per cent, the result was a drop in the savings bank liquidity (LGS) ratio from 17.1 per cent in June 1981 to 15.7 per cent in June 1982.
The relatively slow growth in savings bank lending and deposits was one factor leading to the slowing in M3 growth to 11.3 per cent in 1981-82. A narrower definition of the money supply, M2 (which, by excluding the savings banks, predominantly reflects deposits with the trading banks), grew by 13.9 per cent over the year to June 1982.
A similar proceSIi }Vas evident in the non-bank sector where the permanent building societies experienced a slowing in deposit growth similar to that affecting the savings banks. In both cases, poor deposit performance resulted mainly from interest rate controls.
Total borrowings of permanent building societies grew by 10.2 per cent during 1981-82, compared with 11.0 per cent in 1980-81. Both savings banks and building societies were adversely affected by the rapid growth of cash management trusts, which first appeared in Australia in December 1980 and which grew rapidly throughout 1981-82. By mid-1982 these trusts had deposits of about $1500m. These institutions give the household sector access to returns from high yielding securities on the professional short-term money market.
The slowdown in savings bank and building society deposit growth was reflected in their lending for housing. The value of loans approved by savings banks and building societies fell by 12.9 per cent in 1981-82, compared with an increase of 1.2 per cent in 1980-81. Approvals by the major lenders (which includes, in addition, major trading banks) also fell by 11.1 per cent in 1981-82.
Finance companies and, in particular, money market corporations grew much faster than the banks and building societies last year. Preliminary figures indicate that over the year to June 1982 non-bank deposits with finance companies increased by 13.0 per cent, while their advances to the general public grew faster, by 15.2 per cent. The equivalent figures for money market corporations were 37.6 per cent and 41.0 per cent respectively. During the year to June 1982, advances to the general public by money market corporations totalled $2698m compared with a total of $2382m by the major trading banks and $4602m by the banking system as a whole.
Monetary growth may also be assessed in terms of broader financial aggregates than M3. One such aggregate (M6) includes the liabilities of building societies, finance companies and money market corporations in addition to the components of M3. Preliminary figures indicate that this aggregate increased by 13.5 per cent over the year to June 1982; in the year to June 1981 this aggregate increased by 15.8 per cent.
Growth in M6 has in the past generally been higher than in M3 reflecting, in part, the heavier Government regulation of those banks whose deposits account for the major part of M3. The difference between the two growth rates widened considerably during 1980-81 but narrowed during 1981-82. This development mainly reflected the slowdown in building society deposit growth, partly offset by strong growth in the liabilities of money market corporations. It should be noted that several forms of financial intermediation that grew rapidly during 1981-82, such as bank 'bill name' facilities and cash management trusts, are not fully included in the M6 measure.
(iii) Interest Rates
There were large increases in most domestic interest rates during 1981-82, reflecting continued high interest rates in some overseas countries, the very strong demand for

112 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

funds at home, increased inflationary expectations and uncertainties concerning the economic outlook. The increase in short-term rates was particularly marked during the June quarter tax payment period, reflecting the relatively modest build-up in private sector liquidity during the preceding three quarters and the private sector's heavy demand for funds for tax payment purposes. Ninety-day rates, including the Treasury note yield, peaked in mid-April in the 20 to 23 per cent range, with most rates easily exceeding previous record levels. Longer-term rates indicated more clearly the nonseasonal trends during the year. The maximum rate on finance company two-year debentures moved up from 14.25 per cent in July 1981 to 17.0 per cent in June 1982. The yield on two-year Treasury bonds also increased over the year, from 13.1 per cent to 16.4 per cent. Chart 12 provides further details.

Balance of Payments
The balance of payments recorded an overall surplus of $1362m in 1981-82 as strong capital inflow exceeded the large current account deficit. Table 12 and Chart 13 show the main balance of payments aggregates for recent years.
The rise in the current account deficit in 1981-82 largely reflected a sharp widening in the trade deficit from $372m in 1980-81 to $3321m in 1981-82. At the time of the last Budget, the trade account in 1981-82 was expected to be strongly influenced by the pronounced cyclical difference between Australia, where economic activity was rising strongly, and major overseas countries, where activity was sluggish. Demand for Australian exports was thus expected to be subdued and Australian demand for imports high. In the event, there was an even lower level of exports and a higher level of imports than had been expected. A decline in Australia's international competitiveness contributed to this weaker outcome, reinforcing the effects of cyclical divergence.
Generally lower agricultural commodity prices and little change in shipments led to a fall in the total value of rural exports in 1981-82. Favourable seasonal conditions yielded a good wheat harvest which provided the only significant real growth in rural exports. The volume of meat exports was limited by depressed demand and low livestock numbers. Grain and meat prices remained low throughout the year as world supplies were plentiful, while sugar prices declined markedly from the previous year's exceptionally high levels.
Non-rural export receipts grew modestly because of price rises as there was no change in volume. Iron ore and coal prices were increased through contract renegotiations but prices for other commodities-particularly metals-were depressed. There was continued weak demand for coking coal while the buoyant demand for steaming coal could not be fully met because of industrial disputes and inadequate port facilities.
Total exports of goods increased by only 2 per cent in nominal terms in 1981-82, with little change in either volume or average prices as compared with 1980-81.
The total value of imports increased by 17 per cent in 1981-82. Most of the increase was in volume, reflecting rapid growth in domestic demand (particularly private business investment) as well as increased import penetration over a wide range of goods. Overall import prices increased only a little in the year. There were substantial increases in the value of imports of chemicals, machinery and transport equipment, other manufactured goods and also petroleum (of which the volume of imports was maintained partly by an increased incidence of industrial disputes in domestic petroleum production) .

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 113

Chart 12 - Interest Rates

percent 22

A: Short Term Rates

___ Uncontrolled Major Trading Bank Overdraft Rate
_ _ _ 90-day Bank Bill Rate 20 _____ 13-weekTreasuryNoteRate

18

16

14

12

10

8

o

per cent 22
20

B: Long Term Rates
___ Two-year Treasury Bond Rate ___ Two-year Finance Company Debenture Rate _____ Maximum Savings Bank Savings Investment
Account Rate.

18

16

14

,,_/ ,,--/ r/-----_--_---

/

r---

-

-

-

"
--

.

/

,------

,/

12

~../

, __________ ___I I

/

I

I

, ____________ ____/,1

10

I I

I

------_ ../'

8

o ~-'~---r----r---~----'----'----~--~
SEP DEC MAR JUN SEP DEC MAR JUN

1980-81

1981-82

114 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Table 12: Balance of Payments: Main Aggregates ($m, not seasonally adjusted)

1980-81

1981-82

1981-82

Year

Year

First half

Second half

Current AccountExports Imports Trade balance Net invisibles
Current account balance

18816 -19188
-372 -4971
-5344

19130 -22450 -3321
-5759
-9080

9046 -10 788 -1741
-2725
-4467

10083 -11662
-1580 -3034
-4613

Capital AccountGovernment securities Other government Total government capital
Trade credi t nei Foreign investment in enterprises in
Australia Undistributed income Other Other private capital and balancing
item Net apparent private capital inflow

-78 II
-67
-41
788 5003
810 6560

387 -III
276
241
900 8368
656 10 165

366 -22 344
217
450 2447
-297 2817

22 -90 -68
24
450 5921
953 7348

Net apparent capital inflow Net official monetary movements

6493 1149

10441 I 362

3161 -1306

7280 2668

Private sector foreign exchange transactions (a)

2803

2459

-928

3387

(a) This item represents the directcontribution to private sector LGS assets and the volume of money from overseas sources, including borrowings by semi-government authorities. It is defined as net official monetary movements adjusted to exclude Commonwealth Government budgetary and financing transactions overseas. See Table II.

The net invisibles deficit increased in 1981-82 to $5759m from $4971m in 1980-81. The rapid rise in the volume of imports led to higher freight costs and, more importantly, interest payments rose strongly on the much increased private overseas borrowings.
The current account deficit for 1981-82 was $9080m compared with $5344m in 1980-81. The current account deficit was equivalent to about 6t per cent of GDP in 1981-82, a high figure by historical standards. As in 1980-81, the current account deficit was more than financed by capital inflow.
Private capital inflow was much higher in 1981-82 than in 1980-81 mainly reflecting a strong rise in overseas borrowing by enterprises in Australia. As shown in Table 13, foreign investment in corporate equities fell in 1981-82, but other forms of foreign investment in enterprises increased. The financing requirements of resource projects and the need for additional corporate finance for working capital purposes (including meeting end-year taxation commitments) resulting from the effects of sharply rising wage costs on profits and corporate cash flow led domestic enterprises to borrow heavily overseas during the year. These borrowings were concentrated in the second half of the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 115

Chart 13 - Recent Trends in Australia's Balance of Payments ($m per quarter)

$m

6000 500(J 4000

Exports and Imports (seasonally adjusted)
-----------_....----...---
,,-'"

,,-
-- ---- Imports ",,,/
"''''---- ---------
Exports

3000

2000

1000
O+---~--~r_--,_--~----r_--,_--_.----._--._--_.----~--~
$m Balance of Trade (seasonally adjusted)
1000
o

s s -1000+-----r_--~-----r----,_----r_--~----_r----,_----

D

M

D

M

1979-80

1980-81

D

M

1981-82

$m
5000 Balance on Current Account and Net Apparent Capital Inflow (not seasonally adjusted)
4000

3000

2000

..- ..-'"\
--- , ..-"-

Net Apparent / Capital Inflow I
(left scale) I
I I I I I I I I

$m -5000
-4000
-3000
-2000

1000

,. ,./ - - - - - ---II'

Balance on

Current.Account

-1000

(right scale)
O+-~~T=~"~~----r-----r---~----~----~-----r-----r----~----'-----+O

$m
3000 Net Official Monetary Movements (a) (not seasonally adjusted)

2000

1000
o

-1000

__ __ s -2000+-----~--__----_r----~----~-- ----_r----~----~-- ----_r--~

D

M

DM

DM

1979-80

1980-81

1981-82

(a) Net official monetary movements are the sum of the balance on current account and net apparent capital inflow.

116 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

year when there was a seasonal drain on private sector domestic liquidity and when uncovered interest rate differentials favoured overseas financing-differentials which, as noted earlier, were needed to finance the larger deficit on current account.

Table 13: Foreign Investment in Enterprises in Australia ($m)

Undistributed Corporate income equities(a)

Borrowing by public
non-monetary enterprises (b)

Other borrowing

Other inflows (c)

Total

Year1979-80 1980-8\ 1981-82
Half Year1980-81 I II 1981-82 I II

1061 788 900
394 394 450 450

732 1780
344
1 185 594 -48 392

509

462

409

2487

950

6244

157

621

251

1867

298

1809

652

4434

331

3094

328

5791

831

9267

13

2372

315

3420

387

2896

444

6371

(a) Includes direct and portfolio investment in corporate equities. (b) Includes net borrowing overseas by State semi-government authorities under the infrastructure borrow-
ing program, loans raised overseas by public transport enterprises, etc. (c) Consists of changes in branch liabilities to head offices (overseas) and inter-company indebtedness.

Government capital transactions resulted in a net inflow of $276m in 1981-82 compared with an outflow of $67m in 1980-81. Gross borrowings overseas by the Commonwealth amounted to $919m in 1981-82 compared with $173m in 1980-81. This expanded (but still modest) borrowing program served mainly to refinance some $552m in maturing debt. The net inflow of $368m as a result of Commonwealth overseas borrowings was partly offset by an outflow on other government capital transactions.
At end-June 1982 official reserve assets stood at $6517m, an increase of $808m on the end-June 1981 level. Of that rise, balance of payments transactions increased reserves by $1364m while revaluations of foreign exchange and gold holdings reduced reserves by $556m. The level of foreign exchange reserves rose from $2223m at end-June 1981 to close the financial year at $4065m.
The Exchange Rate
Management of the exchange rate of the Australian dollar in 1981-82 had to be carried out against the background of continuing extreme volatility in international financial markets and the changes in Australia's balance of payments situation noted earlier.
Movements in the trade-weighted index (TWI) of the value of the Australian dollar and in bilateral rates with the major currencies over the past five years or so are shown in Chart 14. Movements over the year are detailed in Table 14.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 117

Table 14: Bilateral Exchange Rates and the Trade Weighted Index (TWI)

Changeover year to:

June 1980(a) June 1981(a) June 1982(a)

June 1981 (percent)

SUS/SA Yen/SA OM/$A Pound Sterling/$A TWI

1.1530 251.41
2.0375 0.4933 84.9

1.1404 255.73
2.7094 0.5782 91.9

1.0332 259.61
2.5075 0.5873 88.2

-1.1 1.7
33.0 17.2 (b)8.2

(a) Monthly averages. (b) Between 30 June 1980 and 30 June 1981 the TWI rose by 9.3 percent. (c) Between 30 June 1981 and 30 June 1982 the TWI fell by 5.1 percent.

Changeover year to:
June 1982 (per cent)
-9.4 1.5
-7.5 1.6
(c) -4.0

Chart 14 - Movements of the Australian Dollar Against Selected

Currencies and in the Trade Weighted Index (a),(b)

Index points

(1977 March quarter = 100)

110

MJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJ

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981.

1982

(a) Upward (downward) movements represent appreciation (depreciation) of the SA against other currencies.

(b) Rates calculated as monthly averages.

At end-June 1982 the TWI, which is an overall indicator of the average value of the Australian dollar relative to the currencies of Australia's trading partners, stood at 88.2, 5.1 per cent below the end-June 1981 figure. Early in 1981-82 the upward movement in the TWI which had commenced in early 1979 came to an end, at a peak of 94.7 in early August. The index generally declined through the remainder of 1981-82, levelling out late in the year, so that by 30 June 1982 it was 6.9 per cent below the August 1981 peak. The general decline in the index took place against the background of a widening current account deficit and, for much of the year, an overall balance of payments deficit.

118 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Bilateral exchange rates between the Australian dollar and other currencies, some of which are shown in Table 14, depend on both the setting of the TWI and the performance of the other currencies on foreign exchange markets overseas. 1981-82 saw a further marked strengthening of the $US against other major currencies, influenced' mainly by continuing high US interest rates. This reinforced the effects of the decline in the TWI to produce a depreciation of the $A against the $US of almost 10 per cent between June 1981 and June 1982. Movements of the $A against the other major currencies were generally smaller over this period, though there was also a sizeable depreciation against the Deutschemark.
International Economic Conditions
Activity remained weak in all major industrialised countries during 1981-82 with real GNP estimated to have increased by only -!- per cent in the OECD area as a whole. Moreover, activity slackened during the course of the year; in the first half of 1981-82 OECD real GNP increased at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of t per cent, but in the second half year it contracted at a rate of t per cent. Amongst the major OECD countries, the growth of the Japanese economy slowed in 1981-82 and the United States remained in recession for most of the year. Economic activity in West Germany and the United Kingdom remained depressed while the Canadian economy contracted quite markedly. In France real GNP declined in the March quarter 1982 after rising modestly in the second half of 1981. Domestic demand in the OECD area was even more subdued, with no growth evident for the year as a whole.
The weakening in activity has been accompanied by a slowing in international trade. In 1981 the value of world trade declined by 1 per cent, the first year-on-year decline since 1958. The volume of world trade remained constant in 1981, reflecting a decline in the volume of oil traded on world markets; excluding crude petroleum, the volume of world trade grew by 2t per cent compared with 4-!- per cent growth in 1980.
Subdued economic activity and world trade volumes have affected commodity prices. The IMF estimates that the market prices of non-oil primary commodities fell by nearly 15 per cent in 1981; a further decline of 5t per cent has been forecast for 1982. The average price of internationally traded crude oil pea~ed in the first quarter of 1981 at around $US36 per barrel and at end-June 1982 was just under $US33 per barrel.
Throughout the year most industrial countries have continued to seek reductions in their rates of inflation through policies of economic restraint. However, in many of these countries considerable weight has continued to be placed on monetary policy. Budget deficits in nearly all countries remain swollen both absolutely and relative to GDP. Concerns about the size and consequences of prospective increases in the US Federal deficit in particular have been an important factor holding interest rates at high levels despite weakening activity and declining inflation in the US. (Even on the official estimate, the Federal deficit for fiscal 1983 would be about 3.4 per cent of GNP.) As a result, real interest rates have risen to historically high levels in the United States and in many other countries. As indicated in Table 15, nominal interest rates differ markedly between countries, lower rates generally being recorded in countries where inflation has been more successfully combated.
Maintenance of relatively restraining economic policies and a weakening in economic activity and commodity prices have resulted in a marked slowing in inflation in the OECD area (see Chart 15). As measured by private consumption deflators, inflation in the OECD area is estimated to have been running at an annual rate of around 8 per cent

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 119

Table 15: International Comparisons ofInterest Rates and Inflation at end-1981

Inflation rates (a) (percent)

Long term government bond yields( b)
(percent)

Prime lending
rate (per cent)

Japan West Germany United States Australia United Kingdom Canada France

2.6

7.9

6.0

5.6

9.7

14.0

8.9

12.9

15.75

10.1

15.0

(c)15.75

11.3

16.0

15.5

11.4

15.3

16.5

14.0

16.4

16.85

(a) Changes in implicit price deflators for GNP or GDP in the six months to December 1981 compared with the previous six months expressed as annual rates. Because of the unavailability of a GDP deflator for the United Kingdom, the implicit price deflator for private consumption expenditure has been used.
(b) Long term government bond yields at end-December 1981, as follows: Japan-Central Government bonds; West Germany-Public sector bonds, 7-15 years; United States-Government bonds and notes, 10 years and over; AustraliaTreasury bonds, 10 years; United KingdomGovernment bonds, 10 years; Canada - Federal Government bonds, 10 years and over; France-Public and semi-public sector bonds.
(c) Estimated base lending interest rate charged by major trading banks on overdrafts $A 100000 or over.

in the first half of 1982 compared with 9t per cent in the second half of 1981 and a recent peak of 12 per cent in the first half of 1980. Consumer price data indicate that in the recent June quarter inflation was running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of around 5 per cent in both the US and West Germany. In Japan, consumer prices
declined at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of around t per cent in the June quarter.
By comparison, the consumer price index in Australia increased at an annual rate of 10.4 per cent in the six months to the June quarter 1982 and at an annual rate of 10.0 per cent in the June quarter.
The fall in inflation overseas has both resulted in and been significantly assisted by moderation in wage increases in the countries concerned. In the OECD area as a whole total compensation per employee rose by around 11 per cent in 1981. However, in the major three industrialised countries wage increases in 1981 were appreciably lower: in the United States total compensation per employee rose by around 9-1per cent; in Japan by 7 per cent; and in West Germany by less than 6 per cent. There have been signs of further slowing in wages growth in these countries in 1982. In the United States, compensation per civilian non-farm worker increased at an annual rate of around 7 per cent in early 1982, while in West Germany the 1982 wages round has been completed and most settlements were for increases of less than 4t per cent. The OECD expects that growth in hourly manufacturing earnings in the OECD area will decline to around 8t per cent in 1982 compared with 10.1 per cent in 1981.
The past year has seen a significant strengthening in the combined current account of the balance of payments of the major industrial countries, although current account deficits in a number of smaller industrialised countries remain large. The OECD estimates that the current account deficit for the OECD area was running at an annual rate of only $US 11 billion in the first half of 1982 compared with the peak of $US71 billion in 1980. This improvement in the current account position of the industrial countries

120 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Chart 15 - International Comparisons ofInflation Rates (percentage change on same period of previous year)
percent 14

- - - OECD Average CPI (a)

- ---- Major Trading Partners CPI (b)

//----

/

\

/

\

I

\

I

\

/ 12

I

\ \

I

\ / .......

---.-.-. Australia CPI (c) .............. Australia CPI excluding hospital and
medical services (c)

V ._---j--_._._._j

\"
v /\\ \ \ ",

r--------.

.I

iI

,--------...,;---------

!_._---_.-

\

.__........ r-------------j

j

\\

10

:.............!

............"' ..

l~~:.~i-----h;;;j;~~-J

.................................

,----.., ,--

\

8

,\
\ ,,.

\

\

.\
'. ........

................. /

6

M

J

1980

S

D

M

J

1981

S

D

M

J

1982

(a) A weighted average of indexes for the twenty four OECD countries based on consumption levels and exchange rates in 1980.
(b) Australia's eight major OECD trading partners comprise the United States, Japan, West Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, Canada and New Zealand and were weighted by current import and export weights.
(c) Up to and including the June quarter 1981 based on the six State capitals index and on the eight capital cities index thereafter.

has been reflected in a sizeable decline in the combined OPEC surplus. OPEC imports have continued to grow but exports have declined sharply in the face of a sizeable decline in oil consumption in the industrial countries and the associated weakening of oil prices. The combined current account deficit of the non-oil producing developing countries remains large.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 121

PART II-POLICY ISSUES
Background
The marked turnaround in the Australian economy in 1981-82 and the associated increase in unemployment have been taking place against the background of a range of external influences which have worked in conjunction with domestic factors to depress activity, particularly in some industries. Of those domestic factors, the most important have been excessive increases in labour costs, along with the loss of international competitiveness and the severe squeeze on profits and business cash flow which those increases generated; these, in turn, have fed into uncertainties in general and pressure on financial markets (and interest rates) in particular. For the period immediately ahead, the prolonged recession abroad together with continuing low profitability and a high rate of inflation at home will constrain economic policy options and impose severe limits on the pace of domestic economic recovery. This Part reviews the main elements of those problems and their bearing on policy.

External Constraints
During 1979-80 and 1980-81 Australia's economic growth was generally stronger, and our inflation rate generally lower, than for most other industrialised economies. The basis for that had been laid in preceding years when Australia had implemented, earlier than most other industrialised countries, relatively restrictive domestic economic policies in response to the build up of inflationary pressures in the 1970s. The general application of those policies over a run of years resulted in a continued recovery in business profitability and general business and consumer confidence and thereby helped to re-establish an environment more conducive to private sector spending including, most importantly, business investment. In addition, the sharp increase in oil prices in 1979 and 1980-and associated oil supply uncertainties-encouraged the development of alternative energy sources and contributed directly to a surge of investment in export-oriented natural resource projects in areas where Australia had a comparative advantage. The developments in international oil prices thus tended to provide an initial inducement to investment in Australia in contrast to their immediate deflationary impact in much of the rest of the world.
Without the hard-won recovery of business confidence over the previous few years that would not, of course, have led to much in the way of new investment decisions; as it was, it contributed significantly.
Despite the continued weakness in the international economy, economic activity expanded vigorously in Australia in 1980-81, led by a remarkable strengthening of business investment and firmer private consumption expenditure. Strong growth in imports, together with some diversion of non-farm exportables to satisfy domestic demand, helped to provide the real resources required for the investment surge. The resultant current account deficit in the balance of payments was more than financed by private capital inflow, facilitated by a perception abroad that the Australian economy offered sound long-term investment opportunities.
During 1981-82, however, influences from abroad, including the prolonged malaise in the international economy, the weakening in the international oil market and continued high interest rates in a number of major overseas countries, all worked to restrain domestic activity on a broad front.

122 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

The sluggishness in international economic activity has been more severe and has been sustained over a longer period than was generally expected a year ago-even though, at that time, the assumptions underlying the 1981-82 Budget forecasts were themselves more pessimistic in this regard than those being made then by the major international economic institutions (the IMF and the OECD). On the positive side, the international economy is benefiting from falling price and wage inflation; this in itself is welcome and an encouraging sign that a sound basis for a sustained strengthening in world economic activity can, over time, be established. For the present, however, most of the major economies are enduring minimal growth, reflecting the obduracy of the domestic imbalances impeding their recovery, particularly large budget deficits (with the uncertainties they have generated and their influence on interest rates) and reduced profitability of their business sectors.
The resultant recession in international trade has had obvious adverse effects upon the Australian economy. The demand for our exports has been subdued and export prices have been depressed, particularly for metals and some rural products. The stagnation of world trade and the sharp reduction in inflation rates abroad has resulted in keener competition facing many Australian producers in import-competing and export industries.
The conjunction of these international events with the adverse domestic developments already described has greatly compounded the effects of the latter. Industry in Australia has had to absorb the impact of the international recession at a time when domestic cost levels, particularly wage costs, have been rising rapidly. In addition, the world recession and significant gains in energy conservation in major overseas economies have reduced the demand for both oil and oil substitutes. As a result, and particularly against the background of major increases in domestic costs (eg, a total cost increase averaging over $100 per week per employee in the New South Wales and Queensland coalfields in late 1981) and increased levels of industrial disputation leading to falling productivity levels, some of the more marginal resource investment proposals have been abandoned and others rescheduled or deferred indefinitely.
Of course, the fact that many of these projects were initiated, or allowed to proceed, in a period of weak world activity reflected the long lead times involved and expectations at the time of an early strengthening in international economic activity. The more marginal projects, particularly, were vulnerable to a prolonged delay in world economic recovery (and, of course, to cost increases). Moreover, as many of the projects were competing they could not all have been expected to proceed together, notwithstanding the compilation of various large 'lists' of projects suggesting the contrary.
In short, a sense of perspective is needed in assessing these developments. Just as the succession of announcements of various development proposals in 1980 and the first half of 1981 may have built up exaggerated perceptions about the likely size of the resource investment surge, so the subsequent deferral or cancellation of some of them may have engendered exaggerated impressions of the magnitude of the downturn, at least in the short-term. In fact, recent surveys suggest that business fixed investment in major projects could continue in 1982-83 at a level which, as a proportion of GDP, would still be high by the standards of the post-war period. However, while the 'pipeline' effect of projects already underway will help to maintain investment spending in 1982-83, the seriousness for the medium term prospect of the recent change in the climate for new investment decision-making should not be underestimated. Moreover,

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 123

even the investment intention surveys as they stand at present will (as with past surveys) depend for their validation on no further significant deterioration, at least, in labour and financial costs.

While there remains considerable uncertainty about the likely timing and course of

economic activity overseas, the longer term outlook for the demand for energy and re-

lated minerals, and other natural resources with which Australia is relatively well

endowed, remains promising. Despite the recent softening of energy markets, major

consuming nations are likely to continue to seek to avoid undue dependence on

imported oil, particularly from OPEC sources, for their energy supplies. How far

Australia can take advantage of any strengthening in demand overseas will depend

largely on the appropriateness of domestic economic policies and on their success in re-

establishing an attractive economic environment for business decision-makers, includ-

ing foreign investors.

.

Interest Rates
During 1981-82 interest rates in several major overseas countries remained high, and in some indeed increased in 'real' terms (as inflation fell). This reflected, inter alia, a persistence of inflationary expectations flowing from doubts held in financial markets and elsewhere about future economic policies and prospects in the countries concerned. Large budget deficits hang like a cloud over markets, particularly in the United States, where questioning of some of the official budgetary figuring over the past 18 months or so has itself become a source of uncertainty and associated scepticism in financial markets. In all cases, these deficits exert a direct influence on interest rates in adding to competition for available funds within the ambit of any given rate of growth of the monetary aggregates.
The relationship between overseas and Australian interest rates is not a precise one but it is nonetheless pervasive. The relationship depends on a range of factors including, in particular, relative inflation and exchange rate expectations here and abroad. Nevertheless, although Australian capital markets remain insulated, to some extent, by restrictions on capital flows, the degree of integration of world financial markets has increased markedly over the past decade and ultimately there is little Australia, as a small relatively open economy, can do to insulate domestic interest rates from developments overseas other than by establishing (as, for example, countries such as Germany, Switzerland and Japan have done) a distinctly better price performance.
In 1980-81 the immediate impact in Australia of the sharp increase in overseas interest rates was offset by relatively favourable perceptions of the outlook for Australian inflation and the Australian dollar. As we moved into 1981-82 and the year progressed, those perceptions tended to change as the current account deficit increased and, at the same time, the strengthening domestic demand for funds combined with heightened inflationary expectations to push domestic interest rates sharply higher. Higher interest rates contributed to the slowing in business fixed investment, while the diversion of funds from savings banks and building societies, where lending and hence deposit rates were constrained, contributed to the decline in lending for housing and so in dwelling construction. More generally, the high cost of finance aggravated the already serious profits squeeze and spurred employers to re-examine the calls upon their cash outgoes; as a result, many of them moved, more quickly than in the past, to

124 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1 J

adjust employment in response to the deterioration in their labour costs and falls in demand for their output.
The timing and size of any sustained reduction in interest rates in major countries overseas will depend on a further slowing in inflation and inflationary expectations in those countries and on the degree of success they achieve in correcting their policy imbalances and reducing the size of their budget deficits. For Australia to take full advantage from any such developments, it will be important that we also achieve a substantial lowering of domestic inflationary pressures and inflationary expectations.
Relative Inflation Rates and International Competitiveness
Firmer economic (mainly monetary) policies and the continued weakness in economic activity have brought about c marked slowing in rates of increase of wages and prices overseas. At the same time Australian labour costs (including the costs, in some areas, of reductions in standard weekly hours) have increased sharply. Thus, even with the depreciation of the exchange rate during the course of 1981-82, the international competitiveness of Australian industry was eroded, with adverse consequences for domestic activity and for the current account of the balance of payments. A point to note, in that regard, is that when excessive wage demands result in a shift of factor income shares away from profits and towards labour, the fundamental imbalances thereby created within the economy cannot be rectified by a shift in the external parameters of policy unless that shift is accompanied by supporting measures of domestic policy designed to prevent the adverse shift of factor income shares from being re-established.
It is against that background that the slowing in inflation overseas has added to the urgency of achieving an early winding back of domestic inflationary pressures. It has, in effect, made the external environment less permissive to what, in any case, are the strongly adverse consequences of domestic inflation.
Domestic Labour Costs
Sharp increases in wages and other labour costs played a major role in the downturn in activity in 1981-82. At the same time, they provided an increased momentum to domestic inflation and inflationary expectations. Although the exchange rate depreciated after August 1981, this followed a period of strong appreciation and, after taking account of lags, the net influence of the external sector on price developments in 1981-82 as a whole was a restraining one. Indeed, while some sectors of the domestic economy experienced strong demand in the first part of the year, a ready flow of imports tended to reduce any upward pressure on prices in these sectors. Overall, labour costs increased much faster than output prices and increases in real labour costs were noticeably in excess of increases in labour productivity.
The continue'd rapid growth in domestic labour costs was bound to produce some falling off in economic activity sooner or later. But coming as it did at a time when inflation overseas was slowing, it sharply reduced the competitiveness of Australian industry against imports and in export markets. As the year progressed, the slowing in output of the traded goods industries (and hence in demand for associated inputs of goods and services) contributed to a more general easing in domestic demand which limited the ability of firms in areas more sheltered from international competition to pass on increases in their labour costs in output prices. Squeezed between a sharp rise in

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 125

labour costs and constraints upon their ability to raise prices, firms' profits fell sharply and they were increasingly forced to cut production, economise on inventories, close marginal plant and prune their labour forces.
In addition to these direct adverse effects in reducing profitability, activity and employment, the acceleration in labour costs appears to have exerted a substantial downward influence on the development of investment plans during the year. The reason is not hard to see; rising labour costs not only had a direct effect on assessments of competitiveness and profitability, but also generated increased inflationary expectations and, by reviving memories of 1974-75, created damaging uncertainty about future cost and price behaviour and the outlook for the economy more generally. The recent increases in labour costs were not as great as occurred in 1974-75; however, the impact on employment of the associated loss of competitiveness and reduced profitability was exacerbated by the fact that these developments occurred in a situation where profits had not fully recovered from the earlier squeeze, where real interest costs were much higher and where the lessons learned from the earlier experience worked to encourage faster adjustment responses.
The acceleration in labour costs in 1981-82 did not appear out of the blue. On the contrary, it had been building up for some time. It is pertinent to recall the warning in Statement No.2 to the 1980-81 Budget Speech that:
'The greatest danger for 1980-81 is, indeed, that the acceleration in wages now in progress will generate a new momentum in domestic wage and price inflation that would undermine the prospective strong growth in activity. Any acceleration in inflation coming at a time when overseas inflation is decelerating would weaken our international competitive position and, in due course, depress the rate of growth of domestic economic activity. Wage increases below those being projected would, of course, enable a more rapid deceleration in the rate of inflation to the benefit of the whole community. What is required is a continued policy thrust designed to restore a downward trend to the rate of inflation and, by so doing, consolidate and build upon the hard won progress made over the past several years in restoring the productive capacity of the economy.'
Twelve months later, the continuing validity of those comments was recognised in framing the 1981-82 Budget and in formulating the associated monetary policy settings. With hindsight it is clear that the forecasts of economic growth made at this time last year gave insufficient weight (notwithstanding the persuasive evidence of the 1970s) to the deleterious effects, even within 1981-82, of a sharp acceleration in labour costs on international competitiveness (and hence on import penetration), domestic activity levels and prospects for employment and hence unemployment.
Contributing to the acceleration in labour costs in 1980-81 referred to in the quotation above, and continuing into 1981-82, was an apparent development of exaggerated expectations about the increases in national income that would be generated by the resource investment 'boom' and, perhaps even more importantly, the speed with which this additional income would accrue. As a result, wage claims were formulated in anticipation of benefits which had not, in fact, yet begun to flow. The development of these attitudes and expectations was supported by the rising levels of economic activity through 1979, 1980 and 1981, with shortages of skilled labour emerging in some areas.

126 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Some large public sector wage settlements further impeded the development ot any atmosphere of restraint. Wage claims and settlements thus developed a momentum of their own which, for a time and within the artificial framework of the arbitration system, was maintained notwithstanding growing evidence of the deterioration of the economic environment.
The pressures which had developed for wage increases, particularly in sectors characterised by high demand for labour and strong union bargaining power, could not be accommodated within the framework of centralised wage determination based on wage indexation. After the abandonment of that framework in July 1981, the working out of these pressures occurred largely through direct bargaining on a more decentralised industry and award basis. The development of such decentralised wage bargaining arrangements is still embryonic and it is probable that some of the wage pressure evident in 1981-82 was due to the transitional or hybrid nature of the arrangements then applying. In effect, we have been experiencing some of the costs usually associated with any 'learning curve'. But even the modest degree ofliberation of wage setting from the shackles of the arbitral tribunals that has so far occurred appears to have moderated the speed of flow of wage increases and to have encouraged a greater sense of responsibility in industrial relations~as reflected, in a limited way, in the development of undertakings to make no further claims during the life of an agreement.
It would be consistent with experience in several major countries overseas, under a variety of wage determination systems, if, beyond a point, the weakening in activity brought greater restraint in wage claims. However, that alone would not be enough; it is more likely merely to be a recipe for stagflation. The experience of the last ten years both at home and abroad points to the central role~if sustainable growth is to be secured~of economic policies that consistently bear down on inflationary expectations.
Over the longer term (and subject to appropriate policy settings), the change to more decentralised wage determination arrangements should work to make wage levels more responsive to economic conditions and capacity to pay at the industry level~and should thus promote higher employment and lower unemployment. Whereas the centralised wage indexation system tended to maintain real wage levels (for those still fortunate enough to be in jobs) in the face of weak activity and high levels of unemployment, the industry bargaining approach should allow greater scope for wage settlements to respond to the need to restore industry profitability and, hence, maintain employment levels. Particularly to the extent that this were to happen in key areas such as the metals industry, it would facilitate a more rapid slowing in inflation and a speedier recovery in activity and employment. The extent of the increased flexibility in the wage system remains, however, to be seen.
Of course, even wage bargaining on an industry basis will not necessarily lead to outcomes which are appropriate to every firm within that industry. The bargaining in the metal trades industry in late 1981, for example, was seen at the time as representing a considerable advance~by way of greater decentralisation~upon the processes of preceding years. With the benefit of hindsight such a bargaining process can be seen to be still far too 'centralised' (in this case, in the metal trades area as a whole) to be able to take appropriate account of the interests of all the units involved. This has been amply demonstrated as firm after firm within that sector has either gone out of business or found itself forced to reduce sharply the scale of its activities. Those elements of the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 127

industry have found it impossible to live with the results of the bargains struck on their behalf by negotiators operating within that particular 'centralised' bargaining framework. Similarly, on the side of labour, the previous employees of those firms now owe their loss of jobs to those who negotiated on their behalf those wage rates and conditions which their former employers found impossible to meet.
An alternative approach would be to seek to re-establish a centralised wage determination system with the object of bearing down directly on wage levels through regulation. One obvious problem is that just referred to-namely, the appropriateness of imposing a 'national' wage agreement upon industries and firms in widely different economic circumstances. That aside, however, the experience of recent years both in Australia and abroad indicates the enormous difficulties involved in seeking to obtain a non-inflationary agreement at the national level that will be adhered to by all the diverse parties involved. The Government cannot itself control wages and the collapse of two centralised systems of wage regulation over the past decade demonstrates the extreme difficulty of achieving restraint by voluntary consensus alone. Overseas experience suggests that those difficulties are greatly increased if policy settings are put at inadequately supportive levels on the grounds that the centralised wage regulation process itself diminishes the need to do more (that being, of course, the usual rationale-or rationalisation-for various forms of prices and incomes policies).
While trade unions were originally established to serve social purposes, their ability within a highly industrialised economy to negotiate wage rates across whole sectors of industry and to seek to have them adopted as legally enforceable minima poses basic difficulties for the efficient functioning of labour markets and hence for the restoration of price stability and full employment. It requires a good deal of intelligent understanding and self-restraint if these powers are not to be abused, but rather directed towards serving the longer term interests of both those of their members who are in work and those other members of the work-force (and potential work-force) who are unemployed and who will be condemned to remain so at the 'non-market clearing' wage rates which trade union negotiators have 'succeeded' in forcing upon employers. A more decentralised approach to wage determination, which worked to reduce rigidities in the wage system by bringing the focus of responsibility for bargaining outcomes closer to the work-face and to the fortunes of the individual firm involved and its employees, should assist in this regard. This would be the more so to the extent that it encouraged both sides of the bargaining table, management and employees alike, to take into account the inescapable economic interrelationships between wage levels, price competitiveness, profitability and employment-not in abstract terms, but in direct relation to the immediate problems and circumstances facing their particular firm and hence their own interdependent livelihoods.

Other Considerations
The preceding passages have discussed the main problems which confronted the Australian economy in 1981-82 and which seem certain to remain at centre stage in the current financial year. While those problems are diverse, one common thread is evident in the response to each-namely, the importance of the 'natural' economic forces inherent in Western market-oriented economies and their role in determining the consequences of recurring 'shocks' and distortions in the economy.

128 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

A clear instance can be found in international energy developments. Contrary to the prophecies of the doomsayers of the early 1970s, the world economy is not faced with an irretrievable energy shortage. While, because of the inherently long 'lags' involved in such a case, it has taken the best part of a decade for the outcome to emerge, supply and demand responses have averted such a 'shortage' and, in the process, have greatly weakened (and are now bidding fair to dismember) the cartel which, in part, contributed to the energy crisis mentality. This is not, of course, to say either that the process of adjustment has been smooth or easy or that market imbalances will not arise in the future.
Similarly, but in a much shorter time span, we have witnessed during 1981-82 the natural response within the Australian economy to the development of excessive wage and other associated cost increases imposed by cartel power in the market for labour. That response has involved chiefly the reassessment by employers of their labour force requirements (and future investment plans) and the resultant increase in unemployment. In turn, that reaction has set in train a reassessment of the potential for further wage increases which, in time, will lead to some slowing in the pace of wages growth.
Again, in capital markets, we have seen the effects upon interest rates of, inter alia, growing borrowing requirements of both the public and private sectors; and we have seen the inevitable effects of those higher interest rates on savings flows and on the lowering of spending plans, at least in the private sector. Those reactions will, in due course, ease to some extent the pressure on capital markets and hence on interest rates, though at the cost of substantially reduced private investment.
In each of these cases, the question arises whether these 'natural' responses are the best that industrialised economies-and societies-can offer. It is clear that such societies have come to expect that government policies should offer some advance upon the necessarily blunt responses that the natural forces of the present-day capitalist economy, labouring as it does under a mass of regulatory and other constraints, will impart. There is now little doubt that expectations of what government policies could achieve were unduly raised in the 1950s and 1960s, particularly in regard to the potential of macroeconomic stabilisation policies generally associated (in some cases unfairly) with so-called Keynesian doctrines. There is equally little doubt-and it is of no small importthat such unrealistic expectations contributed to the problems of the 1970s.
While recognising the practical limitations on what governments can do, the framework of economic policies that they establish is clearly of fundamental importance for economic developments. Of course, countries have to live, as best they can, with the problems which flood to their shores from abroad. But policies do have the capacity to influence the course of events at home and even to offset adverse developments abroad in some degree if they are more effective than those obtaining in a country's major trading partners.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 129

PART III-THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
Background
The international economic environment is unlikely to be helpful to Australia's economic performance in 1982-83. The major international economic organisations which monitor the world economy (the IMF and the OECD) are forecasting some modest improvement in world economic activity over the course of the year but recent experience would caution against placing much store in such forecasts. In particular, the situation in the United States, which is of central importance to world economic conditions, remains fragile.
The acceleration in domestic labour costs over the last couple of years (particularly in 1981-82), and the resultant shift in factor shares which has involved a marked fall in profits, now hang heavily over the economic outlook. That and the further development of labour costs and prices will be critical determinants of Australia's economic performance in 1982-83.
Against that external and domestic background, it is particularly difficult at this time to forecast the Australian economic outlook with any certainty. Much will depend upon reactions-both here and abroad-to the changing economic scene and expectations will, as always, playa dominant role in key areas of private sector decision making. What those reactions and expectations will be is extremely difficult to gauge but, at the very least, uncertainty and risk premiums seem likely to remain high. In such circumstances, the range of possible outcomes for the economy as a whole is unusually wide. The forecasts contained in this Statement should therefore be considered as no more than one possible outcome on the basis of current knowledge and the assumptions set out in the following paragraphs.
Forecasting Framework
For forecasting purposes it is necessary to make a number of assumptions including those relating to the thrust and effect of the Government's macroeconomic policy. As far as fiscal policy is concerned, the 1982-83 Commonwealth Budget parameters can be summarised as follows (1981-82 outcomes are shown in brackets):
- an overall Budget deficit currently estimated at $1674m ($547m) and an estimated domestic surplus of$230m ($911m);
- an estimated increase in total outlays of 13.9 per cent (13.9 per cent); of which cash benefits are estimated to increase by 15.8 per cent (16.6 per cent) and direct expenditure on goods and services by 12.5 per cent (16.6 per cent);
- an estimated real increase in total outlays of 2.6 per cent (2.1 per cent), and after adjustment for the additional payday (for public service salaries and some pensions) in 1981-82, an estimated increase in real terms of 3.6 per cent in 1982-83 (1.1 per cent);
- an estimated increase in total receipts of 11.3 per cent (15.9 per cent) with slower growth in collections of personal income tax, stronger growth in indirect taxes and an easing in company tax receipts.
Apart from the Budget parameters, the other main assumptions underlying the following assessment of the outlook for 1982-83 are that:
- domestic and external policy will be conducted so as to ensure growth in financial aggregates consistent with an increase in M3 in the announced range;

130 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

- prospects for world economic activity and trade will remain subdued; growth in the OECD area as a whole in 1982-83 is not likely to be much above that in 1981-82 of around t per cent;
- world inflation will decelerate further, with the private consumption deflator for the major seven OECD economies slowing to around 6t per cent in 1982-83 compared with a rise of around 8t per cent in 1981-82; and
- worsening seasonal conditions in the eastern States and a reduced wheat crop will contribute to a decline in farm product in 1982-83; current wheat crop estimates would imply a real decline of around 7t per cent in farm product even if other farm production remained broadly unchanged at 1981-82 levels.
It should be appreciated that forecasts must necessarily be based on the available statistical data, which can be subject to substantial revision and then be seen to have provided an erroneous basis for the forecasts. Moreover, assessing the outlook for the economy is not simply a process of translating those things which can be quantifiedsuch as the assumptions listed above-into an economic forecast. Perhaps more importantly, it involves the application of judgment to those many things which cannot be quantified; among the latter, expectations warrant particular mention in the circumstances of 1982-83.
Accordingly, the focus of attention should be on the broad thrust of the following assessment rather than on particular forecasts for individual items.

General Outlook
In the absence of a marked slowing in wages growth and an unexpected improvement in the prospects for world trade, the general outlook is now for little if any growth in activity and employment in 1982-83, and only a slight easing in inflation as measured by the non-farm product deflator, although inflation may decline somewhat during the course of the year.
As to the outlook for wages growth, the Budget estimates and the following assessment assume that average weekly earnings increase by around 12 per cent in 1982-83 compared with a rise of around 14 per cent in 1981-82 (the available wage indicators lie within a range around that latter estimate). A much lower increase would be highly desirable-and, depending on the response of wage bargaining to the changed economic conditions and prospects, may eventuate-but there is little clear evidence at present of how trends may develop. Given the constraints on price increases, such a wage outcome would imply continued low levels of profitability through the course of 1982-83 and, on this assumption, the outlook for economic activity in 1982-83 cannot be other than subdued.
Stated briefly the outlook is for:
- a marked slowing in final domestic demand, mostly concentrated in the private sector;
- notwithstanding the pressures towards some involuntary stock-building which would flow from that slowdown in final demand, a run-down of non-farm stocks;
- some modest recovery in the volume of exports; - little change in the volume of imports following two years of very strong growth;
- no growth in real non-farm output and, given the assumed real wage outlook, no growth in employment and hence increasing unemployment;

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 131

- little change in the inflation rate; - a continuing squeeze on business profits; and - a current account deficit on the balance of payments broadly similar to that in
1981-82.
Some of the main components of this summary are elaborated upon in the following sections.
Expenditures
Growth in real private consumption expenditure could slow to around 1t per cent in 1982-83 following an estimated increase of 3.6 per cent in 1981-82. The projected slowing mainly reflects the likelihood that real household disposable income will rise only marginally in 1982-83, following growth of around 3i per cent in 1981-82. This, in turn, reflects the assumed slowing in real wage incomes and a probable real fall in business related and farm incomes. On balance the Budget will provide a direct stimulus to real houshold disposable income. Some of the increased indirect tax increases will add directly to consumer prices but that will be more than outweighed by increased cash benefit payments and a net reduction (after allowance for the tax avoidance and late payment provisions) in personal income tax payments (including that in relation to home mortgage payments). The net effect is to increase real household disposable income, in the short-run, by around i per cent. Non-farm incomes may rise more strongly than total household incomes but the projected rise in consumption would still require some fall in the non-farm saving ratio-the probability of which is open to doubt. As discussed in Part I, there has been a steady increase in the non-farm saving ratio over the past two years, apparently reflecting the delayed response of consumption to the strong rise in real household disposable income over that period. On the one hand, therefore, that delayed response might now be thought likely to bolster consumer spending for a while. On the other hand, increasing unemployment and uncertainty, together with continuing high inflation and real interest rates on consumer debt will tend to dampen consumption. In such a climate, developments in household saving and consumption will depend crucially upon the success of policy through the year in dampening inflationary expectations and restoring consumer confidence.
Real private dwelling investment is forecast to decline again in 1982-83 after an estimated fall of 3 per cent in 1981-82. Recent indicators have pointed to a sharp contraction in dwelling investment activity and an improvement will depend importantly on the prospects for enhanced deposit flows into the major institutions providing finance for housing.
Real private business fixed investment-I) is projected to show some decline in 1982-83 following several years of record real rates of growth. Some abatement from the very strong growth in resource-based investment would have followed in any case from the continued sluggishness in the world economy, the weakening of real energy prices and continuing high domestic and overseas interest rates. Even so, the available indicators suggest that investment in mining will continue to rise in 1982-83 notwithstanding the preceding several years of remarkable growth.

(I) The discussion of the outlook for business fixed investment and public authority investment abstracts from the effects of the sale to the private sector of portions of the Eraring power station. As a result of these transactions the national accounts will overstate the underlying growth in business investment in 1981-82 and understate it in 1982-83.

132 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

The downward revision to resource-based investment plans has been more marked in the basic metals group. Both in that area and more generally, the slowdown in business investment appears to have been sharply exacerbated by the recent rapid increase in domestic labour costs. Certainly the most recent ABS investment expectations data for 1982-83-dating from April/May 1982-indicate that the outlook is weakest for those industries which have recently granted large wage increases, including basic metal products, transport and textiles.
Nevertheless, these investment expectations data continue to suggest a surprisingly strong outlook for business investment given the significant deterioration in the tone of the economy over the preceding half year. A realisation of those expectations in line with average past experience would provide growth in aggregate business fixed investment in 1982-83 of around 15 per cent in current prices. It is likely, however, that expectations in April/May had still to reflect fully the impact of the changed economic situation on business confidence and investment intentions; moreover, there appears to have been a further deterioration in the domestic economic outlook since then, particularly as regards the prospects for improving profitability, and the policy environment has also changed in several respects. These expectations data have therefore been discounted substantially.
On their face, however, the expectations data point to a much stronger outlook for building and construction investment than for plant and equipment investment, reflecting the continued relative strength in expenditures for mining as well as the longer lead times typically involved in implementing investment decisions of a building and construction nature. Even after the discounting referred to above, therefore, there could be continued real growth in building and construction investment in 1982-83, although that is likely to be more than offset by a real decline in plant and equipment investment (much the larger component of aggregate capital expenditure). That assessment is particularly subject to the general comment made at the outset regarding the uncertainty of private sector reactions to the policy changes now occurring.
Abstracting from the sale of portions of the Eraring power station, growth in real public expenditure on a national accounts basis in 1982-83 is likely to exceed the 1t per cent recorded in 1981-82.
Although Commonwealth current expenditure is budgeted to rise in real terms in 1982-83, it could show little change on a national accounts basis which records defence expenditure at the time of delivery rather than when payment is made. Even so, when allowance is also made for the variation in the number of paydays between financial
years, the real underlying growth in 1982-83 on a deliveries basis is of the order of 1t per
cent compared with no growth in 1981-82. Commonwealth government capital expenditure is likely to increase more strongly in 1982-83 than in recent years.
State and local government expenditures on goods and services could also grow more rapidly than in 1981-82. Commonwealth payments to the States will rise by 13.9 per cent in 1982-83 compared with 8.7 per cent in 1981-82. As well, the approved Loan Council borrowing programs and the added borrowing freedom afforded to some large authorities in 1982-83 seem likely to support continued real growth in current and capital expenditures.
The preceding forecasts for consumption and investment expenditures imply a marked slowing in the growth of final domestic demand in 1982-83, with most of that

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 133

slowing concentrated in the private sector. In turn, that pattern is likely to lead to a re-appraisal of non-farm stock requirements; the continuing high level of interest rates and depressed profitability will provide added pressures to cut back on stocks. As a result, there could be some decumulation of non-farm stocks in 1982-83, the extent (and timing) of that depending in part on what level of unintended stock accumulation has arisen with the fall-off in demand over the past half-year and any continuation of such accumulation into 1982-83.
There could be some unwinding in 1982-83 of the net accumulation of farm and miscellaneous stocks which occurred in 1981-82, reflecting shipping lags following t.he sharp recovery in farm product.
Balance of Payments
In broad terms, the outlook for exports of goods and services will depend on the prospects for world trade and on the competitiveness of Australian producers. Non-rural exports should benefit from the recent improvement in coal loading capacity and efficiency in New South Wales, while rural exports are likely to be boosted by delayed shipment of grain stocks from the 1981 harvest and, in aggregate, may show some increase. Non-rural export prices could increase faster than in 1981-82 as a result of recently renegotiated iron ore and coal prices; rural export prices, however, may remain depressed.
Imports of goods and services may have run ahead of effective demand in the second half of 1981-82 and could show some decline on that account in the first half of 1982-83. The slower growth in domestic demand, and especially equipment investment which has a relatively high import content, should also work to slow the growth in imports. However, the strong growth in imports in 1981-82, and their increased market penetration, also reflects a reduction in the competitiveness of domestic producers. The 9 per cent depreciation of the trade weighted index of the exchange rate for the $A over the year to early-August 1982 has worked to bolster the competitiveness of domestic producers but (given the concurrent domestic labour cost developments) not by so much as to suggest a marked shift in the level of import penetration in the year ahead.
As always, the likely balance on current account is surrounded by considerable uncertainty but the outlook for exports and imports of goods and services and a likely increase in the net invisibles deficit, including strong growth in interest payments abroad, would suggest a current account deficit in 1982-83 broadly similar to that in 1981-82. Domestic monetary policy settings will need to be such as to ensure that, together with any net borrowing abroad on official account, private capital inflow suffices to cover that deficit on current account. As in other years recently, expectations will playa significant role in that regard.

Monetary Conditions
It might be noted that the formulation of the monetary projection for 1982-83 has been changed to an average year-on-year basis; in previous years the projection has been expressed as the increase between the months of June in successive years. Th? change has been made, first, in recognition of the special factors (mainly arising from the Government's accounts) which can cause erratic and unpredictable results in the month of June each year; and, secondly, because the structural changes occurring in

134 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

financial markets are, of themselves, likely to lead to some variability in individual monetary aggregates, such as M3, in the period ahead. Expressing the aggregate on an average year-on-year basis should help in abstracting from those short-term factors. The change in the form of the projection does not, of itself, signify any change in the Government's commitment to the achievement of restrained monetary growth.
In present circumstances, firm monetary restraint is more than ever critical to restraining inflation and inflationary expectations. The historic decisions taken by the Loan Council in June 1982 have provided the Commonwealth Government with greatly enhanced capacity to conduct its monetary policy. The Commonw~alth is now completely free to set the interest rates on Australian Savings Bonds and, in addition, has authority to operate a tender system which provides the potential for selling sufficient Treasury bonds to fully meet whatever monetary policy objectives are deemed appropriate. These developments should permit monetary policy to play a more effective role, as it now must.
Such interest rate adjustments as may be required to achieve the Government's monetary objectives will depend on a number of factors including developments in financial markets overseas, competing demands for financial resources and domestic inflationary expectations. Although world interest rates have recently been tending to fall, they remain high. Australia's inflation performance now compares unfavourably with that overseas; it follows that domestic interest rates are likely to remain uncomfortably high in the absence of a reduction of pressures for funds upon our financial markets. As far as can be seen, however, there is unlikely to be much relief from the recent high level of competing domestic demands for financial resources, notwithstanding the flat outlook for economic activity. The assumed weakening in business investment in 1982-83 is likely to be matched by a weak profit performance with the consequence that the corporate sector borrowing requirement, expressed as a percentage of GDP, is unlikely to be much reduced from that in 1981-82. Subject to the qualifications noted earlier in discussing the outlook for personal consumption and the household saving ratio, the forecasts imply little change in the net lending position of households in 1982-83 as a proportion of GDP, while the public sector borrowing requirement is likely to rise by about 1 per cent as a proportion of GDP in 1982-83 (abstracting from the Eraring power station transactions). All of which having been said, it is proper to add that, as noted earlier, inflationary expectations could well hold sway over the other factors just discussed.

Gross Domestic Product
The available indicators point to a marked easing in economic activity in the second half of 1981-82, the extent depending on the emphasis placed on the product estimates relative to recorded expenditures and labour market statistics, which together suggest a more pronounced decline. Against that background, the activity outlook for 1982-83 is for weak growth in final domestic demand and, possibly, a small contribution to product growth from the net balance of exports and imports of goods and services. However, a turn to modest net non-farm stock decumulation is likely to detract from product growth and non-farm product is therefore projected to remain broadly unchanged in 1982-83 compared with 2.3 per cent growth in 1981-82. Depending on the extent of the decline in farm production in 1982-83, there could be some decline in overall gross

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 135

domestic product compared with a rise of 3.0 per cent in 1981-82. The key to any significant improvement in that rather sombre outlook is only to be had in a clear indication that wage pressures and inflation are moderating and that the economic environment is conducive to a restoration of a more appropriate balance in factor income shares.

Labour Market
The prospect of stagnant economic activity, together with the currently depressed level of profitability and the uncertain economic outlook further ahead, can all be expected to encourage firms to greater efforts to economise on their labour requirements. It follows that there is unlikely to be any growth in employment in 1982-83.
Under these circumstances the outlook for recorded unemployment will depend importantly on the response in the labour force participation rate; with rising unemployment, potential workers will tend to be discouraged from seeking work and hence may drop out of the work force. The participation rate has already declined somewhat over the course of 1981-82 and a further decline is probable over the course of 1982-83. Even so, it is likely that there will be a marked increase in recorded unemployment this year. Consistent with this assessment, and the assumed effect of Government manpower policies, the Budget estimates allow for the average number of unemployment benefit recipients to rise from an average of 332000 in 1981-82 to an average of 395000 in 1982-83.

Incomes and Prices
As noted previously, wage developments are crucial to the overall economic outlook. The pace at which wage increases proceed will be influenced by the state of the economy and the labour market and by the stance of policy. It is also to be hoped that, aided by the more decentralised system of wage determination now in being, wage and conditions claims and agreements will come to reflect more realistically the capacity of individual industries to pay them. That will be a particularly relevant consideration when the metal trades and several other major agreements come to be renegotiated later in 1982 and early in 1983.
The Budget estimate of PAYE taxation collections assumes a 12 per cent increase in average weekly earnings in 1982-83 following an increase of the order of 14 per cent in 1981-82. Because wages increased throughout 1981-82, the level of average weekly earnings at the start of 1982-83 was already somewhat above its average 1981-82 level. Indeed, around half of the assumed 1982-83 increase in earnings reflects the "full year" impact of wage rises which occurred in 1981-82. It would be totally misleading therefore to assume that the wage increase assumption underlying this set of forecasts is consistent with a general wage rise of 12 per cent for all wage and salary earners in the remainder of 1982-83. The assumption in fact implies a substantial slowing in wages growth when agreements now current come to be renegotiated during the remainder of 1982-83, with future wage increases for most groups then being below-in some cases well below-the historical rate of increase in consumer prices.
The significant weakening in the domestic economy and the associated slower rate of increase in wages should act to restrain inflationary influences in 1982-83, although there will be upward pressures on prices to the extent that firms attempt-and are

136 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

able-to lift profit margins from their currently depressed levels. As well, import and commodity price movements are likely to provide less restraint on domestic price trends than in 1981-82. Indirect tax increases contained in the Budget will increase domestic prices, probably adding directly around 1 per cent to the consumer price index over the course of the year, the precise amount depending on profit margins and the speed with which increases flow through to prices. The inflation forecasts are mixed and depend on the price series adopted. For example, consumer prices, as measured by the private consumption deflator, are forecast to increase by around lOt per cent in 1982-83 following a rise of 9.1 per cent in 1981-82. The consumer price index is also projected to rise by around lOt per cent in 1982-83, a little above the lOA per cent rise recorded in 1981-82.
In general terms, therefore, the forecasts are consistent with some acceleration in expenditure prices but some easing in the rate of increase of domestic production costs. Reflecting this assessment, the non-farm product deflator is forecast to increase by around 11 per cent in 1982-83, compared with 11.6 per cent in 1981-82.
On the basis of these forecasts, real average weekly earnings (deflated by the nonfarm product deflator) will have increased by around 6 per cent over the three years to 1982-83. After allowance for productivity growth, real unit labour costs, on the same basis, will have risen by around 3 per cent. This is reflected in a fall in the profit share (the company gross operating surplus in non-farm product at factor cost) from around 15 per cent in 1980-81 to around 13 per cent forecast in 1982-83; well below the level of around 14 per cent recorded in 1974-75. With such a weak profit outlook it is evident that a fall in price inflation can hardly precede a slowing in the rate of increase in wages.
Overview The assessment presented earlier in this Statement indicates that, in 1981-82, the
Australian economy moved into a period of low growth and high inflation. The factors giving rise to that development persist and the outlook for 1982-83 therefore contains little to suggest improvement.
In the current and prospective international environment the most pressing requirement is a moderation in real income expectations and nominal income claims. If it were to come to pass, such a moderation would work to slow the rate of inflation, improve business confidence and our competitiveness in foreign and domestic markets, and provide the scope, as market conditions improve, to rebuild profit margins and work toward lower interest rates. A re-adjustment of factor shares is required so that it again becomes profitable for business to hire labour and to undertake investment.
In the field of international trade, it has long been accepted by most that beggar-thyneighbour practices benefit no country-they simply reduce the size of the cake to be shared. A greater recognition that the same holds within individual economies would do much to benefit those Australians who, over the past year or so, have been beggared into unemployment by the "successful" wage increases of their neighbours; it would also enhance the longer term prospect for an improvement in the standard of living of all Australians.
In short, the Australian economy needs a period-possibly a prolonged period-of income moderation. It also needs policies, across the spectrum, which will encourage such an outcome. The Government's measures to stamp on some of the more notorious examples of tax evasion and avoidance are highly to be welcomed in that regard.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 137

STATEMENT No.3-ESTIMATES OF OUTLAYS, 1982-83

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

Summary

138

1. Defence

141

2. Education

148

3. Health

161

4. Social Security and Welfare

174

5. Housing

199

6. Urban and Regional Development nec and the Environment

207

7. Culture and Recreation

210

8. Economic Services-

A. Transport and Communication

218

B. Water Supply, Electricity and Gas

230

C. Industry Assistance and Development

233

D. Labour and Employment

257

E. Other Economic Services

267

9. General Public Services-

A. Legislative Services . . . . . . . . . . .

270

B. Law, Order and Public Safety . . . . . . .

272

C. Foreign Affairs, Overseas Aid and External Territories

276

D. General and Scientific Research nec

282

E. Administrative Services

286

10. Not Allocated to Function-

A. Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government

Authorities nec . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

291

B. Public DebtInterest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

304

C. Allowance for Prospective Wage and Salary Increases (Non-Defence)

305

138 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

STATEMENT No.3-ESTIMATES OF OUTLAYS, 1982-83
This Statement presents detailed estimates of Budget outlays in 1982-83, classified according to their primary purpose or function. Comparable figures are also shown for 1980-81 and 1981-82; data for the period since 1972-73 are presented in Statement No. 6.

SUMMARY
The following table shows, in summary form, total outlays classified by major functional and sub-functional headings:

I. Defence 2. Education 3. Health 4. Social Security and Welfare 5. Housing 6. Urban and Regional Development nec and the
Environment 7. Culture and Recreation 8. Economic Services-
A. Transport and Communication B. Water Supply, Electricity and Gas C. Industry Assistance and Development D. Labour and Employment E. Other Economic Services
Total Economic Services 9. General Public Services-
A. Legislative Services B. Law, Order and Public Safety . C. Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid D. General and Scientific Research nec E. Administrative Services
Total Public Services 10. Not Allocated to Function-
A. Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec
B. Public Debt Interest C. Allowance for Prospective Wage and Salary
Increases (Non-Defence) Total Not Allocated to Function
TOTAL OUTLAYS

1980-81 Actual
$m 3550.3 2930.5 3650.0 9917.2
341.1
111.4 400.4
989.3 54.2
821.0 386.6 122.7 2373.8
112.0 221.5 747.5 314.5 1089.0 2484.4
7970.6 2561.3
10531.9
36291.0

1981-82 Actual
$m 4135.4 3340.5 2912.4 11498.0
458.3
77.5 483.2
1180.2 66.6
917.1 459.9 133.7 2757.5
132.3 257.8 860.5 393.6 1243.3 2887.4

1982-83 Estimate
$m 4622.3 3792.4 3378.7 13 272.2
570.8
113.0 501.2
1475.3 96.5
1016.4 510.2 122.6
3221.0
160.6 293.0 946.9 425.7 1363.3 3189.5

Change
$m + 486.8 + 451.8 + 466.3 +1774.1 + 112.6
+ 35.6 + 18.0
+ 295.1 + 29.9 + 99.3 + 50.2
11.1 + 463.5
+ 28.2 + 35.2 + 86.4 + 32.2 + 120.0 + 302.1

9908.2 2881.0
12789.1 41 339.4

10 953.0 3243.0
210.0 14406.0
47067.2

+1044.9 + 362.0
+ 210.0 +1616.9
+ 5727.8

The comparison between the 1981-82 outcome and other years' Budget estimates is affected by the occurrence of an additional payday for Public Service salaries and for certain social welfare pensions and benefits in 1981-82. Ifoutlays figures for 1981-82 are adjusted to remove the costs of the additional payday, the rate of growth of outlays in 1981-82 is decreased from 13.9% to 12.8%, and in 1982-83 it is increased from 13.9% to 15.0%.
The main functions affected by this payday effect are Social Security and Welfare (which includes all the pensions and benefits affected and some wages and salaries), Defence (which includes all defence-related wages and salaries) and Administrative Services (which includes a number of Commonwealth departments' wages and salaries votes). Most other functions are affected to some extent.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 139

The following chart, based on the table above, gives a broad impression of the relative size of the major functional blocks of outlays and recent and projected movements in those proportions. It is emphasised that changes in the size of these functional blocks from one year to another are affected by a number of special factors.
The major example of this is the changed funding arrangements for public hospitals, which apply to all States (except South Australia and Tasmania) and the Northern Territory, and for the Community Health Program and the School Dental Scheme. Since 1981-82, such payments are recorded as general purpose grants within the function 'Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities' in lieu of the previous specific purpose payments (recorded within the function 'Health').

140 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Major Functional Blocks - Proportion of Total Outlays

Defence
Education
Health (a) Social Security and Welfare

1980-81 per cent
9.8
8.1
10.1
27.3

1981-82 per cent
10.0
8.1
7.0
27.8

1982-83 0

10

per cent I

I

h m 9.8

20

30

I

I

~ 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83 est.

i i l 8.1

7.2 ffifu~

28.2 kTIcc>~

Community

1.4

Development (b)

Culture and

I.l

Recreation

Transport and

2.7

Communication

Industry Assistance

2.3

and Development

Labour

I.l

and Employment

Other Economic

0.3

Services

Total General

6.8

Public Services

Payments to or for the States, the

22.0

Northern Territory

and Local Government

Authorities (a) (c)

7.1 Public Debt Interest

Allowances for Wage and Salary Increase (NonDefence)

1.5

~ I.7

I.2

~ l.l

2.9

~ 3.1

2.2

~ 2.2

l.l

~ l.l

0.3 7.0 24.0

0.3 6.8 23.3

-i
~

7.0

-6.9

0.4

100.0

100.0

100.0

(a) Changed arrangements for health funding significantly affect comparability of the functional classifications between 1980-81 and subsequent years. Adjusted for these changes, outlays under the 'Health' function in 1981-82 and 1982-83 represent 9.9 per cent and 9.3 per cent of total Budget outlays respectively and outlays on 'Payments to or for the States, the NT and Local Government Authorities nec' represent 21.2 per cent and 21.1 per cent respectively.
(b) Includes expenditure for Housing, Water Supply, Electricity and Gas, Urban and Regional Development nec and the Environment.
(c) Includes Payments for Natural Disasters.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 141

1. DEFENCE
Consistent with Government policy to improve defence capabilities over the longer term, including those in the Indian Ocean, and to sustaining defence co-operation in neighbouring regions, outlays on Defence will increase from $4135.4m in 1981-82 to an estimated $4622.3m in 1982-83 or by 11.8% over the outlays in 1981-82. If the 1981-82 outlay is adjusted so as to remove the effects of the 27th payday that occurred in that year, the estimated increase in Defence outlay becomes 13.9%
The extra resources so provided will be mainly directed toward the sustained development of the Defence Force and national defence infrastructure to provide for a more substantial base for expansion and the heightening of defence preparedness.
An objective of the Government is for Defence outlays to reach around 3% of gross domestic product by 1984-85; in 1981-82 they were 2.8% and in 1982-83 they are expected to reach about 2.9% of gross domestic product.
Outstanding obligations on orders placed, mainly for capital items, to be carried over to 1983-84 and later years are estimated at $5375m (compared to $5065m carried into 1982-83) but this amount could be increased by proposals for new equipment yet to be fully developed.
Estimated outlays include the full-year effects of the increases flowing from the Committee of Reference for Defence Force Pay (Coldham Report) to service personnel and approved increases to clerical and other grades during 1981-82. Estimates are in April 1982 prices and additional provision has been made for 1982-83 cost escalation included in certain major equipment contracts, and a bulk allowance of $11 Om for prospective increases in wages and salaries of service and civilian defence personnel during 1982-83.
Provision for other price increases in 1982-83 may be made in Additional Estimates later in the year in the light of circumstances prevailing at that time.

Defence Manpower Costs necCivilian ForcesNaval Military Air Defence Forces Retirement and Death Benefits
Total
Defence Equipment and StoresNaval Construction Aircraft and Associated Initial Equipment Armoured and Combat Vehicles, Artillery Other 'Capital' Equipment and Stores Acquisition of Boeing 707 Aircraft Supporting Equipment and Stores Repairs and Maintenance
Total
Defence Faci1itiesAdvances to the States for Service Housing Other Buildings, Works, Furniture and Fittings Acquisition of Sites and Buildings Repairs and Maintenance
Total

1980-81 Actual
$m
278.4
277.1 542.7 370.6 199.9
1668.6
223.6 81.9 16.3
233.5 0.2
430.1 134.1
1119.6
1.3 104.9
5.5 73.7
185.4

1981-82 Actual
$m
330.1
368.6 710.3 484.5 245.5
2139.0
137.8 75.8 12.2 257.5 0.3 452.4 158.7
1094.7
3.0 134.6
13.5 74.0
225.1

1982-83 Estimate
$m
339.2
373.1 724.7 488.2 293.8
2219.1
165.9 238.3
16.1 268.6
0.1 469.2 170.8
1329.0
8.3 136.8
18.7 79.4
243.1

Change
$m
+ 9.1
+ 4.6 + 14.4 + 3.7 + 48.3
+ 80.1
+ 28.1 +162.5 + 3.9 + 11.2 - 0.2 + 16.7 + 12.2
+234.3
+ 5.3 + 2.2 + 5.2 + 5.4
+ 18.1

142 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Defence Industrial CapacityWage and Salary, Administrative and Operational Expenditures Buildings and Works Machinery and Plant Maintenance of Production Capability Government Factory Operations Other Repayments
Total
Defence Science and Technology Establishments (net)
Defence Co-operationPapua New Guinea Indonesia Malaysia Singapore Other
Total
Storage and Transport Services . General Administrative Expenditure Natural Disasters, Civil Defence and Other Recoveries and Repayments Allowance for Prospective Wage and Salary Increases
TOTAL DEFENCE

1980-81 Actual
$m

1981-82 Actual
$m

1982-83 Estimate
$m

Change $m

92.0 10.9 12.8 74.7 0.1 13.8 5.5Cr
198.9

107.8 25.3 23.0 87.1
1.2 18.9 2.8Cr
260.6

112.5 28.2 50.0 87.6 2.2 21.4
3.9Cr
297.9

+ 4.6 + 2.9 + 26.9 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 - 1.2
+ 37.3

109.4

126.5

138.7

+ 12.2

15.2 11.9 3.9 1.2 5.6
37.9
23.3 297.1
7.4 97.2Cr
3550.3

16.7 8.6 4.0 1.2 9.2
39.7
30.6 329.2
8.9 118.8Cr
4135.4

17.5 10.2 4.4 1.2 9.7
43.0
30.6 362.4
7.1 158.6Cr 110.0
4622.3

+ 0.9 + 1.5 + 0.4
+ 0.5
+ 3.3
+ 33.2 - 1.9 - 39.8 + 110.0
+486.8

DEFENCE MANPOWER COSTS NEC
Expenditure under this heading is to increase from $2139m in 1981-82 to an estimated $2219.1m in 1982-83 and provides for the bulk of service and civilian manpower outlays of the Department of Defence.
The net increase of $80.1m in 1982-83 reflects the full year increases in Defence Force salaries recommended by the Committee of Reference for Defence Force Pay in its Second and Third Reports on the Adequacy of Defence Force Remuneration, which were accepted by the Government. Also included are the effects of salary increases for civilians awarded in 1981-82, and increased provision for Defence Force retirement and death benefits. These increases are partially offset by a reduction in the number of paydays from 27 in 1981-82 to 26 in 1982-83.
The approved strength of the permanent force is estimated to reduce by 712 by 30 June 1983 primarily as the result of phasing out of HMAS Melbourne (300), a reduction in the Navy's fixed wing aircraft numbers (180), and phasing out of Canberra aircraft (230). The Army's ceiling strength is to remain unchanged.
The active Army Reserve has been maintained at the target of 30 000; Active Reserves for the Navy are to rise by 119 to 1523 and for the Air Force by 533 to 2275. Army Officers of Cadets are planned to increase by 145 to 1100 and the Regular Army Emergency Reserve by 205 to a total of 306.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 143

The civilian staff level for the Department of Defence has been set at 20 503 at 30 June 1983 which is a reduction of 15 from the actual strength at 30 June 1982. The staff levels for the Department of Defence Support have been set at 19 272 at 30 June 1983 which is an increase of 309 from the actual levels at 30 June 1982.
Details of manpower strengths are:-

Actual June 1982

Estimated June 1983

Variation

DefencePermanent Forces Reserves Civilians Sub-total Defence Support*

73185 34238 20518 127941 18963

72 473 35204 20503 128180 19272

-712
+966 - 15 +239 +309

Total

146904

147452

+548

* There may be some revision of these figures following finalisation of further transfers from the Departments of Defence and Administrative Services.

The costs of some elements of Defence manpower shown in the above table are recorded under the categories 'Defence Science and Technology Establishments', 'Natural Disasters, Civil Defence and Other', 'Defence Co-operation', 'Defence Equipment and Stores' and 'Defence Industrial Capacity'. Provision for wage and salary increases during 1982-83 is included in bulk in the 'Allowance for Prospective Wage and Salary Increases'.
The main factors leading to the increase of $48.3m in the provision for Defence Force retirement and death benefits are the:-
- annual update of pension rates in July 1982 to reflect the increase in the Consumer Price Index of 10.5% over the year to March 1982;
- projected pensioner population increase of 1420; and
- flow on effect of salary increases.

DEFENCE EQUIPMENT AND STORES
Outlays on Defence equipment and stores are intended to ensure that Defence equipment (ships, aircraft, armour, artillery, etc.) and general logistic support are adequate for anticipated operational activities and as a basis for expansion if required. Outlays on 'capital' type equipment in 1982-83 are estimated at $688.9m or $205.6m more than in 1981-82. Outstanding obligations on capital items to be carried over to 1983-84 and later years are estimated to be some $4011m compared with some $3911m carried into 1982-83.
The Government approved a number of major Defence projects during 1981-82, including the purchase of the new F / A18 fighter aircraft, additional P3C Orion aircraft, and the design and development of a Basic Trainer aircraft.
As a result of these and other decisions by the Government in previous years, estimated outlays on the more significant 'capital' items for 1982-83 are:

144 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

$m

- Acquistion of the new F / A 18 aircraft - Progress payments for the four FFG guided missile frigates (of which
two were delivered in 1980-81, the third is scheduled for delivery in 1983 and the fourth in 1984) - Additional P3C Orion aircraft - The target acquisition and tracking system for the FIll aircraft - Medium trucks for the Army - Patrol boats - Basic Trainer aircraft - DE Modernisation - Underway Replenishment Ship (AOR1) - DDG Modernisation - Follow-on-Destroyers (long lead items) - Mirage Refurbishment .

217.2
120.5 32.7 40.7 32.3 19.4 13.9 15.6 17.6 27.7 17.7 22.1

These amounts are subject to adjustment during the year in the light of variations in progress on individual items and requirements for payments to the United States Government in respect ofthose purchases under Foreign Military Sales arrangements.

Defence capabilities were enhanced during 1981-82 with the delivery of a wide range of equipment and completion of refurbishment of existing equipment. These included 3 FIll aircraft, 3 patrol boats, 2 fire support vehicles and completion of the modernisation of HMAS Parramatta and refit of HMAS Ovens.

A high level of expenditure is provided for supporting equipment and stores such as fuel, ammunition, rations and clothing required for the efficient performance of both manpower and equipment within the Defence Force, and for repairs and maintenance of ships, aircraft, vehicles, weapons and other equipment. The increases associated with these activities arise mainly from higher prices and the additional cost of maintenance of the more technically complex equipment now entering the service inventory.

DEFENCE FACILITIES
These outlays provide and maintain facilities which include living and working accommodation for the Defence Force and Department of Defence. Defence industrial capacity or defence science related facilities for the Department of Defence Support are recorded under the 'Industrial Capacity' and 'Defence Science and Technology' headings.
Proposed expenditure on facilities includes provision for capital works ($127.5m), furniture and fittings ($9.2m), advances to the States for the provision of new houses and improvements to existing houses for servicemen and their families ($8.3m), acquisition of sites and buildings ($18.7m) and outlays on repairs and maintenance ($79.4m).
Provision has been made in 'Other Buildings, Works, Furniture and Fittings' and 'Acquisition of Sites and Buildings' to commence the construction or acquisition of some 600 new or replacement houses. This new housing program is estimated to cost $35m over about 3 years with $llm proposed expenditure for 1982-83.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 145

In 1981-82 133 houses were completed on Commonwealth owned land and 152 were acquired from private sources for servicemen and their families in areas where rental accommodation is not readily obtainable. In the same period 497 existing dwellings constructed over many years for the Defence Force under the various Commonwealth State Housing Agreements (Servicemen) were returned to the States as being below standard or surplus to requirements.
Outlays on 'Other Buildings, Works, Furniture and Fittings' are estimated to continue at about the same level as 1981-82. The major part of the provision is to meet progress payments for projects committed in earlier years. These include provision for modernisation of the fleet base and dockyard at Garden Island (NSW), the Australian pefence Force Academy (ACT), living and working accommodation for the Army at Holsworthy (NSW), Bonegilla (Vic) and Townsville (Qld) and workshops at RAAF Richmond (NSW). Expenditure on new Defence works projects in 1982-83 is estimated at $23m or 18% of the total provision. New commencements include a new airfield at Derby (WA), facilities for the Tactical Fighter Force at Williamtown (NSW) and redevelopment of the Armoured Centre at Puckapunyal (Vic). Outstanding obligations to be carried over to 1983-84 and later years are estimated to be $381m compared with $285m carried into 1982-83.

DEFENCE INDUSTRIAL CAPACITY
On 7 May 1982 following consideration of the interim report of the Defence Review Committee, the Government announced the creation of the Department of Defence Support. Within approved defence policies its role is to administer the activities of the defence production factories, defence industry development, defence research and development establishments, naval dockyards excluding fleet base activities, defence purchasing, and associated marketing activities.
The selective direction of Defence procurement to Australian industry, assisted by investment in specialised facilities and technology, has continued to be the means of developing and sustaining local industrial capabilities of defence significance. With the creation of the Department of Defence Support it has been possible to reclassify to this category costs related to the maintenance of naval dockyards and Defence procurement.
The 1982-83 provision will allow for the costs of administerillg and maintaining the munitions and aircraft factories, dockyards and Australian industry participation programs ($112. 5m) and the provision of additional facilities in munitions, aircraft factories and Williamstown and Cockatoo Island dockyards ($28.2m). Projects being undertaken in 1982-83 include construction of a structural bonding workshop at the Government Aircraft Factories (Vic) ($9.7m), establishment of facilities for the new Tactical Fighter Project ($l.Om), replacement of cranes at Cockatoo Island dockyard ($1.5m) and continuing development of facilities at the Williamstown dockyard (Vic) ($1.9m).
Also included is expenditure on capital equipment and plant ($50m). Major items are new plant at the Mulwala Explosives Factory (NSW) for the manufacture of double based propellant ($2m), a heavy shell forgings plant at the Ordnance Factory, Maribyrnong (Vic) for the forging of 155 mm shells ($2m), modernisation of small arms ammunition production facilities at the Ammunition Factory, Footscray (Vic) ($3.4m), and additional plant for the Basic Trainer and New Tactical Fighter projects ($20.3m).

146 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Maintenance of production capability, involving the subsidisation of factory production activities where peacetime activities are such that full recovery of associated overhead costs is not achievable, is estimated to cost $87.6m. Other expenditures include purchase or manufacture of items of essential Defence materiel for reserve stock holdings ($2.3m), development of production techniques in respect of existing and proposed new production in defence industries ($4.3m), and subsidisation of Nomad aircraft production ($14.8m). A decision has now been taken to terminate Nomad production when 170 aircraft are completed.

DEFENCE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ESTABLISHMENTS (NET)
Expenditure on Defence science and technology provides scientific and technical advice and support to the Australian Defence Force.
The estimated expenditure of $138.7m in 1982-83 ($126.5m in 1981-82) covers salaries, other administrative and operating expenses, machinery, plant, stores and works services of the Defence and Defence Support science establishments and laboratories. Research is continuing on such projects as the Jindalee over-the-horizon radar, underwater detection aids, and electronic warfare techniques including development of a defence against sea skimming anti-ship missiles (Project Winnin).

DEFENCE CO-OPERATION
Australia maintains a variety of bilateral contacts with countries in South East Asia and the South West Pacific which share our strategic interests.
The Government over many years has sought to develop relations with such countries by promotion of their independent defence capabilities through co-operative assistance. Recently increasing priority has been given to smaller South West Pacific countries and this emphasis is being continued in this Budget.
The total expenditure is estimated to increase from $39.7m in 1981-82 to an estimated $43m in 1982-83.
Defence co-operation activities with Papua New Guinea will continue in 1982-83 at an estimated cost of $17.5m and will include assistance in the form of loan personnel, equipment and training and study visits to Australia for PNG Defence Force personnel. Ongoing projects undertaken in PNG include provision of Nomad aircraft, assistance with survey and mapping and civil engineering tasks.
Defence co-operation activities with Indonesia seek to extend the range of matters on which the two Governments co-operate. The focus is on joint projects which contribute to development as well as to Defence capabilities. Provision is made for Indonesia to receive co-operative assistance to the value of $1O.2m. This will involve patrol boat, Sioux helicopter, survey and mapping and antimalarial projects as well as advisory assistance and training.
Continuing assistance is provided for Malaysia ($4.4m) and Singapore ($1.2m). These bilateral programs place emphasis on advisory and project assistance and training in Australia.
The allocation for 'Other' is to be devoted to the increased provision of a range of co-operative assistance to countries of the South West Pacific, and for continuing project and training assistance for the Philippines and Thailand. Provision is also made for the expansion of training facilities and equipment for overseas students in Australia.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 147

During 1982-83 the Defence Forces expect to provide 211 personnel to assist other countries under these programs compared with 186 in 1981-82. Of these, 160 are for assistance to Papua New Guinea, the majority filling PNG Defence Force established positions. It is expected that 1325 personnel from overseas forces will visit Australia for courses and study visits in 1982-83 compared with 1365 in 1981-82.

STORAGE AND TRANSPORT SERVICES
This item provides for shipping and long term storage services provided on behalf of the Department of Defence by the Department of Administrative Services and for removals and storage of furniture for service personnel and civilians, and their families, on posting or transfer. The constant level of expenditure reflects the full year effect of cost increases in 1981-82 offset by a change in procedures which will result in the majority of shipping costs being met directly by the Department of Defence and included under the next heading 'General Administrative Expenditure'.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE
General administrative expenditure includes rent, movement expenses, office requisites, postage and telephones, fuel, light, power and water, freight, compensation payments, training at other than defence establishments, and medical and dental services. The proposed increase of $33.2m to $362.4m in 1982-83 reflects increases in costs. An additional cost now included relates to the fees paid to consultants engaged by the Department of Transport and Construction to design and supervise the construction of Defence works ($13.5m in 1982-83 compared with $8.5m in 1981-82).

NATURAL DISASTERS, CIVIL DEFENCE AND OTHER
Expenditure on this item includes the operating costs of the Natural Disasters Organisation ($1.8m), reimbursement to the State Governments for some salaries paid to their civil defence personnel and subsidies towards the cost of accommodation ($1.7m), Commonwealth assistance in the form of equipment and stores to State and Territory Emergency Services ($1.3m), and maintenance of war graves ($2.3m).
RECOVERIES AND REPAYMENTS
The principal items provided for under this heading are rent payments made by service personnel for houses under the Defence Force Group Rental Scheme ($44.2m), charges made for meals and accommodation provided at Defence establishments ($30.8m), returns from disposals, and recoveries from other governments.
The increase in revenue of $39.8m is due mainly to an increase in recoveries from other governments arising from exercises in Australia, an increase in expected disposals revenue and higher revenues from rents, meals and accommodation due to increases in charges.

ALLOWANCE FOR PROSPECTIVE WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES
The amount required to meet prospective increases in wage and salary rates of civilian and service personnel flowing from wage adjustments during 1982-83 will depend on the actual increases in wage and salary rates awarded. A bulk allowance of $11Om

148 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

has been included in the Budget estimates so as to present what is expected to be a more realistic picture of Budget outlays for 1982-83. This allowance is not appropriated at Budget time. The actual additional provision will be determined by the Government during the course of the year.

2. EDUCATION
Total direct outlays on education are estimated to increase by 13.5% in 1982-83 to $3792.4m, which is equivalent to 8.1 % of Budget outlays. Assistance for education is also given through income tax rebates for certain expenditures on self-education and education of a taxpayer's children or dependants and through income tax deductions for some gifts to educational institutions. The cost of revenue so forgone is not included in the figures given here, but further details are given in the Appendices to Statement No.4.
Over four-fifths of the Commonwealth's direct expenditures on education are in the form of grants to the States and the Northern Territory. Further details are provided in Chapters IV and V of Budget Paper No.7 Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities 1982-83.

TertiaryUniversitiesTertiary Education Commission Grants Other
Total
Advanced EducationTertiary Education Commission Grants Other
Total
Technical and Further EducationTertiary Education Commission Grants Further Education in the ACT Other
Total
Cost Supplementation of Grants Tertiary Education Commission Other Overseas Student Charge
Total Tertiary
SchoolsSchools Commission GrantsGovernment Non-Government Joint Programs
Total

1980-81 Actual
$m

1981-82 Actual
$m

1982-83 Estimate
$m

Change $m

872.4 0.6
872.9

1006.6 0.4
1006.9

1024.0 1024.0

+ 17.4 - 0.4 + 17.0

580.1 5.3
585.5

609.4 7.0
616.4

642.5 8.0
650.5

+ 33.1 + 1.1
+ 34.1

172.4 25.8
198.2
3.2 7.3Cr 1652.5

198.8 24.8 0.2 223.9
3.6 11.2Cr 1839.7

2\0.8 27.6 0.3
238.7
110.4 3.7 0.6 16.8Cr
2011.1

+ 11.9 + 2.8 + 0.1
+ 14.8
+ 110.4
+ 0.6 - 5.7
+ 171.4

410.3 365.3 29.1
804.7

470.0 472.4
40.3
982.7

537.5 620.9
46.5
1204.8

+67.4 + 148.4 + 6.2
+222.0

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 149

Pre-schools in the States and Northern Territory Schools and Pre-schools in the ACT-
Government Non-Government School Transport
Total
Schools Commission Curriculum Development Centre
Total Schools and Pre-Schools
School to Work Transition Student Assistance Schemes Special Groups-
Aboriginals Migrant Education Soldiers' Children Education Isolated Children
Total Special Groups
General Administrative and Other ExpenditureAdministration Other
Total Administration and Other
Recoveries nec
TOTAL EDUCATION

1980-81 Actual
$m 31.2
85.7 17.2 2.6
105.6
3.6 2.5
947.6
27.8 190.3
37.8 33.6 2.4 14.5
88.3

1981-82 Actual
$m 33.0
95.1 17.9 3.6
116.6
3.9 2.0
1 138.2
34.3 200.2
42.2 37.8 2.3 19.2
10l.5

1982-83 Estimate
$m 33.1
107.0 25.2
3.9
136.1
4.7
1378.6
43.3 220.8
48.0 36.5 2.3 21.1
107.9

Change
$m + 0.1
+ 11.9 + 7.3 + 0.3
+ 19.5
+ 0.8 2.0
+240.4
+ 9.1 + 20.7
+ 5.8 1.3
+ 0.1 + 1.9
+ 6.4

24.3 2.0
26.3 2.2Cr
2930.5

28.0 1.5
29.5
2.8Cr
3340.5

31.8 1.4
33.2 2.6Cr
3792.4

+ 3.8 0.1
+ 3.7
+ 0.2
+451.8

It should be noted that comparisons between the 1982-83 outlays on certain program components and those of previous years are affected by changes in arrangements for providing for program cost increases. Before 1982 Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission and Commonwealth Schools Commission programs were supplemented retrospectively in line with increases in wages, salaries and other costs; the program estimates in the Budget Papers were presented in estimated June prices, with an allowance for cost increases being included under the item 'Cost Supplementation of Grants'. Since the end of 1981, automatic retrospective adjustment for these education program cost increases has ceased. Instead, calendar year programs will include a prospective allowance for anticipated cost increases. In the light of recent salary increases in the schools sector following the end of wage indexation in 1981, the Government has decided to provide an additional supplement, equivalent to 65% of the increases, to the States for the government schools general recurrent program in 1982 and a full supplement to non-government schools. The Commonwealth has fully supplemented the base program for all schools for 1983 for estimated cost increases. These decisions will cost $73.1m in 1982-83. At this stage, the tertiary education grants for 1983 are expressed in the same price terms as the 1982 grants, currently provided for in legislation. A bulk allowance of about $110m has been included in the 1982-83 Budget for estimated cost adjustment of the tertiary programs.

150 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

TERTIARY EDUCATION
Total expenditure for the 1982-83 financial year for tertiary education is estimated at $2011.1m, compared with $1839.7m in 1981-82.
With the exception of further education in the Australian Capital Territory and some other minor items, the estimates under this heading for 1982-83 comprise the second half of the 1982 and the first half of the 1983 calendar year programs of the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission. Through these programs, the Commonwealth provides full financial support for all universities and colleges of advanced education (CAEs) and assists the State and Northern Territory systems of technical and further education (TAFE).
Details of the calendar year 1983 program, as shown below, were announced by the Minister for Education on 21 June 1982 in the same price levels as the 1982 program. The 1982 program is shown for comparison purposes. Because payments are not spread evenly throughout the year, the Commission's calendar year programs cannot be related directly to the financial year estimates.

Universities and CAEsRecurrent Equipment Capital
Total
TAFERecurrent Equipment Capital
Total
Evaluative Studies
Total Tertiary

1982 $m
1560.3 67.1 34.8
1662.2
84.6 10.1 112.1
206.8
0.4
1869.4

1983 $m
1561.4 67.1 39.0
1667.5
87.2 10.1 108.2
205.5
0.4
1873.4

In addition to the already announced amounts above, the Government has decided to provide $1.8m for the development of ratings training at the Australian Maritime College and to direct $1.4m to Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission programs to promote the provision of post arrival services and programs related to migrants.

Universities and Colleges ofAdvanced Education
In the context of the Review of Commonwealth Functions and in line with the recommendations of the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission, the Government announced in 1981 that it would promote a major rationalisation and reallocation of resources in higher education. This involved the consolidation of colleges of advanced education for which teacher education was a major activity into multi-purpose or multi-campus colleges with a single governing body or by integration with neighbouring universities. It also involved phasing out certain Victorian engineering schools (with no new students to be admitted after 1981), collaboration between certain neighbouring universities, and encouraging a redirection of effort in advanced education to the technologies and business studies. As a condition of continued Commonwealth funding,

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 151

30 Colleges of Advanced Education would be consolidated. Negotiations with the States are proceeding in relation to the 6 colleges identified for amalgamation on which action is not complete.
Funds have again been provided to meet Government undertakings to establish research centres of excellence in universities and to develop community language courses in universities and colleges of advanced education.
The allocation for 1983 of $1667.5m (in 1982 prices) for total higher education as announced by the Minister for Education represents an increase of $5.3m or 0.3% over the 1982 allocation. The increase in recurrent funds of $l.lm to $1561.4m reflects the Government's decision late in 1981 to provide additional funds to assist institutions to meet the rising costs of staff superannuation schemes. Negotiations about the introduction of a new superannuation scheme are continuing with both the State authorities and the institutions. The $106.1 m allocated for capital and equipment programs will enable commitments arising from ongoing capital projects to be met and new capital projects, minor works and equipment purchases to be implemented.
Student load in universities and colleges of advanced education built up rapidly in the decade to the mid-1970s but has tended to remain stable since that time; this relative stability is seen as continuing in the medium term.

Student Load in Universities and Advanced Education (aj (as at 30 April o/the respective year)

Universities

Advanced Education

Total

Change on previous year

1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 (b) 1983 (c) 1984 (c)

'000 140.9 140.7 139.7 140.1 142.6 143.8 144.0 144.0

'000 114.0 119.2 121.5 122.2 123.2 124.2 125.0 125.0

'000 254.9 259.9 261.2 262.3 265.8 268.0 269.0 269.0

%
+3.0 +2.0 +0.5 +0.4 +1.3 +0.8 +0.4 +0.0

(a) Expressed as 'equivalent full-time students', as defined by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission. (b) Preliminary. (c) Projected. (Source: Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission).

Other Advanced Education
The Australian Film and Television School was established by the Commonwealth in 1973 to provide, at the highest levels, a wide range of training and experience for creative workers in the film and television industry and in education. The Budget provides $5.6m for the operational and capital expenses of the School in 1982-83 including a further $O.4m for design and other preliminary costs associated with the School's permanent building to be built in the grounds of Macquarie University in Sydney. In 1982-83 the School will host the CILECT (International Centre for Liaison between Schools of Film and Television) Congress. The 1982 Congress will discuss future international policies for integrated television training and the means of assisting developing countries to create their own communications training schemes. Forty-three countries will be represented at the Congress.

152 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Commonwealth assistance for the National Institute ot Dramatic Art (NIDA), previously included in the table item 'Advanced Education-Tertiary Education Commission Grants', is now included in this category. NIDA aims to provide practical training in the profession of live theatre, television, film and radio with courses in acting, directing, stage management and design. In 1982-83 the Commonwealth will provide $0.9m for the operating expenses of NIDA.
The Government has agreed that new premises for NIDA (estimated cost $4.2m) be built on the western campus of the University of New South Wales, instead of at the University of Sydney as first proposed. An amount of $O.lm is to be provided in 1982-83 for the relocation of existing buildings on the new site and it is hoped that construction will commence in 1983-84.
Also included within this category is $0.3m for sports-oriented courses at the Canberra College of Advanced Education which operate in conjunction with the Australian Institute of Sport (see 'Youth, Sport and Recreation' under the functional heading 'Culture and Recreation').
Technical and Further Education
The States and the Northern Territory are responsible for technical and further education. Commonwealth grants, constituting about one-quarter of total outlays for such education, are provided on the understanding that the States and the Northern Territory will at least maintain fully their own total efforts in this area.
General recurrent grants are provided by the Commonwealth to compensate the States and the Northern Territory for not levying fees for courses at technical and further education institutions. These grants will increase in real terms in 1983 in response to growing enrolments. Inaddition, specific recurrent grants are provided to improve the quality and effectiveness of technical and further education. The TAFE sector is also benefitting substantially from the Commonwealth's School to Work Transition Program (see below).
On the capital side, where Commonwealth grants now make up about two-thirds of TAFE outlays, funds will continue to be provided at a high level in 1983 in line with the priority attached by the Government to this form of education. $1 08.2m at 1982 prices will be provided for capital programs in 1983, including funds for the first year of a new National Priority Projects Program under which a money amount of $60m will be provided over three years to meet specialised industry needs and to give training opportunities to young people where facilities are lacking. $lO.lm has been allocated in 1983 for the TAFE supplementary equipment program established in 1982 to assist the States in meeting the need for updated equipment, particularly in the technologies.

Further Education in the ACT
Further education institutions in the ACT are now mostly housed in relatively new or substantially upgraded accommodation. In 1982-83, the new Central Services Facilities building will open at the Canberra College of TAFE.
Enrolments in Canberra's five further education institutions are estimated to reach 23300 in 1983, 5.9% more than in 1982. The 1982-83 estimates provide $27.6m altogether for these bodies, of which $23.8m is for recurrent and $3.8m for capital expenditure compared with $21.1m and $3.8m, respectively, in 1981-82.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 153

Overseas Student Charge
The families of overseas students, unlike those of Australian tertiary students, do not contribute to the cost of tertiary education through taxation. Accordingly, overseas students attending Australian universities or colleges of advanced education or undertaking certain other Commonwealth funded tertiary courses are required to help defray the cost of their tuition. This contribution is made through payment of the overseas student charge. The amount of the charge is reviewed annually, taking into account changes in the cost of tertiary education and other elements of overseas student policy. From the beginning of 1983, the charge will be increased by an average of7.7% which is significantly less than the increase in education costs. The charge will now range from $1850 to $2500 a year depending on the course of study and will represent around 33% of the estimated average per student cost of higher education in 1983. The Government will continue to pay the charge for students from Papua New Guinea and developing countries in the South Pacific region; the cost of this subsidy in 1982-83 is estimated to be $0.6m for the 1982 intake. This is in addition to payment of the charge on behalf of overseas students sponsored by the Australian Development Assistance Bureau which will amount to $1.9m in 1982-83.
Both the demand by overseas students for entry to Australian tertiary institutions and the numbers admitted have continued to rise. The estimated number of students liable for the charge, including those whose liability is met by Australia's aid program, was around 6000 in 1981-82, yielding revenue of $11.2m. The number is expected to rise to about 8500 in 1982-83, yielding revenue of$16.8m in that year.

SCHOOLS
Schools in the States and the Northern Territory
The Commonwealth provides grants to the States and the Northern Territory for programs administered by the Commonwealth Schools Commission (CSC) for recurrent and capital costs of government schools. Payments for recurrent and capital purposes are also made to the States and the Northern Territory for non-government schools. In addition, Commonwealth assistance is provided to both government and non-government school systems under joint programs such as special projects for handicapped children and multicultural education projects. Commonwealth grants represent about 12% of spending on government schools (the balance being met by other governments) and 35% of spending on non-government schools (of the total cost about 21 % is also met by other governments and 44% from private sources).
Total expenditure in 1982-83 is estimated at $1204.8m, compared with $982.7m in 1981-82.
Details of the 1983 calendar year program for the States, the Northern Territory and the ACT were announced by the Minister for Education on 21 June 1982. The Government has subsequently decided to increase grants for migrant education in line with the recommendations of the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs. The amended 1983 program is shown below. (As with the tertiary grants, payment arrangements prevent direct comparison with the financial year estimates.)

154 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

1982

1983

Government schoolsRecurrent Capital . . . .

$m
370.7 124.7

$m
423.9 143.5

Non-government schoolsRecurrent . Capital . .

495.4
485.1 44.9

567.4
576.0 51.4

Joint programs

530.0 41.1

627.4 46.0

Total .

1066.6

1240.8

(Note: Includes $2m in 1982 and $2.3m in 1983 for the ACT.)

Total grants to the States and the Northern Territory in 1983 are estimated to increase by 16.2% over 1982 grants. In the government school sector, despite the continuing overall decline in enrolments, the Government will maintain the real level of capital grants in 1983 and will increase general recurrent grants by $42.4m, which is a 2% increase in real terms. In the 1983 calendar year the total recurrent program for government schools will, as a consequence, increase by approximately 14.4% compared with 1982. The Government notes that, on average, recurrent resource standards for government schools are now in excess of the targets set by the Interim Schools Commission in 1972 as shown by the table below. The additional Commonwealth funding should help maintain these improved standards.

Government Schools Recurrent Resource Expenditure per Student (1979-80)

Primary
(Target =100)

Secondary
(Target =100)

All Schools
(Target =\00)

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory . . Australian Capital Territory Australia . . . . . .

\08

112

110

124

124

124

116

97

\08

135

119

128

122

125

123

125

124

125

254

168

221

139

137

138

120

116

118

(Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission).

The Government has decided to continue for a further year the pilot program of assistance for ethnic schools pending a review of needs. This program, which provides $30 per capita grants to approved education authorities, will cost $4.5m in 1982-83. Grants for the Severely Handicapped Children Program are to be increased by 38%, or $1 m, and the program extended to cover handicapped children below school age. Grants for the English as a Second Language Program for government and nongovernment schools will increase from $62.4m in 1982 to $70.9m in 1983, which includes an additional $1.7m being directed to the New Arrivals element of the program.
For non-government schools, where enrolments continue to show a significant growth, the percentage link between non-government school general recurrent grants and average government school standard costs will be maintained. As the average cost

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 155

of educating a child in government schools has recently risen significantly in real terms, there will be a corresponding increase in per capita grants for students attending nongovernment schools. Also, in line with the 1980 election commitment, assistance for students attending Group 3 non-government schools (those assessed as having greatest need) will be increased in 1983 from 38% to 40% of government school standard costs. Taking these factors into account, together with a projected 3% increase in enrolments and some change in subsidy categories of individual schools, total recurrent grants to non-government schools are estimated to increase by 23% in 1983 compared with 1982. The level of assistance for the base capital program for non-government schools will remain constant in real terms; in addition, $9m will be allocated in 1983 as the final instalment of $25m the Government had undertaken to provide to non-government school authorities for capital purposes to lessen the pressure from new enrolments.
The following table sets out information on recent trends in enrolments together with projections for 1982 and some future years:

School Enrolments (as atfirst week ofAugust ofrespective year)

Government1980 (a) 1981 (a) 1982 (b) 1983 (b)
Non-government1980 (a) 1981 (a) 1982 (b) 1983 (b)
All schoo1s1980 (a) 1981 (a) 1982 (b) 1983 (b) 1984 (b) 1985 (b)
(a) Actual. (b) Projected. (Source: Department of Education).

Primary
'000
1508.0 1485.6 1453.8 1412.4
376.1 386.0 392.2 394.6
1884.1 1 871.6 1846.0 1807.0 1761.6 I 728.4

Secondary
'000
810.1 813.8 822.5 841.1
290.4 302.0 316.2 333.1
1 100.5 1 115.8 1 138.7 1 174.2 1211.5 1 231.7

Total
'000
2318.1 2299.4 2276.3 2253.5
666.5 688.0 708.4 727.8
2984.6 2987.4 2984.7 2981.3 2973.1 2960.1

Change on previous year
%
-0.8 -0.8 -1.0 -1.0
+2.5 +3.2 +3.0 +2.7
-0.1 +0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.3 -0.4

Enrolments in government primary schools are estimated to decline by around 120000, or approximately 8%, over the three years to 1985; non-government primary school enrolments are expected to increase slightly over this period. Government secondary school enrolments seem likely to increase by about 44000 or 5% while nongovernment secondary school enrolments are expected to increase by about 49 000 or almost 15.5%, over the same period. Overall, total enrolments are projected to decline by about 25 000. Programs such as the School to Work Transition Program, which are designed, inter alia, to encourage more young people to continue their education, and changes in immigration patterns have a bearing on these projections.

156 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Pre-schools in the States and the Northern Territory
Under the Children's Services Program, the Commonwealth makes a block grant to the States and the Northern Territory as a contribution towards the costs of pre-school education. The Government has decided that $33.1m will be provided in 1982-83 for this purpose-the same level of funds as was available to the States for pre-schools in 1981-82. Actual payments in 1981-82, however, were reduced by $O.1m on account of excess funds being held in one State from payments made in 1978 for certain pre-school projects that did not eventually proceed.

Government Schools and Pre-schools in the ACT
Outlays for government schools and pre-schools in the ACT are estimated at $107m in 1982-83, an increase of 12.5% on the 1981-82 expenditure of $95.1m. Recurrent expenditure is estimated to rise by 11.6% to $1 02.8m and capital expenditure by 38% to $4.2m. Total government school enrolments for 1983 are estimated at 38 500 compared with 38 200 in 1982 (primary down 1.6%, high schools up 5.2% and secondary colleges up 1.5%) and current Department of Education projections show slightly increasing enrolments overall in the medium term.
Commonwealth Schools Commission recurrent funds for a range of programs in government and non-government schools in the ACT have been increased from $0.9m in 1981-82 to an estimated $1.7m in 1982-83.

Non-Government Schools in the ACT
The Commonwealth provides per pupil grants to non-government schools in the ACT equivalent to those paid through the Commonwealth Schools Commission and by State Governments to non-government schools in the States. These grants are the major component of recurrent assistance which is estimated at $22.5m in 1982-83, compared with $15.1m in 1981-82. $2.8m of the apparent increase stems from a change in the timing of payments; the balance reflects higher subsidy rates in 1983, due both to the link with government school standard costs and the increase in grants to less well off schools (Group 3 schools), and an estimated increase in enrolments in 1983 of 700 (up 4% on 1982). Department of Education projections indicate a lower rate of growth in non-government school enrolments in the three years beyond 1983.
Capital grants are provided to non-government schools in the ACT under arrangements similar to the CSC's program of capital assistance for non-government schools in the States. The Government has decided to make available a grant towards construction of a co-educational Anglican Secondary School of $0.2m in 1982-83 from within the existing base level of funding of $0.7m; a further $0.6m will be made available over the subsequent two years. Assistance is also continuing for building works approved under the former Capital Aid Scheme, whereby the Commonwealth undertook to reimburse, over 10 years, capital payments and a portion of the interest charges on loans taken out by non-government school authorities in the ACT. While no new approvals have been granted since 1975 when the scheme was superseded by the capital grants scheme, capital grants in 1983 in respect of past approvals will amount to $1.5m. For 1982-83, total capital assistance, including the CSC's 'new places' program in the ACT, is estimated at $2.7m, compared with $2.8m in 1981-82.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 157

School Transport in the ACT
The cost of subsidising bus services for children travelling to and from schools is estimated at $3.9m in 1982-83, an increase of $0.3m on 1981-82. This figure reflects significant increases in fuel, salary and other operating costs, and increases in route distances and the number of schools to be served.
Curriculum Development Centre
The Curriculum Development Centre as a statutory body, in consultation with other Federal and State education authorities, produced and marketed teaching materials for use in Australian schools as well as advising on curriculum and materials development. As part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Government decided to abolish the Centre unless the States were prepared to contribute 50% of its total operating costs. As the States were not prepared to do so, the Commonwealth is proceeding to disband the Centre. A small unit has been established in the Department of Education to develop curriculum projects of national significance. $0.3m has been provided in 1982-83 for this purpose. The Curriculum Development Centre will, pending its abolition, operate at a substantially reduced level, publishing and reprinting previously approved projects. No funds have been provided in 1982-83; the Centre will use revenue from its previous sales for the residual publishing activities.

SCHOOL TO WORK TRANSITION
The Government is providing substantial grants over the five years from the beginning of 1980 for a range of education, training and counselling activities in schools and TAFE institutions. These activities are directed particularly to young people who have left (or are likely to leave) school early, and are intended to equip them better to move into the work force. Of the $43.3m available for transition projects in 1982-83, $39.9m (including $4.9m for the Education Program for Unemployed Youth) will be available for projects in government schools and TAFE colleges. An amount of $3m will be provided for non-government schools and $O.4m for national projects and evaluation.
In addition, expenditure associated with this program has been substantially increased as a result of decisions to provide living allowances to students under Commonwealth or State transition schemes as from February 1981 at an estimated cost of $llm in 1982-83 (see Function 8D: 'Labour and Employment' below).

STUDENT ASSISTANCE SCHEMES
The main schemes of community-wide student assistance are the Secondary Allowances Scheme (SAS), the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS), the Adult Secondary Education Assistance Scheme (ASEAS), and Postgraduate Awards. These provide support for families of children who are in the final two years of schooling (SAS), for adults studying full-time at matriculation level or the equivalent (ASEAS), for full-time students undertaking TAFE courses (TEAS), and for full-time undergraduate and postgraduate students at universities and colleges of advanced education (TEAS and Postgraduate Awards). The Postgraduate Awards are free of means test but are not available if a certain level of income is received from other awards; they are taxable and are awarded on the basis of academic merit. The other schemes are open to all, subject to a means test on family and student income and to academic admission requirements, and are free of tax.

158 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

From the beginning of 1983, allowance levels in all schemes will be increased. The Postgraduate Awards living allowance will be increased from $4620 to $6850 per annum, the limit on income from other awards will be eased and the number of new awards to be offered in 1983 will be increased by 100 to 900. Living allowances under TEAS and SAS will be increased by 20% and living allowances under ASEAS by 11 % (see following table).
Under TEAS, ASEAS and SAS, the maximum allowance is reduced where family income (and for TEAS and ASEAS student income) exceeds certain levels in a year. The family income levels for TEAS and ASEAS will be increased by 11 % for 1983 and the family income level for SAS will be increased to the same level as for TEAS.
Means test levels and maximum rates of living allowance applicable in both 1982 and 1983, and numbers of students expected to receive assistance in these two years, are as follows:

Maximum entitlement

Number of students

Scheme and main benefit
Tertiary education assistanceLiving at home . . . . . Living away from home Independent students
Adult secondary education assistanceLiving at home . . . Living away from home Independent students
Secondary allowances Postgraduate awards . .
Marginal adjusted family income for use in means test: TEAS and ASEAS SAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1982
$
1675 2583 2583
1675 2583 2583
726 4620
11034 8482

1983
$
23100100} 3100
I 860} 2867 2867
871 6850
12248 12248

1982
86200
2050 25910 2019

1983
88700
2100 33500 2160

Other forms of assistance for students are available to certain special groups, namely Aboriginals, soldiers' children, and isolated children; these are dealt with in the separate section 'Special Groups', but certain information on them is included in the table below.
Taken together, all forms of assistance for students (including those for special groups) are estimated to require $279.6m in 1982-83, an increase of $27.1m (10.7%) over 1981-82.
Details of estimated expenditure according to scheme and the main institutions of study are shown in the following summary table:

Student assistance schemesTertiary education assistanceUniversities Advanced education Technical and further education
Total

1981~82
$m
67.1 66.1 36.3 169.4

1982~83
$m
71.0 69.9 38.4 179.3

Change $m
+ 3.9 + 3.9 + 2.1 + 9.9

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 159

Postgraduate awardsUniversities Advanced education

Total . . . .

Other tertiary

...

Adult secondary education assistance

Secondary allowances

Total student assistance schemes

Assistance provided under programs for special groupsAboriginalsSecondary grants Study grants . . . . . Soldiers' children Assistance for isolated children

Total special groups .

Total assistance for students

1981-82
$m
9.4 0.2
9.6
l.l 4.5 15.6
200.2

1982-83
$m
12.4 0.3
12.7
1.3 4.9 22.6
220.8

Change
$m
+ 3.0 + 0.1
+ 3.1
+ 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.1
+20.7

19.2 11.8 2.3 19.2
52.3
252.5

22.1 13.3 2.3 21.1
58.8
279.6

+ 2.9 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.9
+ 6.5
+27.1

STUDENT LOANS
The Government has decided to introduce a loans scheme as additional assistance for full-time tertiary students who are permanent residents of Australia. Loans of up to $1000 per annum (and up to $8000 in total over the period of tertiary study) will be available to those eligible for TEAS, ASEAS, a Postgraduate Award, an Aboriginal Study Grant or other students who meet the requirements of a means test.
Loans will be guaranteed by the Government and an interest rate subsidy of 5% will apply. There will be a two-year period of grace from completion of study before repayments are required and the repayment period will be up to 10 years.

SPECIAL GROUPS
The Budget estimates include $107.9m towards the education of special groups in 1982-83, an increase of $6.4m (6.3%) over 1981-82.
Aboriginals
The Aboriginal Secondary Grants (ABSEG) and Aboriginal Study Grants schemes provide living allowances and other forms of benefits, free of means test, to Aboriginals attending approved secondary schools or classes or undertaking approved full-time or part-time courses of education and training at universities, colleges of advanced education, TAFE colleges and other institutions. Living and boarding allowances under these schemes in 1983 will be increased by 11 %. Under the ABSEG Scheme, school and hostel boarding allowances will be amalgamated and the new allowances will be paid at the school rate.
These schemes constitute the bulk of the Commonwealth educational assistance available to Aboriginals and account for $35.4m of the total provision compared with $30.9m in 1981-82. The increase of 14.5% reflects a greater number of Aboriginals participating in the schemes and the new allowance levels. In addition, $12.3m will be available as grants-in-aid and grants to the States and Northern Territory through the

160 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Department of Aboriginal Affairs for the implementation of programs that address the special educational disadvantages of Aboriginals. These programs include support for Aboriginal programs conducted by other than State Departments and support for independent Aboriginal schools. They will provide educational facilities and employment for about 4800 Aboriginal children and adults.

Migrant Education
Amounts shown under this heading are not comparable with those for previous years because for 1982-83 over $75m of the funds for child migrant education is included within the total Commonwealth Schools Commission programs for the States and Northern Territory. The Contingency Program for Refugee Children was transferred from the Commonwealth Department of Education to the CSC from the beginning of the 1982 calendar year, and grants for the child migrant education program have been incorporated into the CSC's English as a Second Language program.
This heading now primarily encompasses the Adult Migrant Education Program (AMEP) which provides initial settlement orientation and 'on-arrival' and 'on-going' English language training courses for adult migrants and refugees. Expenditure covers the salaries of English language instructors, bilingual information instructors, funds for work on field and program activities by States and non-government organisations, and living allowances for adults attending courses. Following the review of post-arrival services for migrants by the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs, the Government has decided to introduce modifications to the 'on-arrival' component which should achieve a more cost-effective provision of resources while giving more newcomers access to language training. The Government will also be extending the present living allowance (subject to an income test) to cover those attending 'on-arrival' courses on a part-time basis.
For the 'on-going' component, the Government has decided that, from 1983, the more advanced courses should be provided as part of the normal offerings of technical and further education institutions wherever sufficient demand exists. To facilitate the transition to this new arrangement, funds of the order of $1.2m will be transferred in 1983 from AMEP to the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission (see'Tertiary Education').
The provision for adult migrant and refugee education in 1982-83 is $34.4m compared with $32.4m in 1981-82.

Soldiers' Children Education Scheme
Under this Scheme, assistance is provided by way of living allowances and other benefits for the schooling, tertiary education and training of children of those veterans who died as a result of war service or are either blind or totally and permanently incapacitated. Benefits are generally free of means test although a student's own earnings may be taken into account. Allowances for primary and secondary students under the Scheme are to be increased by 10.7% from January 1983 and allowances for tertiary students including income limits are to be increased in line with increases in similar allowances payable under TEAS. The number of beneficiaries is estimated to decline from 2190 at 30 June 1982 to 1900 at 30 June 1983.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 161

Assistancefor Isolated Children
This Scheme assists families whose homes are remote from normal daily access to government schools. It provides basic allowances free of means test for eligible students who are boarding away from home, studying by correspondence or living in a second family home close to school facilities. Means tested allowances are also provided to meet the additional costs of boarding away from home and to meet cases of special hardship. The Scheme also covers children regarded as isolated for reasons of medical and social disability. From the beginning of 1983, the additional boarding and special supplementary allowances will be combined to give a new allowance. The level of family income above which the new allowances are reduced will be $10200. The new allowance will be subject to actual costs incurred and a sibling concession will apply. The basic boarding, second home and short term boarding allowances will be increased by 11 % from the beginning of 1983.
It is estimated that the Scheme will cost $19.6m in 1982-83 (compared to $17.8m in 1981-82) and that assistance will be provided in respect of an estimated 19 600 children in 1983. The increased provision reflects the increases in benefits to be available under the scheme.
In addition, the Government introduced from the beginning of 1982 a three year pilot program costing $4m to provide, on loan, video facilities to families in isolated areas.
GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER EXPENDITURE
General administrative and other expenditure of the Department of Education is estimated to increase by 12.5% to $33.2m in 1982-83, of which $24.9m is for wages and salaries. Also included under this heading is $0.7m in support of research in education through the former Education Research and Development Committee and the Australian Council for Education Research, and for evaluative studies (mainly of student assistance schemes) being undertaken by the Department itself.
To assist full advantage to be taken of the telecommunications possibilities to be opened up by the domestic satellite in 1985, $O.lm will be provided by the Commonwealth for research into its uses for the delivery of educational services, with the States and the Northern Territory contributing on a $ for $ basis.

3. HEALTH
Commonwealth outlays on health recorded under this function are estimated at $3378.7m in 1982-83, an increase of$466.3m or 16% on 1981-82.
An additional amount of $1010.9m is provided to the States and the Northern Territory in the form of grants in lieu of previous specific purpose payments for health, following changed funding arrangements introduced in 1981-82. (See the function 'Payments to or for the States, Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec' for details.)
Commonwealth assistance for health care is also provided through the taxation system. A rebate at the standard rate of taxation is allowed against the cost of basic hospital and/or medical insurance with registered health funds, at a cost to revenue which is estimated to be of the order of $506m in 1982-83. In addition net expenditure in respect

162 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

of doctors, hospitals, chemists, dentists, opticians and optometrists is in certain circumstances allowable for income tax rebate purposes; gifts of $2 or more to eligible organisations (e.g. medical research organisations) are tax deductible; and a wide range of health related goods are exempt from sales tax. Estimates of the cost of other 'taxation expenditures' are given in the Appendices to Statement No.4.

Medical Services and Benefits~ Medical Benefits Diagnostic Services Veterans and Dependants
Total
Hospital Services and Benefits~ Hospital Payments Hospital Benefits Reinsurance Other Hospital Benefits Veterans and Dependants Launceston General Hospital
Total
Health Program Grants Pharmaceutical Services and Benefits~
Pharmaceutical Benefits~ General Concessional Pensioners Administration
Veterans and Dependants
Total
Nursing Home and Domiciliary Care Services and
Benefits~
Nursing Home Benefits Nursing Homes Assistance Domiciliary Nursing Care Benefits Nursing Care for Veterans and Dependants Home Nursing Service
Total
Community Health Facilities and Services Dental Services for School Children Treatment of Tuberculosis Health Services in the ACT, nec Health Services for Aboriginals Other Health Services~
Medical Research Grants Walter and Eliza Hall Institute Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commonwealth Institute of Health Aids and Appliances Blood Transfusion Services and Products Isolated Patients Travel and Accommodation Assis-
tance Drug Education Campaigns Quarantine Services National Health Promotion Program Other
Total
General Administrative Expenditure Recoveries
TOTAL HEALTH

1980-81 Actual
$m
682.9 23.6 85.2
791.6
1393.9 115.2 0.5 204.1 3.4
1 717.1
5.3
118.2
191.0 11.1 44.9
365.2

1981-82 Actual
$m
772.8 25.8 103.0
901.7
257.7 101.1
0.1 231.8
2.4
593.2
5.8
150.9
239.9 13.2 54.9
458.9

1982-83 Estimate
$m
917.0 23.4 108.0
1048.4
276.5 100.0
249.2 2.5
628.2
6.3
148.6 23.7 285.6 14.5 59.6
531.9

Change
$m
+144.2 - 2.4 + 5.0
+146.7
+ 18.9 1.1 0.1
+ 17.3 + 0.1
+ 35.1
+ 0.4
2.3 + 23.7 + 45.7 + 1.3 + 4.7
+ 73.1

277.8 103.8
17.5 39.2 13.5
451.9
67.8 20.9
1.3 50.7 19.9
19.2 0.3 10.5 3.0 11.9 13.S
4.S 1.7 2S.3
15.6
109.3
53.1 4.0Cr
3650.0

407.3 164.1 21.2 48.1 16.5
657.2
7.9 0.2 1.1 83.8 21.6
25.6 1.6 7.3 4.8
15.3 16.2
6.3 1.7 30.1 0.1 IS.I
127.2
57.S 3.SCr
2912.4

534.0 205.9
22.8 50.4 21.1
834.2
8.2 0.5 1.2 81.4 24.2
29.8 4.4 4.8 4.9 20.1 19.5
6.9 I.S 33.3
22.1
147.6
71.7 5.1Cr
3378.7

+126.7 + 41.8 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 4.6
+177.0
+ 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1
2.5 + 2.6
+ 4.1 + 2.8
2.5 + 0.1 + 4.8 + 3.3
+ 0.6 + 0.1 + 3.2
0.1 + 4.1
+ 20.5
+ 14.0 - 1.3
+466.3

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 163

PENSIONER HEALTH BENEFICIARIES AND HEALTH CARE CARD HOLDERS
Eligibility for Pensioner Health Benefits (PHB) and Health Benefits Cards
In addition to certain postal, transport and telephone concessions, eligible pensioners including supporting parent beneficiaries, sickness beneficiaries, rehabilitation allowees and their dependants may receive the following Commonwealth 'health' concessions without charge as holders of PHB and Health Benefits cards:
- pensioner medical benefits;
- Schedule optometrical services;
- public hospital accommodation and services as a public patient, and outpatient treatment;
- pharmaceutical benefits; and
- hearing aids and batteries (provided by the National Acoustic Laboratories).
Eligibility for these Commonwealth fringe benefits is currently restricted to those whose income, apart from pension or benefit, is less than $40 a week in the case of a single person, or $68 a week combined income in the case of a married pensioner or beneficiary couple. The income limits are higher for recipients of sheltered employment allowances or where there are dependent children.
From the first pension payday in November 1982, the Government has decided to increase these limits on non-pension income to $54 a week for single pensioners and $90 a week for married pensioner couples. In the case of recipients of sheltered employment allowances, the limit for single recipients will remain at $68 a week but the married limit will increase to $90 a week. The Government has decided that from February 1983 these higher limits for single sheltered employment allowees will also be extended to invalid pensioners undertaking training in Activity Therapy Centres and Adult Training Centres which have been approved under the terms of the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act. A uniform and increased amount of additional income of $20 a week will also be allowable for each child under 16 or dependent full-time student aged 16-24 years.
Since January 1982, 60% of any disability pension received by a service pensioner has been excluded from the PHB income tests. From the first pension payday in November 1982 disability pension will be totally disregarded for the purposes of this income test.
Also from the first payday in November 1982, entitlement to Commonwealth fringe benefits will be extended to all sickness beneficiaries and their dependants without the requirement to satisfy any income test other than the test for receipt of the benefit itself.
The estimated number of holders of PHB and Health Benefits cards and their dependants at 30 June 1982 was 2.3 million.

Eligibility for Health Care Cards
The following groups in special need are eligible for a Health Care card: - for the first six months of residence, migrants and refugees, regardless of their
income, who have been authorised to remain indefinitely in Australia;

164 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

- people whose average weekly income for the four weeks prior to applying for the card is below the following levels:
- married couples, $172 a week ($184 from November 1982). These income levels rise by $20 for each child,
- single parents with one child, $172 a week ($184 from November 1982). These income levels rise by $20 for each additional child, and
- single people without children, $103 a week ($111 a week from November 1982); and
- unemployment and special beneficiaries. A Health Care card is automatically issued subject to the same income test as for the Pensioner Health Benefits card, currently $40 a week for single people and $68 a week for married couples, rising from November 1982, to $54 and $90 a week respectively. If these limits are exceeded, unemployment and special beneficiaries may qualify as low income earners subject to the limits on average weekly income listed above.
The Government has decided that from 1 January 1983 a Health Care card will be issued automatically for 12 months, without income test, to people who have accepted employment and lost eligibility for an invalid pension, sheltered employment allowance or in the case of former invalid pensioners, rehabilitation allowance.
Holders of Health Care cards and their dependants are entitled to the following 'health' benefits:
- the provision, with the agreement of doctors, of Schedule medical benefits (see 'Medical Benefits' below);
- Schedule optometrical services; and
- free public hospital accommodation and treatment as a public patient and free outpatient treatment.

MEDICAL SERVICES AND BENEFITS
Medical Benefits
The Commonwealth contributes towards the costs of medical services, as f0ilUws:
- 85% of Schedule fees, subject to the gap between the benefit and Schedule fee for a service not exceeding $5, for pensioners (and their dependants) covered by Pensioner Health Benefits entitlements, and sickness beneficiaries (and their dependants) covered by Health Benefits entitlements;
- 85% of the Schedule fee for each service for persons in special need covered by a Health Care card where the service is bulk-billed on the Commonwealth;
- 85% of the Schedule fee, subject to the gap between benefit and Schedule fee for a service not exceeding $5, for persons in special need covered by a Health Care card where the patient is billed and claims through a registered medical benefits organisation; and
- for the rest of the population, 30% of the Schedule fee for each service, provided the person is covered by basic medical insurance with a registered health fund. (Commonwealth medical benefits are not available to persons who do not take out basic medical cover with a registered health insurance fund.)

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 165

It is expected that in 1982-83 Commonwealth medical benefits for around 89% of services rendered to eligible pensioners, sickness beneficiaries, and Health Care cardholders will be paid directly by the Commonwealth under the bulk-billing arrangements. In respect of the rest of the population who are insured for medical services (including the balance of eligible pensioners, sickness beneficiaries, Health Care card-holders and their dependants), registered medical benefits organisations will act as agents for the Commonwealth and pay Commonwealth medical benefits.
Outlays on Commonwealth medical benefits are estimated to increase by $144.2m in 1982-83 to $9l7m. The increase includes provision for:
- $26m for the balance of the 7.6% average increase in Schedule fees from 16 November 1981 following the 1981 Enquiry on Medical Fees for medical benefit purposes, and the increase in optometrical consultation fees from 1 January 1982;
- an allowance for the effects of an expected increase in Schedule fees in 1982-83;
- $34m for benefits at Pensioner Health Benefits rates, reflecting increases in use, and growth in the estimated number of persons covered;
- $15m for benefits to persons in special need reflecting changes in eligibility criteria from 1 September 1981; and
- $43m for services rendered to medically insured persons for changes in eligibility criteria from 1 September 1981.
Diagnostic Services
This item relates to the running of health laboratories operated by the Commonwealth. These include Department of Health pathology laboratories, which provide services to hospitals and medical practitioners, the National Acoustic Laboratories, the National Biological Standards Laboratories and the Australian Radiation Laboratory.
Since the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the possibility of transferring the pathology laboratories to the States has been taken up with State Governments. The laboratory at Kalgoorlie was transferred to the Western Australian Government from 1 July 1982. The provision of $23.4m for 1982-83 allows for a full year's operation of the remaining pathology laboratories pending further negotiations with the States.
Treatment and Allowancesfor Veterans and Dependants
The Commonwealth meets the costs for eligible persons of specialist, local medical officer, paramedical and dental services, the provision and maintenance of surgical aids, and travelling expenses incurred in obtaining medical treatment. The estimated increase of $5m reflects increased fees for professional services, increases in travelling costs and increased demand arising from demographic factors as well as decisions taken in the Budget affecting the number of veterans eligible to receive free treatment.

HOSPITAL SERVICES AND BENEFITS
Hospital Payments
Under new financial arrangements that commenced on 1 July 1981, New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory receive, under the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981, general purpose financial assistance identified for health purposes in lieu of specific purpose assistance previously

166 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

provided by the Commonwealth for public hospital operating costs, the community health program and the school dental scheme. South Australia and Tasmania receive general purpose assistance payments in respect of the community health program and school dental scheme only. Details of these new arrangements are provided under the function-'Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec'.
South Australia and Tasmania continue to receive from the Commonwealth specific purpose assistance to meet half the approved net operating costs of those State public hospitals recognised for cost sharing purposes under Agreements drawn up under the Health Insurance Act 1973. The Agreements between the Commonwealth and South Australia andTasmania expire on 30 June 1985.
South Australia and Tasmania have been given the option to elect at any time before 30 June 1985 to receive general purpose assistance in respect of their public hospitals on the same terms as the other States and the Northern Territory in lieu of specific purpose assistance. Neither State has exercised this option.
Hospital net operating costs represent the aggregate residual operating deficits of 'recognised' public hospitals after patient fees and other hospital revenues have been taken into account. Commonwealth payments since 1979-80 have been on the basis of maintaining the overall level of hospital services at their 30 June 1979 level. Estimated payments in 1982-83 to South Australia and Tasmania reflect a continuation of this policy.
The Agreements with South Australia and Tasmania were amended with effect from 1 September 1981 to reflect major changes to criteria for the provision of free public hospital accommodation and treatment, and to levels of charges for hospital services, to bring them into line with those applying to the determination of the levels of health grant paid to the 'non-agreement' States and the Northern Territory. Further amendments effective from 1 July 1982 have been made to allow South Australia and Tasmania (in line with the other States and the Northern Territory) to set public hospital charges independently of the Commonwealth, provided that the range and level of these charges are not less than those being applied at 1 September 1981. These amendments also enable South Australia to place those of its public hospitals' long term hospital patients not in need of continuous acute care on a financial basis comparable to nursing home patients. Similar arrangements already apply in Tasmania.
Payments under the Health Insurance Act 1973 for hospitals in 1982-83 are estimated to increase by $18.9m to $276.5m, and comprise:
- half the estimated net operating costs of 'recognised' hospitals in South Australia and Tasmania for 1982-83-$161.8m ($162.8m in 1981-82);
- the final payment for State entitlements in respect of 1980-81 cost sharing-$24.8m; and
- payments to private hospitals in respect of the daily bed subsidy arrangements (see 'Private Hospitals' below)-$90m ($84.4m in 1981-82).
Private Hospitals
Under the Health Insurance Act 1973 the Commonwealth makes payments of$16 a day for each occupied bed in approved private hospitals. A higher bed-day subsidy of $28 per day is paid for patients receiving a prescribed surgical procedure. The estimated

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 167

increase, from $84.4m in 1981-82 to $90m in 1982-83, reflects growth in the number of bed-days for which payments are made.
Hospitals Benefits Reinsurance Trust Fund Under the provisions of the National Health Act 1953, the Commonwealth subsi-
dises private health funds by sharing deficits that arise in reinsurance accounts required to be maintained by registered hospital insurance organisations. The deficits arise from paying benefits to long term hospitalised members. The Commonwealth's contribution to the Fund in 1982-83 will be $1 OOm, the same as in 1981-82.
Veterans and Dependants
Repatriation hospitals and clinics are maintained in each State for the treatment of eligible veterans and their dependants; to a limited extent non-repatriation patients also are treated in repatriation hospitals, while use is made, where appropriate, of private and State public hospitals for repatriation patients. The increase of $17.7m to $236.4m in the 1982-83 provision reflects higher wages and salaries, operational and equipment costs associated with the running of repatriation institutions, including the re-opening of five wards as well as an increase in nurse trainee positions ($10.5m) and increased bed charges and usage in non-departmental institutions ($7.2m).
Expenditure on medical care and treatment in State mental hospitals for eligible veterans and their dependants is estimated at $12.8m in 1982-83.
Launceston General Hospital
The Commonwealth is meeting 50% of the approved cost of Stage One of the redevelopment of the Launceston General Hospital. The Commonwealth's share of the total estimated cost is now $22.8m. Payments in 1982-83 are estimated to be $2.5m.
HEALTH PROGRAM GRANTS
Health Program Grants, authorised under the Health Insurance Act 1973, are payable to eligible organisations to meet the cost, or such proportion of the cost as the Minister for Health may determine, of approved health services, including contract medical services, provided outside of hospitals by approved organisations. Eligible organisations impose charges for services where appropriate.
Included in the estimate of $6. 3m for 1982-83 are:
- $1.9m for the payment of salaries and associated staff costs involved in the clinical activities of Aboriginal Medical Services; administrative and other expenses are provided for by grants-in-aid from the Department of Aboriginal Affairs;
- $2.8m for payment to family planning associations in respect of estimated deficits on the clinical activities of the associations; and
- $0.9m for projects that develop and test new forms of health care delivery systems (e.g. health maintenance organisations).
PHARMACEUTICAL SERVICES AND BENEFITS
Pharmaceutical Benefits-General. Concessional and Pensioners Except for a flat charge of $3.20 per prescription item, payable by persons other
than Pensioner Health Benefits (PHB) and Health Benefits (HB) card-holders and their dependants, the Commonwealth meets the cost of a wide range of drugs supplied

168 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

on doctors' and dentists' prescriptions. These card-holders and their dependants are eligible to receive, free of charge, all drugs on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) list.
The Government has decided, with effect from 1 January 1983, to introduce a three tier scheme for patient contribution. Under this scheme there will be:
- an increase in the flat charge per prescription item to the general public from $3.20 to $4 reflecting increases in the cost of drugs and in chemists' remuneration for the supply of pharmaceutical benefits;
- a new concessional flat charge per prescription item of $2 for Health Care cardholders, Social Security pensioners who do not hold a PHB card, Veterans' Affairs service pensioners with no PHB card, and the dependants of these groups-these groups previously paid the same contribution as the general public; and
- a continuation of the arrangements under which PHB and HB card-holders receive list drugs free of charge.
Total outlays on pharmaceutical benefits (general, concessional and pensioners) are estimated to increase by a net $67.1m in 1982-83 to $457.9m. The main components of the net increase are as follows:
- an estimated increase ($34.1m) in the volume of prescriptions dispensed and variation in the mix of benefit items prescribed;
- the full year effect ($15.1m) of the across-the-board increase in drug prices from 1 November 1981 (3.5% on the price to chemists plus 10 cents per benefit item);
- a reduction ($14.4m) due to the increased patient contribution of $3.20 which applied from 1 December 1981;
- a part-year increase of $12.4m ($24.8m in a full year) resulting from the Government's decision to award an across-the-board drug price increase to manufacturers and wholesalers, to apply from 1 November 1982 (3% on the price to chemists plus 9 cents per benefit item);
- the full-year effect ($9.1m) of the increase from 1 January 1982 in chemists' dispensing fees which was awarded by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal, and $8m for the further increase awarded by the Tribunal, from 1 July 1982; and
- a net increase ($2.8m) resulting from the part-year effect of the increase in the general contribution rate and the introduction of the new concessional contribution rate, both to apply from 1 January 1983.

Pharmaceutical Benefits-Veterans and Dependants
The Commonwealth meets the full cost of drugs and medicinal preparations supplied on doctors' and dentists' prescriptions for eligible veterans and their dependants. The increase of $4.7m to $59.6m in 1982-83 reflects increased use of pharmaceuticals together with the increase in drug prices awarded to manufacturers and wholesalers and in chemists' remuneration, referred to in the preceding section.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 169

NURSING HOME AND DOMICILIARY CARE SERVICES AND BENEFITS
Nursing Home Benefits Under the National Health Act 1953 benefits are paid by the Commonwealth to
approved nursing homes for all qualified patients in such homes. Current benefit rates, which have applied since November 1981, are:

New South Wales and Australian Capital Territory . . . . . . . . .
Victoria . . . . . . . . . . Queensland . . . . . . . . . South Australia and Northern Territory Western Australia . . . . . . . Tasmania . . . . . . . . . .

Ordinary Care
Patients $aday

Extensive Care
Patients $aday

23.00 31.65 20.40 27.60 18.55 20.65

29.00 37.65 26.40 33.60 24.55 26.65

Benefits are adjusted annually, with new benefit levels to apply from the first pension payday in November, so that, together with the statutory patient contribution (currently $10.25 a day), they cover fees charged to 70% of patients in approved nongovernment nursing homes in each State at the time of the review. The patient contribution is set at 87.5% of the sum of the single age pension plus supplementary assistance.
Expenditure on nursing home benefits is expected to be $534m in 1982-83, an increase of $126.7m or 31 %, reflecting the effects of higher benefits and an estimated increase in bed-days of the order of 11 %.

Nursing Homes Assistance
Under the NurSing Homes Assistance Act 1974, the Commonwealth meets approved operating deficits of eligible private non-profit nursing homes that participate in arrangements authorised by the Act.
Expenditure on financing of deficits of eligible nursing homes is estimated to be $205.9m in 1982-83, an increase of$41.8m or 25.5%, reflecting an allowance for cost increases and an estimated 7% increase in bed-days. The expected increase in bed-days reflects the continuing assistance provided to organisations under the Aged and Disabled Persons Homes Act 1954. The average number of beds funded under the deficit financing arrangements increased by around 1300 in 1981-82 and is expected to increase by a further 950 in 1982-83.

Domiciliary Nursing Care Benefits
The Commonwealth pays a benefit of $42 per fortnight to eligible persons who provide care for approved patients at home as an alternative to institutional care. Patients must be aged 16 years or over and require professional nursing care to an extent that would otherwise justify admission to an approved nursing home.
Expenditure in 1982-83 is estimated to be $22.8m, $1.6m higher than in 1981-82. The increase results from an expected growth in the number of recipients of the order of7%.

170 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Nursing Care for Veterans and Dependants
The Commonwealth meets the full costs of nursing home accommodation required by veterans for service-related disabilities. For certain categories of veterans and war widows, the Commonwealth also meets the cost of nursing home care for disabilities not related to service, subject to payment by the patient of the patient contribution applicable to other nursing home patients in the community. Free domiciliary care services are also provided, as required, to these groups.
Home Nursing Services
Approved non-profit organisations providing home nursing services receive Commonwealth subsidies, not in excess of that paid to the organisation by the relevant State government or local government authority, which are estimated to cost $21.1 m in 1982-83.
The increase of $4.6m largely reflects an increase in the number of eligible nurses on which subsidy payments are based ($l.lm), and an increase in the rates of subsidy from 1 July 1982 ($3.5m), including provision for an expected increase in the amount of assistance provided by the States in 1982-83.

COMMUNITY HEALTH FACILITIES AND SERVICES
In 1982-83 the Commonwealth will provide an estimated $8.2m for 'national projects' that have an Australia-wide application and are fully funded by the Commonwealth. A large part of this ($5.6m) is for the Family Medicine Program of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners, a vocational training program for medical graduates wishing to enter general practice. The balance ($2.6m) comprises grants to various non-government organisations which are national in character and which operate in the fields of health care delivery, education and research.

DENTAL SERVICES FOR SCHOOL CHILDREN
The 1982-83 estimate of $0.5m provides for the finalisation of Commonwealth payments in respect of services in 1980-81 that were formerly cost shared with the States.

TREATMENT OF TUBERCULOSIS
The provision of $1.2m in 1982-83 is for the payment of allowances to persons (and their dependants) suffering from tuberculosis. The increase of $O.1m mainly reflects increased rates of benefit.

HEALTH SERVICES IN AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY NEC
The Commonwealth provides or subsidises health services in th~ ACT of the type provided elsewhere by State and local government authorities. These include three hospitals (expected to provide in 1982-83 a total of 903 acute care beds, 44 nursing home beds and 20 beds for the profoundly intellectually handicapped), public health activities, ambulance services, community health and nursing services (including 11 community health care centres, 62 child health clinics, and 57 school dental clinics), 2 nursing homes (248 beds), 6 residential care hostels for the mentally ill and the handicapped (140 beds), a central health laboratory and a centralised health services supply centre.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 171

Net expenditure by the Commonwealth under this heading in 1982-83 on recurrent and capital costs of health services in the ACT is estimated at $81.4m, compared with $83.8m in 1981-82. After allowing for the additional payday in 1981-82 ($2.lm), additional revenue ($4.3m) and cash on hand at the end of 1981-82 ($O.7m), the effective increase in financial resources available in 1982-83 over 1981-82 is $4.7m or 5.6%.

HEALTH SERVICES FOR ABORIGINALS
This heading covers special assistance provided for Aboriginal health through the Department of Aboriginal Affairs' programs of direct assistance to Aboriginal organisations and groups, including Aboriginal Medical Services ($8.5m in 1982-83), and payments to the States ($15.6m in 1982-83). Funds are provided to develop Aboriginal responsibility for, and involvement in, the improvement of their own health through participation in the delivery of medical/health services, and through training of Aboriginal expertise in all aspects of health care administration.
In addition to the amount under this heading, $12m is being provided in 1982-83 as the second year of implementation of the Government's undertaking to provide $50m over five years for the Aboriginal Public Health Improvement Program. The program encompasses the provision of water supplies, sewerage systems, and power generation and reticulation to Aboriginal communities around Australia. The amounts for the Aboriginal Public Health Improvement Program are provided through the Department of Aboriginal Affairs' grants-in-aid and grants to the States and the Northern Territory for Community Management and Services, which appear under the function 'Urban and Regional Development nec'.

OTHER HEALTH SERVICES
Medical Research Grants
The Commonwealth provides financial assistance for medical research through the Medical Research Endowment Fund. Disbursement of the funds is made by the Minister for Health on the advice of the National Health and Medical Research Council and acting, where necessary, in accordance with the conditions of gifts or bequests made to the Fund. Assistance is provided to universities and other institutions such as the Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine and the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, and to individual research workers or trainees, and may also be provided to Commonwealth and State Government departments. The Budget provision has been increased by $4.lm to $29.8m in 1982-83, representing an increase in support for these groups of 112% in four years.
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute ofMedical Research
The Commonwealth has agreed to share equally with the Victorian Government the approved cost of a new building for the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research. The project is estimated to cost a total of $35.8m (taking into account escalation over the period of construction) and is expected to be completed in 1984-85. The estimated Commonwealth contribution in 1982-83 is $4.4m.

172 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission
The Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission (CSL) produces and sells pharmaceutical and veterinary products as approved by the Minister for Health. Under the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Act 1961 the Commonwealth meets the full cost of activities considered to be in the national interest which are undertaken by the Commission at the request of the Minister for Health. The national interest activities include research, the maintenance of production facilities and the holding of stocks of pharmaceutical products. An amount of $4.8m is provided for these activities in 1982-83, including an allocation of $O.Sm for research into the drug 'Interferon'.
The decline in expenditure on the CSL recorded in 1982-83 reflects the completion of a capital works program that commenced in 1978. An amount of $2.4m was made available for that purpose in 1981-82.
Commonwealth Institute ofHealth
The Commonwealth Institute of Health, jointly operated by the Commonwealth Department of Health and the University of Sydney, is a national research and teaching centre. The Institute continues to undertake the basic functions of its predecessor, the School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine. Priority is given to health services research, health education, preventive medicine and health surveillance, and occupational and environmental health.
The amount of $4.9m to be provided to the Institute in 1982-83 includes $3.2m to cover its recurrent and capital costs and $1.7m for a special epidemiological study into the effect of herbicides and other chemicals on Australian Vietnam veterans.
Aids and Appliances
The Commonwealth provides, through the National Acoustic Laboratories (NAL) at no cost to users, a range of hearing services for children, eligible pensioners, and supporting parents who receive an allowance from the Department of Social Security. Services include hearing tests, provision, fitting and maintenance of hearing aids and the supply of hearing aid batteries. The laboratories also conduct a research and development program on hearing impairment, hearing aid design and technology, noise measurement and hearing conservation.
The Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions recommended that private sector involvement in NAL activities be increased. Tenders have been called for a contract to manufacture hearing aids to NAL designs. The cost of supplying hearing aids and batteries in 1982-83 (to an estimated SO 000 clients) is estimated to be $lO.Sm, $2.8m higher than in 1981-82.
The Commonwealth also meets the full costs of stoma appliances that are provided free of charge by stoma associations to their members ($3.5m in 1982-83). Artificial limbs are supplied free by the Department of Veterans' Affairs to veterans and other eligible persons and payments to contractors for the supply of limbs are estimated to be $2.Sm in 1982-83.
The Government will provide $3.6m to the States and the Territories for the continuation of a Program of Aids for Disabled People under which aids (for example, wheelchairs, walking aids, splints and home modifications) may be provided without charge to disabled people who are not eligible to receive them under other existing

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 173

Commonwealth or State programs. $2.4m was provided for the program in 1981-82 and it is estimated that an additional 14 000 di~abled Australians will benefit from the increased level of funding provided in 1982-83.
Blood Transfusion Services and Products
The annual operating costs of the Red Cross Society's Blood Transfusion Service in the States are shared by the States (60%), the Society (the lower of 5% of operating costs or 10% of the previous year's income from donations) and the Commonwealth (the balance). The Commonwealth provides similar assistance in the Northern Territory. Approved capital costs are shared between the Commonwealth and the States and the Northern Territory on a $ for $ basis.
Blood collected by the Transfusion Service is processed by the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission and blood products are supplied, free of charge, to hospitals and approved pathologists for use in medical treatment and analysis. The Commonwealth reimburses the Commission for the cost of processing the blood. The Commonwealth contributions are estimated to increase by $3.3m in 1982-83 to $19.5m, reflecting demand and cost increases.
Isolated Patients Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme
Under this scheme the Commonwealth provides financial assistance to persons (and, if necessary, their escorts/attendants) who are referred for specialist medical treatment not available locally. To be eligible for assistance a patient must reside outside the metropolitan areas of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth and be more than 200 kilometres from the nearest place of specialist medical treatment; persons living on certain offshore islands are exempt from this requirement.
The Commonwealth meets the approved travel costs per return journey of all eligible patients, escorts and/or attendants less a total contribution of $20 regardless of whether the patient is escorted or not. An accommodation benefit of up to $20 per night per person in respect of each approved overnight stay is also payable.
The cost of the scheme is expected to increase by about $0.6m in 1982-83 to $6.9m, reflecting greater usage.
Drug Education Campaigns
An amount of $1.8m will be provided in 1982-83 through the National Drug Education Program to support State, Northern Territory and national programs of education to reduce the abuse of narcotics and other drugs of addiction.
Quarantine Services
Human, plant and animal quarantine measures are enforced to prevent the introduction into or the spread of exotic diseases within Australia. By arrangement, the States and the Northern Territory administer, at Commonwealth cost, certain animal, plant and human quarantine operations. Other quarantine functions are administered directly by the Commonwealth.
The provision of $33.3m for quarantine services in 1982-83 is an increase of $3.2m on 1981-82. This increase reflects, in part, the effect of increases in payments to the States and the Northern Territory and medical practitioners for animal, plant and human quarantine activities ($I.3m) and in expenditure on seaport waste disposal facilities ($OAm).

174 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Other
This category includes expenditure on international, environmental, social and other public health activities, health advisory committees, and expenditure under the Therapeutic Goods Act 1966. Also included is a subsidy to the Royal Flying Doctor Service ($4.Sm), funds for the National Trachoma Program ($1.1m), $1.5m for the combined mumps/measles vaccine to be made available in 1982-83, a special grant of $O.4m to the Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine for gene synthesis research, and grants to the States and the Northern Territory for the Australian Encephalitis Eradication Campaign ($O.lm).

GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE
Expenditure under this heading is estimated at $71.7m in 1982-83 and comprises the major portion of general administrative and capital expenses of the Department of Health, including the costs of administering Commonwealth medical benefits, nursing home benefits and assistance and subsidies for private hospitals.
The Commonwealth pays a service fee to registered medical insurance funds for paying medical benefits on the Commonwealth's behalf to non-medically insured:
- persons registered with the funds, for medical services rendered to them after 1 November 1978 but prior to 1 September 1981; and
- PHB, Health Benefits and Health Care card-holders and their dependants whose doctors decline to bulk-bill.
The estimated cost in 1982-83 of the service fee is $S.4m, $1.7m greater than in 1981-82. The increase reflects the full-year effect of an increase in fees and in the number of services attracting the fee.

RECOVERIES
Recoveries shown under this heading are in respect of charges met by certain countries for treatment given to their war veterans through facilities made available by the Department of Veterans' Affairs, charges made on departments and authorities for the use of the Department of Health's computer facilities, and other miscellaneous receipts.

4. SOCIAL SECURITY AND WELFARE
The Australian social security system is intended to protect people from economic hardship caused by events such as loss of earnings through age, invalidity, sickness, unemployment or the loss or absence of a supporting spouse as a result of death, desertion or long-term separation. It is designed also to compensate veterans for service-related disabilities and the dependants of those whose deaths are service-related and to assist parents with the expenses associated with raising children.
Much of this assistance is provided by way of cash benefits. There are selective or income-tested benefits such as invalid and widows' pensions and unemployment benefits, as well as universal benefits such as family allowances and handicapped child's allowance.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 175

In addition, assistance is provided, eIther direCtly or tnrougn ~tate and local government authorities and voluntary agencies, for a wide range of welfare services for people with special needs. The aged, for example, may be assisted with their accommodation needs and the disabled may be trained so that they can re-enter paid employment.
Assistance is provided in a variety of forms for the advancement of Aboriginals.
Total direct outlays on social security and welfare in 1982-83 are estimated to be $13 272.2m which is equivalent to 28.2% of total Budget outlays. The increase over 1981-82 is $1774.1m or 15.4%, but the increase in outlays due to increases in rates of pensions and benefits, increased numbers of cash benefits recipients, and expansion of welfare services is about 18% once allowance is made for the different number of pension paydays in 1981-82 and 1982-83.
In addition to these outlays on social security and welfare, assistance is provided under the personal income tax system through the dependent spouse and sole parent rebates and through the deductions allowed for gifts to certain welfare bodies which provide indirect assistance to the organisations concerned. The Government has decided to increase the dependent spouse rebate where there is a dependent child, to increase the sole parent rebate and to introduce a new pensioner tax rebate. Further details are outlined in Budget Statement No.4.

Assistance to the AgedAge Pensions and Allowances Aged Persons' Homes and Hostels Home Care Services Personal Care Subsidy Other
Total

1980-81 Actual
$m
3935.8 45.8 21.5 19.6 0.2
4022.9

1981-82 Actual
$m
4506.9 56.7 23.6 22.2 0.2
4609.7

1982-83 Estimate
$m
4900.0 83.0 31.5 35.0 0.2
5049.7

Change $m
+ 393.1 + 26.3 + 7.8 + 12.8 + 0.1 + 440.0

Assistance to Veterans and their DependantsDisability Pensions and Allowances Service Pensions Other
Total

499.9 686.5
0.6
I 187.0

514.6 807.5
0.6
1322.8

570.1 1005.5
0.6
1576.2

+ 55.5 + 198.0 + 253.5

Assistance to the HandicappedInvalid Pensions and Allowances Sheltered Employment Allowances Mobility Allowance for Severely Disabled Persons Handicapped Children's Benefits and Allowances Handicapped Persons' Facilities Rehabilitation Services Other
Total

880.8 27.5
20.8 51.4 25.0 0.9
1006.4

977.1 34.0
24.2 60.0 28.2
1.6
I 125.1

1040.0 42.5 4.6 27.8 72.6 41.8 0.9
1230.2

+ 62.9
+ 8.5
+ 4.6 + 3.6 + 12.7 + 13.6
0.7
+ 105.1

Assistance to Widows and Single ParentsWidows' Pensions and Allowances Supporting Parents' Benefits and Allowances Other
Total

641.8 412.4
14.3
1068.5

717.4 605.9
1323.3

755.0 724.0
1479.0

+ 37.6 + 118.1 + 155.7

176 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Change

AssIstance to FamiliesFamily Allowances Family Income Supplement Children's Services (a) Crisis Accommodation for Families in Distress Orphan's Pension Other

$m
950.4 42.9
2.1 4.5

$m
I 041.8
47.4 2.0 2.9 5.3

$m
1360.0 3.5
70.1 4.0 3.4 6.1

$m
+ 318.2 + 3.5 + 22.7 + 2.0 + 0.6 + 0.8

Total

999.9

I 099.4

1447.2 + 347.8

Assistance to the Unemployed and SickUnemployment Benefits Sickness Benefits Special Benefits Unemployment Relief Relocation Assistance Scheme Other

995.7 174.5 70.0 14.2
1.3 0.3

1224.3 225.1 74.1 14.9 1.6 1.1

1567.0 275.0 85.3 18.5 2.0 0.6

+ 342.7 + 49.9 + 11.2 + 3.6 + 0.4
0.4

Total

1255.9

I 541.1

1948.5

+ 407.3

Other Welfare ProgramsFuneral Benefits Telephone Rental and Postal Concessions Mortgage and Rent Relief Assistance to Homeless Men and Women Assistance for Migrants Welfare Programs in the ACT Other

1.5

1.4

1.5

21.0

25.7

28.4

+ 2.7

20.0

+ 20.0

7.7

5.5

6.7

+ 1.2

5.6

5.4

7.2

+ 1.8

7.9

8.8

11.0 + 2.2

3.7

5.8

7.6

+ 1.8

Total

47.3

52.7

82.4

+ 29.7

Aboriginal Advancement Programs nec General Administrative and Other Expenditure Recoveries and Repayments

50.8 283.1
4.8Cr

78.6 348.6
3.ICr

91.0

+ 12.5

371.1

+ 22.6

3.2Cr

0.1

TOTAL SOCIAL SECURITY AND WELFARE

9917.2

11498.0

13272.2

+1774.1

(a) Excludes block grants paid to the States and the Northern Territory for pre-school education. Those amounts are recorded under the function 'Education'.

ASSISTANCE TO THE AGED
Age Pensions and Allowances
Age pensions are payable, subject to an income test, to residentially qualified women aged 60 to 69 years and to residentially qualified men aged 65 to 69 years. Residentially qualified men and women aged 70 years and over receive a fixed base rate of pension free of income test. The rate of this pension is lower than the income tested maximum rate but the higher rate may be paid if the person qualifies under the income test. To be residentially qualified for age pension, a period of ten years continuous residence in Australia at any time is usually necessary.
Currently the pension income test provides that the maximum rate of pension is reduced by 50 cents for each $1 of non-pension income above 'free areas' of $20 a week for a single pensioner and $34.50 a week (combined income) for a married pensioner couple. This income test is applied to all pensioners (except those on fixed rates of income test free pension who are aged 70 years or over and blind pensioners) supporting

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 177

parent's beneficiaries and sheltered employment allowees. The Government has decided to increase the 'free areas', from the first pension payday in November 1982, to $30 a week for a single pensioner and to $50 a week for a married pensioner couple. Changes have also been made to the limits for Commonwealth 'health' concessions. These are outlined in the 'Health' function.
Wife's pension is payable to an age pensioner's wife who does not qualify for an age, invalid or repatriation service pension in her own right. The pension is subject to the same income test as age pensions. The same general conditions apply to the granting of wife's pension as apply to the granting of age and invalid pension.
Additional payments of $10 a week for each child are available to pensioners with children. A single pensioner with one or more children may also qualify for a guardian's allowance of $6 a week ($8 a week if a child is under 6 years or an invalid). These payments are subject to the income test.
Supplementary assistance is payable, subject to a test on the amount of rent paid and the level of non-pension income, to pensioners and supporting parent beneficiaries who pay rent or lodging charges to private landlords. The Government has decided to increase the maximum rate from $8 to $10 a week from the first pension payday in November 1982. The subsidy rate is 50 cents for each $1 of rent in excess of $10 a week, with the amount thus determined reduced by $1 for each $2 of non-pension income (combined income in the case of pensioner couples).
The Government has also decided that, from November 1982, all grants by way of rent subsidy provided to or for a private tenant by a public housing authority will be excluded from the definition of non-pension income for the purpose of assessing entitlement for pensions, benefits and supplementary assistance.
Upon the death of one of a married pensioner couple, the surviving member may receive, for up to six fortnightly instalments, the equivalent of the two pensions that would have been paid had the spouse not died.
Age pension (including wife's pension paid to the wife of an age pensioner) is subject to personal income tax and the introduction of a pension tax rebate will ensure that no tax is payable by those having little or no income apart from their pension. The additional payments for children and supplementary assistance are not subject to tax.
The basic rates of pension are increased automatically each six months in accordance with movements in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The rates will be adjusted in November 1982 by the percentage increase in the CPI between the December quarter 1981 and the June quarter 1982, and in May 1983 by the percentage increase in the CPI between the June and December quarters 1982.

178 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The existing maximum rates of age pensions and additional payments, and the rates to apply from November 1982, are set out below:

Pension or additional payment
Pensions Standard (or single) rate of pension . . . . . . . . . . . Married rate of pension (each person) . . . . . . . . . . Wife's pension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Free of income test pension-age pensioners aged 70 years and over-
Standard rate Married rate (each person) . . . . . . . . . .
Additional Payments Additional pension for each child (including a student child) Guardian's allowance-
No child under 6 or invalid At least one child under 6 or invalid Supplementary assistance

Existing
$a week
74.15 61.80 61.80
51.45 42.90
10.00
6.00 8.00 8.00

From November
1982
$ a week
77.25 64.40 64.40
51.45 42.90
10.00
6.00 8.00 \0.00

The above rates alsq apply to invalid and widows' pensions, supporting parent's benefit and sheltered employment allowance. Widows and supporting parents may receive mother's allowance in lieu of guardian's allowance and, sheltered employment allowees receive an income test free, non-taxable incentive allowance in lieu of supplementaryassistance.
The cost of the automatic increases in the rates of age pensions in November 1982 and May 1983 is estimated to be $176.7m in 1982-83 and $451.5m in a full year. The estimated cost of changes to the pensions income test is $41.9m in 1982-83 and $64.2m in a full year. Increases in supplementary assistance for age pensioners are estimated to cost $6.2m in 1982-83 and $8.9m in a full year.
The average amount of age pension (including additions for children and supplementary assistance) is estimated to rise from about $60.10 a week in 1981-82 to about $67.20 a week in 1982-83, an increase of 11.8%. The main reasons for this rise are the increases in the maximum rates of pension in line with increases in the CPI, the increase in the 'free areas' and in the maximum rate of supplementary assistance.
At 30 June 1982 there were 1 395000 age pensioners (including wives) and, on the basis of existing policy it is estimated that the number at 30 June 1983 would be 1 415 000 an increase of 20 000 or 1.4%. In 1981-82 the comparable increase was 18 000 or 1.3%. As a result of the proposed increases in the pension 'free areas', some people will become newly eligible for small part-rate pensions. An allowance has been made in the estimated outlays for an additional increase of some 10 000 age pensioners on this account.

Aged Persons' Homes and Hostels
Under the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act 1954, organisations are assisted to provide suitable accommodation in which aged people or disabled people aged 16 years or over may live. Grants on a $2 for $1 basis up to certain maximum limits may be made to religious and charitable organisations and local government bodies to meet the cost of erection, extension or purchase of these homes. The maximum subsidies are reviewed periodically and for approved projects commencing after 1 July 1982 the subsidy limits have been increased from $12 100 to $14 000 for single accommodation units and from

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 179

$14035 to $16 240 for double units, while the maximum subsidy of $1920 per unit for land costs continues. Expenditure on the provision of homes is estimated at $65.6m in 1982-83.
The Aged or Disabled Persons Hostels Act 1972 was designed to encourage the provision of hostel accommodation for the aged. Grants under this Act are made only in respect of hostels approved for funding under the Act within the three year period commencing on 27 September 1972. (Grants for hostel accommodation approved after this period are made under the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act 1954.) Subject to certain conditions, the Commonwealth meets under this Act the cost of hostel accommodation provided by eligible organisations up to a maximum limit per person for buildings. The maximum building cost limit has been increased from $18 150 to $21 000 a person for projects commencing after 1 July 1982. In addition, up to $2400 a person may be provided for the purchase of land and a further $250 a person is available for furnishings. Accommodation is allocated strictly on the basis of need and without any contribution from the prospective resident. Grants in 1982-83 for projects under construction at 30 June 1982 or expected to commence in 1982-83 are estimated at $17.4m.
The Government had decided to make $17Om available during the two years 1982-83 and 1983-84 for the purchase or construction of aged persons' accommodation. Expenditure in 1982-83 is expected to be $83m compared with $56.7m in 1981-82.
Grants for pensioner accommodation under Housing AgreeIVents with the States and the Northern Territory are included under the function 'Housing'.

Home Care Services
Under the States Grants (Home Care) Act 1969 and the States Grants (Paramedical Services) Act 1969, the Commonwealth provides funds in association with the States for the provision of a range of home care services, mainly for aged persons, and for the provision of senior citizens' centres and associated welfare officers.
Under the States Grants (Home Care) Act 1969, the Commonwealth shares on a $ for $ basis with the States the cost of approved housekeeping or other domestic assistance provided wholly or mainly for aged persons in their homes. The Commonwealth also shares with the States, on a $2 for $1 basis, the approved capital cost of senior citizens' centres and, on a $ for $ basis, the cost of the salary of a welfare officer employed in conjunction with such a centre. Grants on similar terms are also provided to the Northern Territory for these purposes.
Grants towards the cost of approved housekeeping and other domestic assistance for aged persons in their homes are estimated to rise from $12.7m in 1981-82 to $15.9m in 1982-83 because of past and prospective cost increases and the expansion of approved services. Grants towards the cost of the salary of a welfare officer employed in conjunction with a senior citizens' centre are estimated to rise from $l.4m in 1981-82 to $1.8m in 1982-83 because of the effect of salary increases awarded in 1981-82, allowance for prospective increases and a further increase in approved positions.
The Government has decided to provide $14m during the two years 1982-83 to 1983-84 for the construction of senior citizens' centres. Expenditure in 1982-83 is estimated to be $7m compared to $4m in 1981-82.

180 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Under the States Grants (Paramedical Services) Act 1969, the Commonwealth shares on a $ for $ basis with the States the cost of approved paramedical services provided wholly or mainly for aged persons in their homes. Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania are participating in the program. Grants in 1982-83 are estimated to be $1.2m.
The Delivered Meals Subsidy Act 1970 is designed to assist the establishment, expansion, improvement or maintenance of approved meals on wheels services. The basic rate of subsidy of 40 cents a meal is to be increased to 50 cents a meal from 1 October 1982. An additional subsidy of 5 cents a meal is payable for each meal with an approved Vitamin 'C' supplement included. Expenditure under the Act in 1982-83 is estimated to be $5.6m, compared to $4.3m in 1981-82, because of the expected increase in the number of meals delivered and the increased subsidy rate.
Personal Care Subsidy
Under the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act 1954, the Commonwealth pays a personal care subsidy to eligible organisations for persons aged 80 years or over and other persons who require, and are receiving, approved personal care while living in hostel-type accommodation provided by those organisations. The Government has decided to increase the rate of subsidy from $20 to $30 per person a week with the higher rate to be effective from 6 July 1982. The number of persons who qualify for the subsidy is estimated to increase from 21 700 at 30 June 1982 to 23 000 at 30 June 1983. Expenditure on the subsidy is estimated to rise from $22.2m in 1981-82 to $35m in 1982-83 as a result of the increased rate and an expected increase in numbers.

ASSISTANCE TO VETERANS AND THEIR DEPENDANTS
Disability Pensions and Allowances
Disability pensions and allowances are available to certain veterans and their dependants.
The term 'veteran' includes any man or woman eligible for consideration under the Repatriation Act 1920 or associated Acts by virtue of service in the Australian armed forces. 'Service' includes service in the 1914-18 War, the 1939-45 War, the Interim Forces, the Korean and Malayan Operations, the Far East Strategic Reserve, special service in South East Asia (including Vietnam) and service with the Defence Force on or after 7 December 1972. Repatriation benefits are also available to certain merchant mariners who suffer incapacity or the dependants of those who died as a result of enemy action or capture or detention by the enemy; to former members of the Royal Papuan Constabulary and New Guinea Police Force who operated under Australian Army Command from 7 December 1941 to 31 December 1945 and to all respresentatives of Australia who suffer incapacity or the dependants of those who died while serving with peacekeeping, observation and monitoring forces.
Benefits for peacekeeping, observation and monitoring forces were introduced from 1 November 1981 for those who served after that date. The Government has now decided to extend eligibility to all representatives of Australia who served with peacekeeping, observation and monitoring forces prior to 2 November 1981.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 181

While the liability provisions of the Repatriation legislation diH'er when applied to different conHicts and to the nature of service, it can be broadly stated that benefits are available for death or incapacity resulting from eligible service.
Disability pension is not subject to personal income tax or an income test.

Classes ofDisability Pensions
Pensions are paid to eligible veterans in three main categories:
- The Special Rate (known as the T & PI) Pension, payable to a veteran who, as a result of service, is blinded, or is totally and permanently incapacitated to the extent that he is unable to earn more than a negligible percentage of a living wage;
- The Intermediate Rate, payable to a veteran who, because of service-related disabilities, can work only part-time or intermittently; and
- The General Rate, payable to a veteran who suffers from service-related incapacity but who is still able to work full-time. The amounts payable range from 10% to 100% of the General Rate, according to the assessed degree of incapacity.
Dependants' pensions are also paid to the wives of incapacitated veterans and to their children. These pensions are paid at rates that depend on the assessed degree of the veteran's incapacity. When the death of a veteran has been accepted as servicerelated or at the time of death he was receiving, or is later adjudged to have been eligible to receive, a pension at the Special Rate or as a double amputee, his widow qualifies for a war or defence widow's pension and associated benefits, while his children each receive pensions at 'orphan' rates and associated benefits. Other dependants of deceased veterans may qualify for pensions in certain circumstances.
The Government has decided, with effect from 6 January 1983, to restore payment of disability pensions at 100% of the General Rate to veterans who received a pension for pulmonary tuberculosis prior to 2 November 1978, or who, prior to that date, had lodged a claim which was subsequently successful.

Allowances
Various allowances are provided to supplement disability pensions. These allowances vary according to the type or severity of disablement and the special needs of the pensioners.
Changes to eligibility provided for in the 1982-83 Budget are:
- the extension of eligibility for double orphan's pension to a double orphan child whose father was a member of the Forces and who had served in a theatre of war; and
- a liberalisation in the means test for certain payments of funeral benefit.

Rates ofPensions and Allowances
Disability pensions and war and defence widows' pensions are automatically adjusted each May and November in line with movements in the Consumer Price Index.
The Government has decided to increase the rates of various pensions and allowances from November 1982.

182 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The existing and proposed rates of these pensions and allowances are shown in the following table:

Benefit

Existing

From November
1982

Disability PensionSpecial Rate . . Intermediate Rate General Rate (100 per cent) War and Defence Widow Wife . . . . . .
Each Child War Orphans Father dead-each child . Both parents dead-each child . Allowances payable under Schedule 5 the Repatriation Act for certain ampu-
tations and/or loss of visionItems 1-6 Items 7-15

Clothing Allowance-

Highest rate

Middle rate

Lowest rate

.

Attendant's Allowance-

Higher rate

Lower rate

Domestic Allowance . . . . . . . .

Recreation Transport Allowance (a month)-

Higher rate

Lower rate

Gift Car Allowance (a year)

Funeral Benefit

$a week
142.05 97.80 53.55 74.15
4.05 1.38
15.00 30.00
88.50 4.30 to 28.05
1.80 1.20 0.85
42.05 21.02 12.00
48.00 24.00 576.00 400.00

$a week
148.00 101.90 55.80 77.25
4.05 1.38
16.60 33.20
92.20 4.75
to 31.05
2.00 1.30 0.95
46.60 23.30 12.00
53.00 26.50 636.00 500.00

A Temporary Totally Incapacitated (TTl) pension is an additional rate of pension paid to a veteran who has been classified as temporarily totally incapacitated by service-related incapacity and unable to earn other than a negligible percentage of a living wage. The rate of TTl pension, when combined with disability pension, equals the Special (T & PI) Rate.
Temporary Incapacity Allowance (TlA) is payable at a rate up to the equivalent of the Special Rate pension to veterans who undergo hospitalisation and consequential convalescence or treatment for a service-related incapacity, for a continuous period of more than four weeks.
A Loss of Earnings Allowance is paid to veterans who have suffered loss of earnings during the investigation of a claim or while receiving medical treatment for a servicerelated disability. In certain circumstances it may also be paid in respect of loss of earnings caused by any illness or incapacity. The allowance is paid either at a rate not exceeding the Special Rate pension less any disability pension in payment at the time, or at a rate equal to actual loss of earnings, whichever is lower.
The increases in the rates of disability pensions and allowances in November 1982 and May 1983 are estimated to cost $19.3m in 1982-83 and $37.9m in a full year.
At 30 June 1982, there were 170 000 veterans and their dependants in receipt of disability pensions. During 1982-83 the number is estimated to decrease by 2000 to 168 000. The effect on expenditure of this estimated decline in numbers is more than offset by the full year effect of increased rates of benefits introduced in 1981-82 and the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 183

increase in benefit rates in November 1982 and the expected increase in May 1983 in line with movements in the Consumer Price Index. In addition, the success of claims, arising from a number of court and Administrative Appeals Tribunal decisions, has increased markedly, while the number of claims from veterans and their dependants wishing to test their eligibility, applications to re-open claims or applications for increased pension has also increased. After taking this into account it is expected that the number of veterans receiving disability pensions will continue to decline. This trend would be consistent with the expected reduction in the number of ex-servicemen and women in Australia over the next three years. The following table provides actual and estimated numbers of ex-servicemen and women at 30 June in the years 1982 to 1985.

30June
1982 1983 1984 1985
Source: Department of Veterans' Affairs

Numbers of Ex-servicemen
and Women
618000 600200 581000 562000

Service Pensions
Service pensions may be payable to:
- a male veteran who served in a theatre of war and who has attained the age of 60 years or is permanently unemployable;
- a female veteran who served in a theatre of war or embarked for service abroad and has attained the age of 55 years or is permanently unemployable;
- ex-members of the Defence Forces of British Commonwealth countries who satisfy the above criteria and have at least ten years residence in Australia;
- ex-members of formally raised Armed Forces of Allied countries who meet the same criteria that apply to members of the forces of a Commonwealth country, providing they have not served in the forces of a country that was at the time at war with Australia; and
- Australian mariners who served in a theatre of war during the 1939-45 War and who were domiciled in Australia at the time of their service.

From 3 February 1983, merchant mariners of Commonwealth and Allied countries will also become eligible for service pension on the same basis of eligibility as veterans of those countries.

Service in a 'theatre of war' means, in respect of the 1914-18 War or 1939-45 War,

service 'at sea, in the field or in the air in naval, military or aerial operations against the

enemy in an area, or on an aircraft or ship of war, at a time when danger from hostile

forces of the enemy was incurred in that area or on that aircraft or ship of war.

'

Service in a 'theatre of war' may also be conceded if a veteran is shown to have incurred

actual personal danger from hostile forces.

In respect of certain later service, 'service in an operational area' and 'special service' as defined are the qualifications equivalent to service in a 'theatre of war'.

184 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

A service pension is the broad equivalent of an age or invalid pension. The advantages to the veteran are availability of the service pension five years earlier and, in certain circumstances, eligibility for a wide range of Repatriation medical treatment services.
Service pensioners are eligible for the same range of pensions and allowances as age pensioners and the rates of benefits are the same. Like age pensions, service pensions will be increased in November 1982 and in May 1983 in line with movements in the CPI. Also consistent with the treatment of age pensions, the Government has decided to increase the maximum level of supplementary assistance to $10 a week with effect from the first pension payday on or after 1 November 1982.
Service pension is paid, subject to income test, to eligible veterans under the age of 70 years. A basic rate (that payable as at 1 November 1978) of service pension not subject to automatic indexation, is paid, free of income test, to eligible veterans aged 70 years and over. Increases in the rate of service pension as a result of automatic indexation are paid to such veterans in the form of an income-tested supplement.
For eligible veterans under 70 years of age and in the assessment of the incometested supplement for veterans aged 70 years and over, 60% of any disability pension received is disregarded as income for service pension income test purposes. The Government has decided that, from the first pension payday in November 1982, the percentage disregarded will be increased to 100%. With this exception, service pensions are subject to the same income test arrangements as social security pensions. The new pension and fringe benefit income test arrangements announced in the 1982-83 Budget will also apply to service pensions.
Service pensions are subject to income tax.
At 30 June 1982, there were 300000 service pensioners (including wives) and in 1982-83 the number is estimated to increase by 25 000 to 325 000. The increase in estimated expenditure in 1982-83 reflects this estimated increase in numbers, and increases in pension rates in line with the CPI, increases in supplementary assistance and the pension income test limits.
The increases in rates of service pensions in November 1982 and May 1983 are estimated to cost $38m in 1982-83 and $78m in a full year. The changes to supplementary assistance are expected to cost an additional $O.4m in 1982-83 and $0.7m in a full year. In addition, the cost of changes to the pension income test will total $6.3m in 1982-83 and $1 0.6m in a full year.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 185

It is expected that the number of veterans receiving service pensions will continue to grow in the short term. The age profile of ex-servicemen is illustrated in the following table.
AGE PROFILE OF EX-SERVICEMEN AT 30 JUNE 1982

Number of ex-servicemen

Percentage of total
ex-servicemen

25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 75-79 80 and over

'000

2.1

0.4

15.3

2.7

17.4

3.1

6.1

l.l

7.1

1.3

37.5

6.6

121.4

21.4

155.3

27.4

104.0

18.3

56.8

10.0

23.8

4.2

19.8

3.5

566.6

100

Source: Department of Veterans' Affairs.

Total male population
(aged 25 and over)
'000 613.8 604.5 548.7 444.9 389.7 391.3 376.5 305.9 247.1 181.1 111.3
83.6
4298.4

Ex-servicemen as percentage of total male population at corresponding age
0.3 2.5 3.2 1.4 1.8 9.6 32.2 50.8 42.1 31.4 21.4 23.7
13.2

ASSISTANCE TO THE HANDICAPPED
Invalid Pensions and Allowances
Invalid pensions are payable to people aged 16 years or more who are assessed as being permanently incapacitated for work to the extent of not less than 85% or are permanently blind. Except in the case of people who are permanently blind, pensions are subject to the same income test as applies to age pensions. No period of residence is necessary if the permanent incapacity or blindness occurred in Australia. If the permanent incapacity or blindness occurred outside Australia, the residence qualification is the same as for an age pension. Invalid pensioners are eligible for the same additional payments as are age pensioners and the rates of payment are the same. Wife's pension is payable, subject to the same income test, to the wife of an invalid pensioner if she is not eligible for an age, invalid or service pension in her own right.
Invalid pension paid to a person of age pension age and wife's pension paid to the wife of such an invalid pensioner are subject to personal income tax. Pensions payable to an invalid pensioner below age pension age and additional payments are not subject to tax.
At 30 June 1982 there were 271 500 invalid pensioners (including wives of invalid pensioners in receipt of wife's pension) and during 1982-83 the number is estimated to remain constant.
The average amount of invalid pension (including additions for children and supplementary assistance) is estimated to rise from about $64.80 a week in 1981-82 to about $72.60 a week in 1982-83, an increase of 12%. The main reasons for this rise are increases in pension rates in line with movements in the CPI and increases in supplementary assistance and the pension income test limits as outlined for age pensions.

186 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The estimated cost of the automatic increases in the rates of invalid pensions is $39.3m in 1982-83 and $lOO.lm in a full year. The estimated cost for invalid pensions of changes to the pension income test is $5.6m in 1982-83 and $8m in a full year. Increases in supplementary assistance are estimated to cost $3.5m in 1982-83 and $5m in a full year.
The Government has decided that, from the first pension payday in February 1983, invalid pensioners undertaking training in activity therapy centres and adult training centres that have been approved under the terms of the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act 1974 will also qualify to receive the income test free, non-taxable incentive allowance payable to sheltered employment allowees in lieu of supplementary assistance. The cost of this change is estimated at $0.5m in 1982-83 and $1.2m in a full year.

Sheltered Employment Allowances
Sheltered employment allowance is payable to disabled people engaged in approved sheltered employment who are qualified to receive an invalid pension or who would become so qualified if they ceased to be provided with sheltered employment. The allowance is non-taxable and is subject to the same income test as is applied to the invalid pension and the rates of payment are the same. A non-taxable incentive allowance is paid income test free to the recipients of sheltered employment allowance in lieu of supplementary assistance.
From November 1982 the rate of incentive allowance will be increased to $10 a week, at an estimated cost of $0.7m in 1982-83 and $1 m in a full year.
The estimated cost of the automatic increases in the rates of sheltered employment allowances is $l.4m in 1982-83 and $3.8m in a full year. The estimated cost of changes to the income test is $0.3m in 1982-83 and $O.4m in a full year.

Mobility Allowancefor Severely Disabled Persons
The Government has decided that, from April 1983, severely disabled people who are gainfully employed or undertaking vocational training and who are unable to use public transport because of their disabilities, and who have not received a sales tax exemption under Items 135 or 135A of the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935 on the purchase of a motor vehicle within the previous 2 years, will be eligible for a non-taxable mobility allowance of $10 a week. The cost of this allowance is estimated at $18.3m in a full year, and $4.6m has been provided for 1982-83.
Handicapped Children's Benefits and Allowances
A handicapped child's allowance is payable to parents or guardians in respect of severely handicapped children under the age of 16 years who are cared for at home and need constant care and attention. The allowance continues to be payable in respect of dependent full-time students aged 16-24 years except where the student is in receipt of an invalid pension. It is also payable, wholly or in part, in respect of handicapped children who need marginally less care and attention than severely handicapped children. In these latter cases, the allowance may be paid if, by reason of the provision of care and attention, the family is subjected to severe financial hardship. Handicapped child's allowance is not subject to tax.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 187

The Government has decided to increase the maximum rate of $73 a month to $85 a month from 15 October 1982, at an estimated cost of $2.6m in 1982-83 and $4m in a full year.
The number of recipients of handicapped child's allowance at 30 June 1982 was 27000 and this number is estimated to increase to 27 900 by 30 June 1983. Expenditure is estimated to rise from $22.3m in 1981-82 to $25.7m in 1982-83.
The Commonwealth pays a handicapped children's benefit to non-profit organisations and local government bodies conducting approved homes providing accommodation and care for intellectually and physically handicapped children. The rate of benefit is $5 a day for each child under 16 years of age. The benefit may continue to be paid to an eligible organisation when a child is absent from the institution for a short period only, such as a week-end home visit. Expenditure is estimated to increase from $1.9m in 1981-82 to $2.1m in 1982-83.

Handicapped Persons' Facilities
Under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act 1974, the Commonwealth provides subsidies on a $4 for $1 basis to approved non-profit organisations and local government bodies for the purchase, construction, extension, alteration, rental and maintenance of premises that cater for people with physical or intellectual handicaps.
Services qualifying for subsidy comprise training, activity therapy and sheltered employment as well as residential accommodation for handicapped people who use these services. Residential accommodation for people who, because of a disability, need special accommodation to allow them to engage in normal outside employment, also qualifies for subsidy.
For the erection, extension or purchase of approved accommodation projects commencing after 1 July 1982 the maximum subsidy limits have been increased from $14520 to $16800 for single accommodation units and from $16843 to $19488 for double units.
Subsidies on a $4 for $1 basis may be provided for the cost of furnishing and equipping the various types of centres, while assistance with operating costs may be granted by means of staff salary subsidies. The latter are usually on a $ for $ basis, although a higher proportion, up to 100%, may be paid during the first two years of operation of new services.
A training fee of $500 is paid to eligible sheltered employment services for each former handicapped employee who, after completing more than six months sheltered employment, graduates to and retains open employment for 12 months or more.
The Government has decided to provide funds of $37m during the two years 1982-83 and 1983-84 for building projects under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Program. Expenditure in 1982-83 is expected to be $18.5m compared to $9.9m in 1981-82. The Government has also decided to provide $0.5m for new projects not involving capital grants from the Commonwealth.
In addition, $0.6m will be made available in 1982-83 to support measures intended to upgrade the effectiveness and the quality of services for handicapped people, an increase of $0.4m on 1981-82.

188 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Expenditure under this heading is expected to rise from $60m in 1981-82 to $72.6m in 1982-83. This is due to the combined effects of past and prospective cost increases affecting approved services, the completion of new facilities which will become operational during this financial year, the increased availability of funds for capital projects and increased subsidy limits for accommodation projects.

Rehabilitation Services
The Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service (CRS) provides treatment and training to enable disabled persons to realise their full potential in the physical, mental, social and vocational spheres. Treatment and training are provided free to persons if there is a reasonable prospect of their being able to undertake full-time, part-time or sheltered employment or household duties, or of their becoming capable of leading an independent or semi-independent life at home.
The following broad categories are accepted for rehabilitation: - pensioners and claimants for pension who woul~ be likely to derive substantial
benefit from that treatment and training;
- beneficiaries and claimants for benefit who, without that treatment and training, would be likely to become unemployable;
- persons being paid allowances under Section 9 of the Tuberculosis Act 1948 who would be likely to derive substantial benefit from that treatment and training;
- persons of 14 or IS years who, without treatment and training, would be likely to become qualified to receive invalid pension on attaining the age of 16 years; and
- men aged from 16 to 65 or women aged from 16 to 60 who would be likely to derive substantial benefit from that treatment and training.
Persons who do not fall within these eligibility criteria may be accepted for rehabilitation on a paying basis.
Provision has been made within the Budget allocation for the Commonwealth's share of the costs of establishing ($0.3m as a final payment in 1982-83) and operating ($IAm in 1982-83) a rehabilitation centre in Hobart jointly with the Tasmanian Government, and for the operation of a permanent rehabilitation facility in Newcastle in conjunction with facilities operated by the State Health Authority ($0.2m).
In addition to its multi-purpose centres, the CRS presently operates four Work Preparation Centres-two each in Sydney and Melbourne-that aim to prepare mildly intellectually handicapped young people for open employment. A further three centres will commence full operation during 1982-83-one in each of Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth. When in full operation, the seven centres will train up to 600 people a year for suitable employment.
Regional services are to be upgraded by setting up in 1982-83 a number of mobile casework teams working from existing centres to service nearby provincial centres and a number of outposted teams in selected regions. Provision of $0.8m for this purpose has been made in 1982-83.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 189

The Government has decided that, from the first payday in March 1983, all persons undergoing treatment with the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service otherwise eligible for a social security pension or benefit will be eligible to receive, while under treatment or training and for a period of up to six months thereafter, a non-taxable rehabilitation allowance equivalent to the invalid pension and subject to the same income test conditions as the invalid pension.
Expenditure is estimated to rise from $28.2m in 1981-82 to $41.8m in 1982-83 as a result of the full year effect of price and salary increases that occurred during 1981-82, the extension of services and the introduction of a rehabilitation allowance. The number of persons accepted for rehabilitation and training is not expected to increase significantly beyond the 1981-82 level of 5700.
Other In 1981-82, $0.3m was expended under a scheme of financial assistance to organis-
ations towards the production costs of braille and audio material for people with printhandicaps; $0.5m is provided for this scheme in 1982-83.
A further $O.1m will be paid to the Australian Caption Centre, which was established to provide facilities for the sub-titling of television programs for those with impaired hearing. An amount of $0.6m was provided for this purpose in 1981-82.

ASSISTANCE TO WIDOWS AND SINGLE PARENTS
Widows' Pensions and Allowances
Pensions are payable to widows, subject to an income test. No period of residence is necessary if a woman and her husband were residing permanently in Australia when she became a widow. In other cases, there is a residence qualification of either five years continuous residence in Australia immediately prior to claiming a pension or ten years continuous residence in Australia at any time.
The Government has decided that, from 1 November 1982, a woman residing overseas who is in receipt of a wife's pension may be granted, without returning to Australia, a widow's pension upon the death of her husband provided that, if she had been resident in Australia she would have so qualified.
There are three classes of widows who receive a pension:
- Class A widow-a widow with one or more qualifying children in her care;
- Class B widow-a widow without qualifying children who is at least 50 years of age or at least 45 years of age if her Class A pension ceased after she reached that age because she no longer had a qualifying child in her care; and
- Class C widow-a widow without qualifying children who is in necessitous circumstances within 26 weeks of her husband's death.
For all classes, the term 'widow' includes a woman who was the common-law wife of a man for at least three years immediately before his death. For Class A and B, it also includes a wife who has been deserted for at least six months, a divorced woman or a woman whose husband has been imprisoned for at least six months.
Widow pensioners are eligible for the same additional payments as are age pensioners (except that mother's allowance is paid in lieu of guardian's allowance) and the rates of payment are the same. These payments are subject to an income test. Widows'

190 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

pensions are subject to personal income tax, although no tax is payable by those having little or no income apart from their pension. The additional payments are not subject to tax.
At 30 June 1982 there were 84 800 Class A widows, 79 200 Class B widows and 100 Class C widows in receipt of pensions.
It is estimated that the number of Class A widow pensioners will decrease by 3 300 to 81 500 during 1982-83 and the number of Class B and Class C widow pensioners will increase by 1 600 to 80 900. The average rate of pension for Class A widow pensioners is estimated to rise from $91.60 a week in 1981-82 to $100.00 a week in 1982-83, an increase of 9.2%. The average rate for Class B and Class C widows' pensions is estimated to rise from $67.70 a week in 1981-82 to $76.10 a week in 1982-83, an increase of 12.4%.
These increases arise from the automatic increases in pension rates in line with movements in the CPI and increases in the pension income test limits and supplementary assistance. The estimated cost of the increases in the rates of widows' pensions in November 1982 and May 1983 is $25.8m in 1982-83 and $65.6m in a full year. In addition, the cost to widows' pensions of changes to the pension income test is estimated to be $5.8m in 1982-83 and $8.3m in a full year. Increases in supplementary assistance will cost $1.8m in 1982-83 and $2.6m in a full year.
Supporting Parents' Benefits and Allowances
A supporting parent's benefit is paid to sole parents who support one or more children without help from a partner and are not receiving another pension or benefit.
The benefit is payable at the same rate as the Class A widow's pension and subject to similar conditions. Supporting parents may also be eligible for supplementary assistance, additional pension for children and mother's or guardian's allowance and Commonwealth pensioner concessions.
There is a residence qualification if the claimant was not living in Australia at the time of becoming a supporting parent. Residence qualifications are identical to those for a widow pensioner.
From November 1982, a person in receipt of supporting parent's benefit will not be taken into account as a dependant in determining the entitlement or additional entitlement of another person for pension, benefit or family allowance. This change seeks to eliminate unintended dual payments according to the principle that if a person receives full income maintenance in his or her own right, that person cannot properly be regarded as the dependant of another person for the purpose of determining that other person's eligibility for a pension, benefit or allowance. People receiving social security pensions, benefits and allowances in respect of a supporting parent beneficiary immediately before November 1982 will not be affected.
The Government has also decided to amend the Social Security Act 1947 to ensure that where maintenance for or in respect of a child is received by a supporting parent beneficiary, any amount in excess of $312 per annum ($6 a week) shall be deemed the parent's own income for income test purposes. This will bring the treatment of maintenance for the children of supporting parent beneficiaries into line with that applying to widow pensioners.
At 30 June 1982, there were 123 900 supporting parent beneficiaries. It is estimated that the number will increase by 14600 to 138 500 by 30 June 1983. The average rate of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 191

benefit (including additions for children and supplementary assistance) is estimated to rise from $94.30 a week in 1981-82 to $103.30 a week in 1982-83, an increase of 9.5%. The main reasons for this rise are increases in benefit rates in line with movements in the CPI and increases in supplementary assistance and in the pension income test limits.
The estimated cost of the automatic increases in the rates of supporting parents' benefits in November 1982 and May 1983 is $21m in 1982-83 and $54.6m in a full year. The cost of changes to the pension income test will be $2.4m in 1982-83 and $3.4m in a full year. Increases in supplementary assistance are estimated to cost $3.4m in 1982-83 and $4.9m in a full year.

ASSISTANCE TO FAMILIES
Family Allowances
Family allowances are payable to people with children under 16 years of age or dependent children aged 16 years but under 25 years who are receiving full-time education at a school, college or university and are not in employment. Allowances are usually paid to the mother.
Family allowance, orphan's pension and handicapped child's allowance are not payable outside Australia except where the child is temporarily abroad or is living abroad pending migration to Australia (within four years).
Parents of children receiving student allowances under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme and other related student assistance schemes are not eligible for family allowances in respect of those children. Family allowances are not paid in respect of students receiving an invalid pension. The allowances are not subject to income tax.
The Government has decided to increase the rates of family allowances by 50% for the first and second children from the entitlement period commencing 15 October 1982. The new rates will first be reflected in payments made in November 1982. This will extend the 50% increase provided for third and subsequent children in last year's Budget to first and second children. The estimated cost of the higher rates is $249.7m in 1982-83 and $374.6m in a full year.
The rates of family allowance are:

First child Second child Third child Fourth child . . . Fifth and later children Child in an institution .

$amonth

Present Rates

Rates from November
1982

15.20 21.70 39.00 39.00 45.55 39.00

22.80 32.55 39.00 39.00 45.55 39.00

192 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The following table sets out the actual number of children in respect of whom family allowances were paid at 30 June 1982 together with the estimated number at 30 June 1983.

30 June

1982

.......

1983 (estimate)

Children in Families
'000 4245 4265

Children in Institutions
'000 9 10

Total

Number

Percentage change over
previous year

'000 4254 4275

+0.6 +0.5

Outlays are estimated to increase from $1041.8m in 1981-82 to $1360m in 1982-83 because of a small rise in the number of recipients, increases in the rates of family allowance for first and second children and the full year effect of higher rates for third and subsequent children announced in the 1981-82 Budget.
Family Income Supplement
The Government has decided to introduce, from May 1983, a new scheme to assist low income families who are not in receipt of a social security pension or benefit or similar assistance. The basic elements of the scheme are:
- assistance will be provided to low income non-pensioner/beneficiary families according to the number of eligible dependent children in the family;
- the maximum rate of assistance per child will equal the rate of additional benefit payable to a beneficiary for a dependent child (currently $10 a week);
- the maximum rate will be payable where the joint income of the parents does not exceed the income limit under the disadvantaged persons health care arrangement for a married couple without children ($184 a week from November 1982. In May 1983 it will be slightly higher.);
- payments will be reduced by $1 for every $2 beyond this level of joint parental income; and
- payments will not be subject to income tax.
The estimated cost is $3.5m in 1982-83 and $30m in a full year.
Children's Services
The Commonwealth provides capital and recurrent assistance for a wide range of services for children and their families. These include early childhood services such as day care centres, family day care, emergency and occasional care and play groups. Services for school aged children include before and after school care and vacation care. Other projects supported are refuges for adolescents under the Youth Services Scheme, support for families in crisis and special services for Aboriginal, migrant and disabled children.
The Government has decided to increase the operational support grants to family day care schemes in 1982-83 from $7 to $10 a week per child in full-time care. Organisations providing day care for pre-school aged children will be required, as a condition of funding, to develop and implement an income test within approved guidelines so that families that satisfy the income test will be eligible for a fee rebate funded by the

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 193

Commonwealth. In addition, existing special need arrangements for day care services are to be replaced by a special economic need subsidy and supplementary subsidies will be provided in appropriate cases in respect of special services for children with special social needs. (For child care centres that are currently funded under the Child Care Act 1972, the special economic need subsidy will not replace the existing special need grant payable under section 12 of that Act unless it is more beneficial to the centre concerned. )
The three year pilot Youth Services Scheme has been extended for one year to 30 June 1983 to enable the scheme to be evaluated by the Commonwealth and State and Northern Territory governments. The scheme supports emergency accommodation and counselling services for homeless young people and its costs are shared $ for $ by the Commonwealth and the States and the Northern Territory. The Commonwealth allocation for this scheme in 1982-83 is $1.7m.
Expenditure on children's services (excluding the block grants to the States and the Northern Territory to assist in meeting the costs of pre-school education) in 1981-82 was $47.4m. Expenditure is expected to rise to an estimated $70.1m in 1982-83 due to the combined effects of past and prospective cost increases, expansion of the number of services supported and increases in subsidy limits.
Block grants for pre-schools are recorded under the functional heading 'Education'.

Crisis Accommodation/or Families in Distress
Under this program the Commonwealth provides funds to the States, the Northern Territory and Aboriginal Hostels Ltd to improve the stock of emergency accommodation available to families in distress. In 1981-82, the first year of the program, about 220 units of accommodation were made available with the $2m provided. A further $4m will be provided in 1982-83.

Orphan's Pension
An orphan's pension of $55.70 a month is payable, free of income test, to the guardian of a child under 16 years of age or of a dependent full-time student aged 16 but under 25 years of age. It is paid in respect of a child both of whose parents are dead or if the whereabouts of the sole surviving parent is unknown, or if its sole surviving parent or adoptive parent is in prison for at least 10 years or in a mental hospital for an indefinite period. It may also be paid for a refugee child if its parents are not in Australia or are of unknown whereabouts. Orphan's pension is not payable in respect of a person who is receiving an invalid pension and is not subject to income tax. At 30 June 1982 there were 5200 recipients. The number is estimated to increase to 5900 by 30 June 1983.
Expenditure is estimated to be $3.4m in 1982-83 compared to $2.9m in 1981-82, the increase mainly reflecting the increase in numbers in receipt of orphans' pensions.

194 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation BiII (No. I)

Other
The provision for the operations of the Institute of Family Studies in 1982-83 is $1.7m, including $O.4m for research activities of the Institute. A further $3.4m is provided for grants to approved marriage counselling organisations and pre-marital education organisations. To maintain the level of educational activity for family planning, $0.8m will be provided in 1982-83. Grants to family planning associations for clinical services in 1982-83, estimated at $2.8m, are provided under Health Program Grants (see the function-'Health'). In addition, $0.2m has been provided to establish, in conjunction with the States and voluntary organisations, a National Children's Foundation to create greater public awareness of child abuse and to encourage support for child protection. Implementation in 1982-83 is subject to negotiations with the States.

ASSISTANCE TO THE UNEMPLOYED AND SICK
Unemployment Benefits
Sickness and Special Benefits
Unemployment benefit is available, subject to an income test, to persons without employment yet willing and able to undertake suitable work and making efforts to obtain work. Sickness benefit, also subject to an income test, is available to persons temporarily incapacitated for work. A special benefit may be paid to persons ineligible for pension, supporting parent's benefit or for unemployment or sickness benefit if they are unable to earn a sufficient livelihood for themselves and their dependants.
To be eligible for unemployment or sickness benefit, a person must be at least 16 years of age and under 60 years (females) or under 65 years (males). The person must also have lived in Australia for at least a year immediately prior to claiming benefit or intend to remain permanently.
The basic rates of benefits are generally the same as for age and invalid pensions except for single people under 18 years of age and older single unemployed people without dependants. The Government has decided that, from November 1982, the maximum rate of benefit for single unemployment and sickness beneficiaries aged 16 and 17 years will be increased from $36.00 a week to $40.00 a week and the rate for single unemployment beneficiaries aged 18 years and over without dependants, will be increased from $58.10 a week to $64.40 a week.
All unemployment and sickness beneficiaries with children are eligible for an additional benefit for each dependent child at the same rate as for children of pensioners. Mother's or guardian's allowance is not payable to unemployment, sickness and special beneficiaries.
After receiving benefits for six consecutive weeks, sickness beneficiaries who rent privately become eligible, subject to a rent test and income test, to receive supplementary allowance of up to $8 a week if they pay rent. From November 1982 this allowance will be increased to $10 a week in line with the increase in supplementary assistance. Supplementary allowance is payable on the same basis and subject to the same income test as supplementary assistance but is not payable to beneficiaries in hospital who have no dependants. The Government has also decided that, from November 1982, rent subsidies provided to or for a private tenant by a public housing authority will be excluded

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 195

from the definition of income for the purpose of assessing entitlements for benefits and supplementary allowance.
The present income tests for unemployment and sickness benefits are:
- in respect of unmarried persons aged 16 or 17 years with at least one parent living in Australia, benefit is reduced by 50 cents a week for each $1 of non-benefit income in the range of $3 to $40 and by $1 a week for each $1 of non-benefit income over $40 a week; and
- in respect of other persons, benefit is reduced by 50 cents a week for each $1 of non-benefit income in the range of $6 to $50 a week and by $1 a week for each $1 of non-benefit income over $50 a week.
The Government has decided to amend the Social Security Act 1947 to provide a uniform income test for unemployment and sickness benefits with effect from the first payday on or after 1 November 1982. Under the new arrangements, benefit will be reduced by 50 cents a week for each $1 of non-benefit income above a 'free area' of $10 a week. Above $60 a week, benefit will be reduced by $1 a week for each $1 of income.
Unemployment and sickness benefits, including additional payments for children and supplementary allowance, are subject to personal income tax.
The cost of the automatic increases in the rates of unemployment, sickness and special benefits in November 1982 and May 1983 is estimated to be $23.6m for unemployment benefit, $10m for sickness benefit and $l.5m for special benefit in 1982-83 and to be $64.4m, $27.1m and $3.9m for these benefits, respectively, in a full year.
The increases in the maximum rate of unemployment and sickness benefits for single people under 18 years and unemployment benefit for persons aged 18 years or more without dependants are estimated to cost $64.3m in 1982-83 and $96.7m in a full year. The introduction of a uniform income test is estimated to cost $3.8m in 1982-83 and $5.8m in a full year and the increase in supplementary allowance for sickness beneficiaries $0.7m in 1982-83 and $1.1 m in a full year.
The average number of unemployment beneficiaries underlying the 1982-83 estimate is 395 000 compared to the average number of beneficiaries in 1981-82 of 332 000. The average number of sickness beneficiaries is estimated to rise from 48 600 in 1981-82 to 54 000 in 1982-83 and the average number of special beneficiaries in 1982-83 is estimated at 19 000.
Unemployment Relief
The main activity under this heading is the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS), introduced in 1976, under which grants are made to assist local communitybased committees to provide unemployed young people with a range of employmentoriented skills, development activities and to build up their self-reliance. After the 1981-82 review of the Scheme, CYSS projects now aim particularly at providing training in work skills and encouraging young people to gain work experience in community service and part-time, casual and temporary work. Other changes will involve CYSS projects more closely with the Commonwealth Employment Service (CES) and local educational institutions and encourage greater awareness of ethnic and geographically isolated unemployed young people. Grants at three standard levels ($34000, $54 000, $74000) are provided for twelve months for projects that meet the requirement for funding under the guidelines of January 1982.

196 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

In 1982-83, $16.4m has been provided for 276 CYSS projects and three grants to develop initiatives to facilitate the participation of unemployed young migrants, Aboriginals and women in the Scheme. Expenditure in 1981-82 was $14.2m.
Also under this heading are twelve other community-based youth projects involving unemployed youth registered with the CES. In five projects, known as the Volunteer Youth Program, the young people undertake a variety of voluntary community service activities. The remainder are community special projects that offer a range of employment oriented training activities to the young people involved. An amount of $0.8m is provided to continue these projects in 1982-83. In addition, provision of $1.3m is made in 1982-83 to enable some expansion of community special projects.
Relocation Assistance Scheme
Assistance with relocation expenses is available, subject to approval by the Commonwealth Employment Service, to unemployed persons (or persons notified of impending redundancy) who have been unable to find continuing employment nearby within a reasonable time. Approval requires an offer of a job in another area, for which no local CES registrants are suitable immediately or with training. The assistance covers fares, removal expenses (up to $1250), and re-establishment costs, legal and agent's fees (up to $1000) or rental allowances (up to $500).
In 1981-82, 1376 persons were relocated under this scheme at a cost of $1.6m. An amount of $2m is provided in 1982-83, on the assumption that about 1700 applicants will be assisted.
Other
Included under this heading is $O.4m in 1982-83 for assistance to unemployed people to attend job interviews with prospective employers. In addition, the Government has decided to make available $0.3m in 1982-83 to assist approved organisations to provide accommodation and, where appropriat~, other assistance for single unemployment, sickness and special beneficiaries under 18 years of age who are unable to live at home.

OTHER WELFARE PROGRAMS
Funeral Benefits
A funeral benefit of up to $20 is payable to a person liable for the funeral costs of an eligible age or invalid pensioner or recipients of sheltered employment allowance or tuberculosis allowance. A funeral benefit of up to $40 is payable to an age, invalid, wife or widow pensioner, a supporting parent beneficiary, or a person in receipt of sheltered employment allowance or tuberculosis allowance, who is liable for the funeral costs of a spouse, a child or another pensioner. Funeral benefits are not taxable.
For funeral benefit purposes a 'pensioner' means a person who satisfies or had satisfied the Commonwealth pensioner 'fringe benefits' income test. As a result of the Government's decision to increase the income limits for Commonwealth fringe benefits from November 1982, the income limits for eligibility for funeral benefits will be correspondingly increased.
Expenditure is estimated at $1.5m in 1982-83.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 197

Telephone Rental and Postal Concessions
Pensioners, supporting parent beneficiaries and recipients of some other benefits who meet certain requirements, including, in most cases, the income test for Commonwealth fringe benefits, may be eligible for mail redirection concessions and a reduction of one-third in the basic annual rental for a telephone.
Outlays on these concessions to social security and repatriation pensioners are estimated at $28.4m in 1982-83, including the additional cost involved in the Government's decision to increase the income limits for Commonwealth fringe benefits.
Mortgage and Rent Relief
An amount of $20m will be provided for the commencement of a program of assistance to low income home buyers experiencing extreme difficulty in meeting their mortgage repayments and to low income private renters experiencing similar difficulty in meeting rent payments. Commonwealth funds will be provided to the States and Northern Territory on a $ for $ matching basis with similar new expenditure by the States. Comparable arrangements will operate in the Australian Capital Territory.

Assistance to Homeless Men and Women
The Homeless Persons Assistance Act 1974 provides for the payment of capital grants to voluntary agencies and to local authorities for approved projects (night shelters, reception centres and hostels) in order to upgrade and replace inadequate existing accommodation and to build or purchase facilities for homeless persons. It also provides for payment of a rental subsidy of up to 100%, salary subsidy of up to 50% of the salary of approved staff, and accommodation and meals subsidies. Commencing from 1 October 1982, the accommodation and meals subsidy is to be increased from $1.20 to $1.35 a person a day and the basic rate of meal subsidy in respect of nonresident homeless persons is to be increased from 40 cents to 45 cents a meal. These subsidies are expected to cost $2.6m in 1982-83.
Total outlays in 1982-83 under this heading are estimated to be $6.7m, including $3m for the funding of new capital projects under the Government's $1 Om program for the construction of new facilities announced in October 1980.

Assistancefor Migrants
On 25 July 1982 the Government announced welfare, education and legislative measures following its consideration of an evaluation by the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs of the results achieved from the new and expanded post-arrival programs and services for migrants recommended in the 1978 Galbally Report. The measures include significant additions to expenditure in the migrant welfare area.
Grants to enable agencies serving ethnic communities to employ social welfare workers will increase from $1.8m in 1981-82 to $3.3m in 1982-83. As a result, the number of grants available will increase from 120 at June 1982 to some 140 at June 1983 and grant levels will also increase substantially. Activities covered by these grants include provision for the special needs of the aged, and the special problems faced by migrant women. In addition, $0.2m is provided for funding of grants for self-help activities in ethnic communities.

198 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Provision for contract translating and interpreting services has similarly been increased from $1.4m in 1981-82 to $1.6m in 1982-83, and a further $0.5m will be provided by the Commonwealth under cost-sharing arrangements for services offered by New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and South Australia.
A provision of $1.1 m has been made in 1982-83 for the 23 migrant resource centres that are now operating throughout Australia. An allocation of $O.5m will also be available to reimburse voluntary agencies providing material assistance to refugees arriving in needy circumstances and to assist sponsors under the Community Refugee Resettlement Scheme. 16 500 refugees were assisted under these schemes in 1981-82.
Overall provision for these services to migrants in 1982-83 is $7.2m, compared with $5.4m in 1981-82.
Welfare Programs in the Australian Capital Territory
The Commonwealth provides welfare benefits and subsidies to ACT residents on a similar basis to those provided by State governments (for example, rental rebates, bus subsidies and rates remissions for pensioners, care of foster children). Estimated expenditure in 1982-83 for these purposes is $llm (compared with $8.8m in 1981-82). The increase is primarily due to the increased number of persons becoming eligible for, and level of, rental rebates and rates remissions ($1.7m) as well as the provision of $0.3m for housing mortgage and rent relief to enable the ACT to participate similarly to the States in the housing crisis relief scheme announced by the Treasurer in March 1982.
Other
The Commonwealth reimburses the Australian National Railways Commission for part of the cost of providing non-commercial concessional fares and freight rates, mainly to pensioners; the cost to the Commonwealth of these concessions in 1982-83 is estimated at $2.2m.
The Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs was established in 1979 to develop awareness and tolerance of diverse cultures through research, public information and other educational activities, and to provide advice to governments. An amount of $3.8m is provided for this activity in 1982-83, including $1.5m for renovation of and construction of new accommodation in central Melbourne and $0.6m for research projects.
In 1982-83, $0.5m has been provided for the maintenance of 300 unattached refugee children who are wards of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs under the Immigration (Guardianship ofChildren) Act 1946.
In addition, $0.5m has been provided for grants to community welfare agencies in financial difficulties or in need of support in providing emergency relief to persons.

ABORIGINAL ADVANCEMENT PROGRAMS NEC
This item includes funding provisions for the Aboriginal Development Commission (ADC), National Aboriginal Conference (NAC) and a wide range of programs of special assistance for Aboriginals administered through the Department of Aboriginal Affairs.
The ADC is to receive $51.4m in 1982-83. Within that total is provision for assistance to Aboriginal communities and groups to acquire land, to engage in business

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 199

enterprises, to provide housing loans to Aboriginals at concessional rates of interest and, more generally, to further the economic and social development of Aboriginals. Estimated expenditure by the ADC on these activities in 1982-83 is $20.7m. Provision is also included in the ADC's 1982-83 allocation for direct grants to Aboriginal housing associations for the construction and purchase of homes for Aboriginal families. Expenditure of $29m on this activity will permit the construction of 547 new housing units this financial year. A further $lm is provided for payment into the ADC Aboriginal Entitlement Capital Account-Capital Fund, an accumulating investment fund. Income from this Fund and from other ADC investments is available for expenditure on ADC programs.
Expenditure by the NAC is estimated at $3.4m in 1982-83. The NAC's role is to provide a forum for the expression of Aboriginal views, particularly on the long term goals and objectives of government in Aboriginal Affairs.
An amount of $24.7m is also to be provided in 1982-83 through the Department of Aboriginal Affairs for programs including grants-in-aid to Aboriginal community and other organisations and State grants in the fields of employment, general welfare and training.
It is estimated that in 1982-83 an amount of $11.5m will be payable by the Commonwealth in respect of royalty payments from mining on Aboriginal land in the Northern Territory in accordance with section 63 of the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976. Payments are made to the Aboriginals Benefit Trust Account to be applied to or for the benefit of Aboriginals in the Northern Territory in accordance with the provisions of the Act.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER EXPENDITURE
This expenditure comprises the general running and capital expenses of the Departments of Social Security, excluding expenses relating to the administration of housing matters which are recorded under 'Housing', ($282.8m in 1982-83), Veterans' Affairs, excluding expenses relating to repatriation institutions which are recorded lfnder 'Health', ($70.1m), Aboriginal Affairs ($17.5m), and the Social Welfare Policy Secretariat ($0.6m).

5. HOUSING
The Commonwealth administers a wide range of programs to assist persons in meeting their housing needs. Total direct outlays on housing are estimated to increase by 24.6% in 1982-83 to $570.8m.
In addition to the outlays included in this function, other assistance for housing is given through-
- recycled funds of the Defence Service Homes Corporation (these are not reflected in Budget outlays);
- revenue forgone on certain loans made by the Commonwealth at concessional rates of interest, including advances to the States for welfare housing purposes and ACT Commissioner for Housing loans;

200 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

- taxation revenue forgone through income tax rebates on mortgage interest payments and for municipal rates on the principal family residence and through deductions for the purchase and installation of thermal insulation material by first home buyers; and
- outlays classified under other functions, e.g. supplementary (rental) assistance for pensioners and certain beneficiaries, assistance towards accommodation for the aged and disabled, crisis accommodation for families in distress, assistance to low income persons experiencing extreme difficulty in meeting mortgage and rental payments and certain Aboriginal housing activities of the Aboriginal Development Commission (see 'Social Security and Welfare').

Welfare Housing Assistance to the States and Northern Territory-
Loan Assistance Repayment of Principal
Net Loans
GrantsPensioner Housing Aboriginal Housing Other Grants
Total Grants
Other Grants to States for Housing Home Deposit Assistance Housing Loans to Savings Banks,- Repayments Defence Service Homes-
Interest Subsidy Other Outlays (net)
Total Defence Service Homes
Housing in the ACTDwellings Built for Sale or Rental Gross Advances Repayment of Principal Sale of Rental Houses Rents from Government Dwellings Maintenance of Rental Dwellings
Net Outlay
Accommodation for Migrants Accommodation for Aboriginals, nec General Administration Other Recoveries and Repayments
TOTAL HOUSING

1980-81 Actual
$m

1981-82 Actual
$m

1982-83 Estimate
$m

Change $m

175.5

146.0

146.0

35.6Cr

37.8Cr

40.2Cr

2.4

139.9

108.2

105.8

2.4

32.6 32.8 56.2
121.7
5.5 44.6 14.0Cr
34.1 0.2
34.3

32.0 34.2 50.0
116.2
8.0 114.6
4.6Cr
41.7 79.6
121.3

32.0 34.2 120.7
186.9
5.5 147.0
2.0Cr
51.5 70.3
121.8

+ 70.7
+ 70.7
2.5 + 32.4 + 2.6
+ 9.8 9.3
+ 0.5

2.5 18.4 31.6Cr
20.5Cr 5.6
25.7Cr
0.9 29.5
5.0 0.7Cr
341.1

7.1 17.8 26.6Cr
22.9Cr 5.1
19.5Cr
0.4 8.6 5.8 0.7Cr
458.3

11.3 29.0 23.4Cr 4.7Cr 25.6Cr
5.1
8.3Cr
0.3 10.3 4.2 0.8Cr
570.8

+ 4.2 + 11.2 + 3.1
4.7 2.7
+ 11.2
0.1 + 1.7
1.6
+112.6

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 201

WELFARE HOUSING ASSISTANCE TO THE STATES AND THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
Total gross payments to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing purposes are estimated at $332.9m in 1982-83 while repayments of advances are estimated at $40.2m. Under arrangements agreed at the June 1982 Loan Council meeting, welfare housing assistance has been combined with the States' other Loan Council programs to form a 'Works and Housing Program'. Within this total program the Commonwealth will provide $312.7m to the States for expenditure on welfare housing in 1982-83. In addition, a State may nominate further amounts from its Works and Housing Program for welfare housing, provided that the State in question maintains its 1981-82 level of expenditure on such housing from its own resources. Such nominated additional amounts would be advanced to the State on relevant terms and conditions applying to other Commonwealth welfare housing loans (see below). The Commonwealth will provide $20.2m for welfare housing in the Northern Territory in 1982-83 under similar funding arrangements.

Loan Assistance and Grants to the States and the Northern Territory for Housing
Loan assistance and grants are provided to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing purposes under the 1981 Commonwealth State Housing Agreement (CSHA) executed under the authority of the Housing Assistance Act 1981. The current CSHA operates for the five years 1981-82 to 1985-86. Under this Agreement, the Commonwealth will provide base financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory of $200m in each year of the Agreement. The Commonwealth may also provide additional financial assistance, the amount being decided annually in the Budget context. The following table sets out the amount and nature of Commonwealth assistance to the States and Northern Territory for welfare housing for 1982-83 compared with 1981-82.

Loan Assistance Grant Assistance-
Pensioners Aboriginals Untied
Total

1981-82 Actual
$m 146.0
32.0 34.2 50.0
262.2

1982-83 Estimate
$m 146.0
32.0 34.2 120.7
332.9

The main features of the Commonwealth's assistance for 1982-83 are-
- $146m is to be provided for loan assistance to the States and the Northern Territory in 1982-83, the same as in 1981-82. The loans are repayable over a 53 year period and carry an interest rate of 4.5% per annum. Under the new arrangements noted above, the States are able to nominate additional amounts for welfare housing from their Works and Housing Programs to be provided on these loan terms and conditions;
- $186.9m is to be provided to the States and the Northern Territory as grants in 1982-83, compared to $116.2m in 1981-82-an increase of $70.7m or 61 %. In

202 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

1982-83, as in 1981-82, grants will be provided for three broad categoriespensioners, Aboriginals and untied grant assistance. Grants totalling $32m are earmarked for rental housing assistance for pensioners. Eligible persons under the pensioners category include those in receipt of an age, invalid or widow's pension, a supporting parent's benefit, a special benefit, a sheltered employment allowance, a training allowance in certain circumstances, and some classes of service pension. Grants totalling $34.2m are earmarked for Aboriginals in need of rental housing assistance. These grants include a component previously provided under the housing grants program administered by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, which was incorporated into CSHA arrangements from 1 July 1981. Untied grant assistance will total $120.7m in 1982-83.
Under the 1981 CSHA, all loan assistance and untied grant assistance to the States and the Northern Territory is provided on a $ for $ matching basis. State and Territory expenditures on welfare housing and surpluses arising from the operation of the rental housing and home purchase assistance programs under the Agreement are eligible for such matching.
The allocation of loan assistance and untied grant assistance between rental housing and home ownership assistance programs is, under the Agreement, determined by each State and the Northern Territory. Funds allocated to rental assistance programs assist in providing concessional rental assistance for low income earners, and may be applied to the construction or acquisition of housing for rental or sale and for innovative purposes covered by the Agreement, such as the leasing of dwellings from the private sector and private/public housing joint ventures. The States and the Northern Territory have the responsibility for the design and conduct of their programs and are free to determine eligibility criteria, provided that assistance is directed to those in need. Emphasis continues to be placed on progressively moving rentals to market rents. Rebates are provided to allow those unable to meet the market-oriented rent to pay a rent geared to their income and their family circumstances. This system seeks to direct assistance to those in most need. The Agreement does not limit the number of dwellings that may be sold, but all sales by the housing authorities are to be at market value or replacement cost, and on the basis of cash transactions.
Funds allocated to home ownership assistance programs assist those who are unable to obtain mortgage finance in the private market. The Agreement does not impose specific means tests or prescribe how assistance is to be provided; instead, each State and the Northern Territory determines the conditions of eligibility for home purchase assistance and applies funds to schemes of its own choosing. Assistance to home buyers is provided on flexible terms so as to limit concessions, as far as practicable, to the period of real need. Purchasers of housing authority dwellings also have access to loans from the home purchase assistance program if they are unable to obtain finance in the private market.
Details of the State by State and Northern Territory allocation of the $146m loan assistance and the $186.9m grants in 1982-83 are shown in Budget Paper No.7, Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities, 1982-83.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 203

Other Grants to States for Housing
The States Grants (Housing) Act 1971 provides for housing assistance to the States by way of grants of $2.75m a year, payable for a period of 30 years, in respect of the States' housing operations in each of the years 1971-72 and 1972-73. An amount of $5.5m is provided in 1982-83 for this purpose. The payments are in lieu of an interest concession on funds used by the States for welfare housing in those years. In 1981-82 $2.5m was paid to Queensland as the Commonwealth contribution to losses incurred in rental housing operations under the 1945 Housing Agreement for the years 1973-74 to 1977-78. Under the terms of the 1981 CSHA, the Commonwealth is not liable to contribute to any rental losses incurred under the 1945 Housing Agreement after 1 July 1981.

HOME DEPOSIT ASSISTANCE
The Government undertook a detailed review of housing policy in 1981-82 culminating in the March 1982 announcement of a number of measures supportive of private home ownership in Australia. Included among those measures was the decision to replace the Home Savings Grant (HSG) Scheme with the Home Deposit Assistance Scheme.
Home Deposit Assistance Scheme Home Deposit Assistance Grants are payable, subject to a family income test, to eli-
gible persons to assist with the purchase or construction of a first home that is contracted for on or after 18 March 1982, on the basis of $1 for each $1 of savings held in an acceptable form (such as deposits with savings banks, credit unions, or building societies). A maximum basic grant of $2500 is payable in respect of savings held for two years ending on the contract date. In addition to the basic grant, the Scheme provides for a family bonus of $500 for families with one dependent child and $1000 for families with two or more dependent children.
The maximum basic grant is available to first home purchasers with a family income, in the financial year immediately preceding home purchase, less than or equal to 135% of average weekly earnings, with assistance tapering off to cut out at 155% of average weekly earnings.
The more significant changes from the previous HSG arrangements areintroduction of an income test to ensure that assistance is better directed to
middle and lower income earners;
- increase in the basic maximum grant from $2000 to $2500; - relaxation of savings conditions; - abolition of the house value limit; and - abolition of the nine month waiting period.
Expenditure on Home Deposit Assistance Grants is estimated at $60m III 1982-83.

204 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Homes Savings Grants
Homes Savings Grants are payable to eligible persons in respect of a first home contracted for on or between 1 January 1977 and 2 June 1982 and who applied for assistance on or before 2 July 1982. The Budget provision of $87m is the amount estimated to be required to discharge commitments under the Scheme in 1982-83.

HOUSING LOANS TO SAVINGS BANKS-REPAYMENTS
Under the Banks (Housing Loans) Act 1974, loans of $150m were made to savings banks and certain other banks to provide a short term stimulus to activity and employment in the home building industry. By 30 June 1982, all but five of the eleven participating banks had fully repaid these loans. Repayments in 1982-83 are estimated at $2m. The balance of $3m expected to be outstanding at 30 June 1983 is currently scheduled for repayment over the period to 1984-85.

DEFENCE SERVICE HMS
The Defence Service Homes Scheme assists former and serving members of the Defence Forces and certain other persons who meet the eligibility requirements to acquire a home by providing low interest loans. The maximum loan is $25 000. The first $12000 is available to borrowers at an annual interest rate of 3.75%, the next $3000 at 7.25% and the remaining $10 000 at 10%. Applications for loans to purchase existing homes are subject to a ten month waiting period.
Total expenditure on Defence Service Homes loans is estimated at $141m in 1982-83, compared to $161.7m in 1981-82. The decrease in estimated expenditure is the result of a reduction in the number of expected loan settlements in 1982-83 compared to 1981-82. In 1981-82, 7303 applications were received for loans compared to 8136 in 1980-81. The expenditure in 1982-83 is expected to be financed as follows:
(a) Non Budget Sources-
- $64m from repayments of principal retained in the Defence Service Homes Trust Account for re-Iending;
(b) From the Budget-
- $12m excess payments by borrowers available to the Defence Service Homes Trust Acco.unt by way of the Special Appropriation under Section 39c of the DeJence Service Homes Act 1918; and
- $65m by way of capital appropriation from the Budget.
In 1982-83, $15.2m is being provided for the Defence Service Homes Corporation's salary and administrative expenses (excluding rent).
An interest subsidy estimated at $51.5m will be appropriated to the Corporation in 1982-83, compared to $41.7m in 1981-82. The interest subsidy reflects the extent to which interest charged to borrowers of Defence Service Homes loans falls short of the interest payable to the Commonwealth on the Corporation's capital. Interest receipts from the Corporation estimated at $lllm in 1982-83 are recorded in the estimates of receipts (see Statement No.4).

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 205

A capital repayment in 1982-83 of $5.5m is estimated to be made from the Defence Service Homes Trust Account to the Consolidated Revenue Fund reflecting the proceeds of sales of surplus land holdings. Repayments in 1981-82 amounted to $1.5m. The Corporation has surplus land holdings as a result of phasing out its estate development and construction activities.
Receipts in 1982-83 in respect of excess payments by borrowers are estimated at $16m. In 1982-83, $12m of these and previous years' excess payments are expected to be paid to the Defence Service Homes Trust Account to meet loan instalments. A further $1.5m is expected to be used for other purposes specified in the Defence Service Homes Act, such as to meet borrowers' commitments for rates, repairs and other improvements.
Receipts from the Corporation in 1982-83 for administrative fees and recoveries are estimated at $2.2m.

HOUSING IN THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Dwellings Builtfor Sale or Rental
Expenditure on construction and upgrading rental dwellings is estimated to be $lO.3m in 1982-83, up $3.2m on 1981-82. Of this amount, $3m relates to the cost in 1982-83 of commencing 300 new houses. An amount of$lm has also been included for the first time to enable the Department of the Capital Territory to 'spot purchase' privately owned houses to add to the stock available for rental to welfare clients.
Gross Advances
Expenditure under this heading includes loans under the ACT Commissioner for Housing Loans Scheme to means-tested applicants as well as loans to public servants compulsorily transferred to the ACT and Queanbeyan (NSW). Eligible welfare applicants receive concessional interest rate loans; they pay a rate of interest of 5.75% in the first year, increasing annually by 0.5% until it reaches the Commonwealth Savings Bank Housing Loan rate. A total of $29m is expected to be available for such loans in 1982-83 compared to $17.8m in 1981-82. Of this proposed expenditure $27.8m is for loans under the ACT Commissioner for Housing Loans Scheme ($16.5m in 1981-82), comprising a $21m Budget appropriation and $6.8m in funds recycled through the ACT Housing Trust Account. The balance of $1.2m is for loans to public servants compulsorily transferred to Canberra ($1.3m in 1981-82) and is provided from Budget appropriations. The increase in expenditure on Commissioner for Housing Loans from $16.5m in 1981-82 to $27.8m in 1982-83 reflects an increase in the demand for loans, a rise in the maximum loan from $23 000 to $28 000 during 1981-82 and the inclusion for the first time of loans for the purchase by tenants of their Government rental houses. Previously Government tenants wishing to purchase their houses were assisted with vendor finance under the Commonwealth of Australia Mortgage Scheme, which did not involve cash loans. The value of such mortgages raised in 1981-82 was $12.8m.
It has been decided to abolish the Commonwealth of Australia Mortgage Scheme, with effect from Budget night, because assistance was extended to non-welfare clients and applicants were exempt from waiting period requirements. From 18 August, tenants who meet the eligibility criteria for Commissioner for Housing Loans will be assisted under that Scheme. Non-eligible tenants will need to arrange private finance.

206 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

An estimated 993 loans will be provided in 1982-83 under the Commissioner for Housing Loans Scheme, along with some 200 loans to meet outstanding commitments under the Commonwealth of Australia Mortgage Scheme. This compares with 1061 loans (including 424 mortgage loans) under the two schemes in 1981-82.
Repayments ofPrincipal This item comprises repayments of principal in respect of loans provided for the
purchase of private and Government dwellings in the ACT. The reduction of $3.1m in this item mainly reflects an expected reduction in the number of early discharges of mortgages.
Sale ofRental Houses
This item includes revenue from the sale of Government houses to tenants in the ACT. The estimate is based on 260 expected sales. This item appears for the first time in 1982-83 as part of the new arrangements for the sale of Government rental housing referred to above. In the past such house sales did not involve cash transactions but were undertaken through the raising of a Commonwealth Government mortgage.
Rentsfrom Government Dwellings This item comprises receipts from rental of Government dwellings in the ACT. The
estimated increase of $2.7m in 1982-83 is due principally to rent increases.
Maintenance ofRental Dwellings Outlays under this heading are for repairs and maintenance, servicing and
caretaking of Government owned houses and flats in the ACT.

ACCOMMODATION FOR MIGRANTS
This heading covers expenditure on minor works, new and replacement plant, and major items of equipment required in the operation of migrant centres and migrant transitory flats. A reduction in the amount required for the replacement of obsolete kitchen equipment is the main reason for the decrease on 1981-82 expenditure.

ACCOMMODATION FOR ABORIGINALS, NEC
The only expenditure in 1982-83 included under this heading is that in respect of Aboriginal Hostels Ltd which will receive $lO.3m. The company now funds the operation of 114 hostels comprising 2637 beds.
The Aboriginal Development Commission (ADC) administers housing loans and grants programs for Aboriginals and Aboriginal housing associations. Payments to the ADC, which is expected to spend $41.5m on these housing programs in 1982-83, appear under the functional heading 'Social Security and Welfare~Aboriginal Advancement Programs nec'.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Outlays of $4.2m under this heading provide mainly for administrative costs of the housing function of the Department of Social Security which, following the changed administrative arrangements announced on 7 May 1982, is now responsible for this expenditure.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 207

OTHER RECOVERIES AND REPAYMENTS
Included in this item are principal repayments from the Northern Territory Government in respect of previous Housing Commission advances and of staff housing transferred by the Commonwealth to the Northern Territory Government from 1 July 1978.
6. URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT NEe AND THE ENVIRONMENT
The Budget provides $1l3m for activities covered by this heading in 1982-83, an increase of $35.6m or 46% on 1981-82. The increase is mainly due to a fall in receipts from the early settlement of loans by South Australia and Victoria in respect of land councils/commissions in those States and to a special payment in 1982-83 to Western Australia for sewerage works.

Urban and Regional Development necGrowth Centres (net) Decentralisation Assistance (net) Urban Rehabilitation (net) . . . . Land Commission/Urban Land Councils (net) Urban Flood Mitigation Other Urban Development and Amenities
Total Urban and Regional Development nec
Protection of the Environment Sewerage and Garbage (net)-
Special Payment to Western Australia Other Outlays General Administrative Expenditure (net)
TOTAL URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT NEC AND THE ENVIRONMENT

1980-81 Actual
$m
23.6 7.0 1.7 17.5 2.6
23.3
75.7
7.0
3.3 25.4

1981-82 Actual
$m
32.2 1.6 0.5
24.5Cr 3.3 30.2
43.3
5.2
4.2 24.8

1982-83 Estimate
$m
33.1 0.9 0.9 3.9Cr
32.3
63.3
7.9
12.1 3.8 25.9

Change
$m
+ 1.0 - 0.7 + 0.4 +20.6 - 3.3 + 2.1
+20.0
+ 2.7
+12.1 - 0.4 + 1.2

111.4

77.5

113.0

+35.6

URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT NEC
This heading covers outlays related to urban and regional development which are not classified to other functions. It includes assistance for the Albury-Wodonga growth centre, general decentralisation, urban rehabilitation, urban flood mitigation and direct expenditure on development in the Australian Capital Territory.
Growth Centres (net)
Of the total amount of $33.1 m provided for growth centres in 1982-83, $32.2m represents capitalised interest on advances to the States for Albury-Wodonga in 1982-83 and earlier years, and on earlier advances for the Bathurst-Orange and Macarthur growth centres. The capitalised interest provisions represent notional advances to the States which are offset by equivalent notional receipts from the States. The latter are recorded with other interest receipts in Statement No.4. The notional advances indicate the extent of the concession actually afforded to the States by the deferment of interest payments.

208 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Commonwealth/State funding agreements in respect of these growth centres are currently under review by the Commonwealth, New South Wales and Victorian Governments. Should the arrangements be modified with effect in 1982-83, the estimates could vary significantly.
An advance of $1 m is provided for the Albury-Wodonga growth centre in 1982-83. An additional $O.3m-recorded as part of the 'General Administrative Expenditure' item-is also provided in 1982-83 to meet the Commonwealth's one-third contribution to the estimated administrative expenses of the Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation in 1982-83.
Decentralisation Assistance (net)
The Regional Development Program was introduced in 1977-78 to provide assistance of a capital nature to State, local government and community bodies, and private firms pursuing manufacturing and tertiary activities, in selected non-metropolitan centres. It was terminated in 1981. Total financial assistance allocated under the Program amounted to $36.5m for 79 projects. A gross amount of $4.2m is provided in 1982-83 to meet the carry over of commitments in respect of assistance approved before the termination of the program.
Repayments of, and interest receipts from, loans made under the Program will continue for some years. Repayments during 1982-83 are estimated at $3.3m. (Interest receipts from the loans are estimated at about $3.2m in 1982-83 and are recorded with other interest as 'Receipts' in Statement No.4.)
Urban Rehabilitation (net)
Discussions with a view to transferring the Glebe Estate to the New South Wales Government are proceeding, but it is not yet clear when transfer or failing that, disposal will occur. The 1982-83 estimates include $lm for the continuation of rehabilitation work and $O.9m for maintenance and administration costs, an increase of 7% on expenditure in 1981-82. Income from rents is estimated at $1.2m in 1982-83.
Under a 1974-75 agreement, the Commonwealth undertook to provide grants of up to $17m to New South Wales for the acquisition of 3.2 hectares of land in the Woolloomooloo Basin of Sydney and for planning and site development. Total payments to the State amounted to $12.4m at the end of 1981-82, and a further $O.6m is provided in 1982-83.
The agreement also provides for the State to make payments to the Commonwealth in respect of each unit of public housing produced and for the payment of receipts from any part of the property that is not retained for public housing. Such recoveries had amounted to $2.2m by the end of 1981-82 and further recoveries of $O.2m have been allowed for in 1982-83.
In 1974 the Commonwealth advanced $3.5m to Victoria to acquire, for rehabilitation, the Emerald Hill estate in South Melbourne. Repayments commenced in 1978-79 and are estimated to amount to $O.2m in 1982-83.
Land Commissions/Urban Land Councils (net)
Under a program commenced in 1973-74, Commonwealth assistance was provided to several States for land acquisition, servicing the land acquired (where costs were not met from normal government subventions) and urban renewal and redevelopment.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 209

This program was terminated in 1977-78. Under the terms on which loans were provided under this program, repayments on the first of these loans are due to commence in 1983-84. The South Australian and Victorian Governments have reached agreement with the Commonwealth to make lump sum payments over a number of years in settlement of loans provided in earlier years for assistance to the South Australian Land Commission and the Victorian Urban Land Council/Urban Land Authority respectively. Payments totalling $31m were received in 1981-82. Receipts in 1982-83 are estimated at $11.5m, but will be partly offset by $7.6m capitalised interest on loans provided to other States in 1977-78 and earlier years.
Urban Flood Mitigation
The Commonwealth contributed $3.3m in 1981-82 for urban flood plain management (including works) under the National Water Resources Program, including $0.9m to New South Wales, $1m to Victoria, $0.8m to Queensland, and $0.5m to South Australia. The amount of any funds for urban flood mitigation works in 1982-83 will depend on allocations to be made for individual projects under the National Water Resources Program. Pending allocation to individual projects these funds are classified under 'Irrigation and Other Pastoral Water Projects' in the function 'Industry Assistance and Development'.
Other Urban Development and Amenities
This item includes $12m allocated under the Aboriginal Public Health Improvement Program (APHIP) as the second year's provision in respect of the Government's $50m five-year program to improve Aboriginal environmental health; $8m was provided for this program in 1981-82. The APHIP is concerned mainly with the provision of clean water and sewerage for remote Aboriginal communities on a priority of needs basis, and includes direct payments to Aboriginal communities and payments to the States and the Northern Territory for these purposes. Total expenditure on programs for the improvement and maintenance of Aboriginal community amenities in 1982-83 will be of the order of $25.6m ($21.4m in 1981-82), comprising payments to the States and the Northern Territory of $6.5m and direct payments to Aboriginal communities of $19.lm.
An amount of $6.1 m is provided in 1982-83 principally for underground electricity mains, provision of street lighting and footpaths as well as servicing of commercial and industrial sites in the ACT. The decrease of $2.2m reflects the continuing reduced level of demand consequent upon the fall in Canberra's rate of population growth.

PROTECTION OF THE ENVIRONMENT
An amount of $7.9m is being provided in 1982-83 for purposes related to the protection of the environment. The increased provision (up $2.7m on 1981-82 expenditure) reflects the Government's decisions to increase funding for several existing activities and to provide support for a number of new programs. A significant component of the proposed expenditure under this heading relates to the Supervising Scientist and the Alligator Rivers Region Research Institute, support for which bodies is being increased from $4.1 m in 1981-82 to $4.7m in 1982-83 to continue the development of environmental protection services in the Region. Increased funding is also provided for radioactive waste management (from $62 000 in 1981-82 to $234 000 in 1982-83) and for the

210 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

commencement of a program for the rehabilitation of Rum Jungle (a former uranium mining site) which will be undertaken by the Northern Territory Government at a cost of $0.8m in 1982-83 ($0.2m was provided for an initial engineering study in 1981-82).
Funds are also being provided for an information program on nature conservation ($0.6m) and, as part of Australia's contribution to the United Nations Year of the Tree, for a national tree program estimated to cost $0.5m in 1982-83.
Other outlays in 1982-83 under this heading are for environmental quality assessment programs including activities related to air quality, marine pollution and hazardous chemicals ($0.2m), for matching grants to assist conservation organisations ($350000), and for the operation of, and acquisition of new computing facilities for, the Baseline Air Monitoring Station in Tasmania ($O.4m).

SEWERAGE AND GARBAGE (NET)
Special Payment to Western Australia The Commonwealth is to provide assistance to Western Australia of $20m towards
the cost of construction of a sewerage pipeline in the Cockburn Sound area from Woodman Point to the sea off Cape Peron. Of this amount, $12.1m will be provided in 1982-83.
Other Outlays A net amount of $4.8m is included in 1982-83 for the provision of sewerage, garbage
and drainage facilities in the Australian Capital Territory. The reduction of $0.3m compared with 1981-82 reflects a further reduction in the building of new facilities.
Repayments of $1 m in respect of loans provided to the States in earlier years under a former program of assistance for sewerage works are offset against outlays under this heading.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE (NET)
The major components under this heading are the administrative expenditure of the National Capital Development Commission ($11.7m) and consultancy fees payable by the Commission for investigation, design and construction purposes ($8.8m). Also included is that component of the administrative expenditure of the Department of Home Affairs and Environment which can be identified as relating to the environment ($3m) and the Commonwealth's contribution to the running costs of the Albury Wodonga Development Corporation mentioned earlier.

7. CULTURE AND RECREATION
Provisions for the support of cultural and recreational activities are budgeted to increase by 3.7% from $483.2m in 1981-82 to $501.2m in 1982-83. The relatively low rate of growth in this function reflects non-recurring payments in 1981-82 in respect of the role of the Australian Broadcasting Commission as Host Broadcaster at the Commonwealth Games, the completion of new facilities for Radio Australia at East Burwood, Victoria, the completion of most major contract work for fitting-out of the National Gallery, and a payment in 1981-82 for the acquisition of pastoral leases for incorporation into national parks in the Northern Territory.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 211

Broadcasting and TelevisionAustralian Broadcasting Commission Operation and Maintenance of Australian Broadcasting Commission Transmitters Special Broadcasting Service Provision and Installation of Transmitters Regulation of the Broadcasting Industry Planning of Broadcasting and Other Related Expenditure, nec
Total
Libraries Australian National Gallery and Collection Film Industry Development Assistance to the Arts War Memorial Archives Youth, Sport and Recreation Other Cultural Organisations Wildlife and National Parks National Estate Australian Heritage Commission . . . . . Cultural and Recreational Activities in the ACT nec
TOTAL CULTURE AND RECREAnON

1980-81 Actual
$m
188.0
27.0 27.0 7.7 3.4
3.9
257.0
17.9 23.5
6.2 29.9
2.7 9.5 10.8 3.0 9.0 3.1 0.6 27.3
400.4

1981-82 Actual
$m
247.0
32.4 26.4 9.4 4.0
4.5
323.8
18.7 24.1
6.0 32.3
3.5 9.7 19.4 8.3 14.7 3.4 0.7 18.6
483.2

1982-83 Estimate
$m
256.1
34.9 28.2 12.0
3.8
5.2
340.3
19.8 17.4 6.8 35.9 5.5 10.0 26.7 7.2 9.6 3.5 0.7 18.0
501.2

Change
$m
+ 9.1 + 2.5 + \.8 + 2.6
- 0.2
+ 0.7
+16.5
+ \,1
- 6.7
+ 0.7 + 3.6 + \.9 + 0.3 + 7.3
- \,1 - 5.1
+ 0.1
- 0.6
+18.0

Broadcasting and Television
Total outlays by the Commonwealth on broadcasting and television services are estimated at $340.3m in 1982-83, an increase of $16.5m or 5.1 % on 1981-82.

Australian Broadcasting Commission
The Budget provides for a total of $256.1m to be paid to the Australian Broadcasting Commission (ABC-soon to be renamed the Australian Broadcasting Corporation) in 1982-83, comprising $242m for domestic radio and television services, $8.7m for Radio Australia, and $5.4m for the Host Broadcaster activities of the ABC at the 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane.
The amount to be provided to the ABC in 1982-83 for its domestic radio and television services-as well as for its other general activities, including the maintenance of the ABC orchestras in each State and the diverse merchandising activities of the ABC-includes $227.9m for operational purposes and $14.1m for capital expenditures. The corresponding figures for 1981-82 were $214.2m and $8.7m, respectively. The proposed increase of $13.7m in operational expenditures by the ABC in 1982-83 should, after allowances for expected cost increases, enable the ABC to undertake a slightly expanded level of activity in 1982-83. The estimated increase of $5.4m in capital expenditures by the ABC in 1982-83 will allow for increased purchases of technical equipment: it also includes $O.3m for site acquisitions and associated preparations for satellite earth stations to be installed near ABC studio facilities in later years (at an estimated total capital cost of $14.9m) and $O.2m for the second stage of the proposed plan to consolidate the ABC's accommodation requirements in Victoria at East Burwood, at an estimated total cost of $15.5m spread over the next 3-4 years.

212 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

The overall provision for Radio Australia in 1982-83 consists of $7.8m for operational purposes and $0.9m mainly for the purchase of minor items of technical equipment. The reduction in the Budget allocation for this purpose in 1982-83 is due to the completion of the construction of new Radio Australia facilities at East Burwood, Victoria, as the first stage of the proposed eventual consolidation of major ABC activities in Victoria on that site.
An amount of $5.4m will be provided to the ABC in 1982-83 in connection with its special role as Host Broadcaster at the 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane. Of this, $4.5m will be for operational purposes and $0.9m for the purchase and installation of technical equipment and related broadcasting facilities. Total outlays on this specific activity by the ABC since 1979-80 are estimated at $20.1m (part of which will, however, be recovered later).
Operation and Maintenance of Australian Broadcasting Commission Transmitters
Following its consideration of the findings and recommendations of the Dix Committee of Inquiry into the ABC, the Government has decided that the ABC should assume the responsibility for this function in future, and that the Australian Telecommunications Commission (Telecom) should be phased out of this activity. However, until this transfer takes place, the transmitters will continue to be operated and maintained by Telecom on behalf of the Commonwealth; an amount of $36.3m is provided for payment to Telecom for this purpose in 1982-83. Revenue of $l.4m in 1982-83 is expected from the hire of technical facilities to commercial television operators and the sale of assets.
Special Broadcasting Service
The Budget provides $28.2m for the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS) in 1982-83, of which approximately $7.7m will be spent on central administration and ethnic radio and $20.5m on multicultural television. The comparable figures in 1981-82 were $6.4m and $20m, respectively. Allowing for cost increases, this will enable the existing ethnic radio stations 2EA and 3EA as well as the Channel 0/28 multicultural television services in Sydney and Melbourne to be maintained at about the same levels of activity as in 1981-82, and also allow for multicultural television to be extended to Canberra and its environs during 1982-83. Grants to eligible public broadcasting stations which transmit ethnic radio programs will be increased from $O.4m in 1981-82 to $O.65m in 1982-83. The Department of Communications is proposing to circulate shortly a public Discussion Paper canvassing various options for the possible development of ethnic radio services in Australia. Comments on this Paper will assist the Government in considering this general subject in due course.
Provision and Installation of Transmitters
The Government has decided that the responsibility for the provision and installation of new radio and television transmitters and ancillary buildings, works and technical equipment required for use either by the ABC (whether for its domestic services or for Radio Australia) or by the SBS should remain with the Commonwealth, rather than be vested in those organisations. The total amount of $12m provided for this purpose in 1982-83 includes $6.1 m for the upgrading and extension of the ABC network in country areas, including $0.2m for preliminary work to be started on the installation of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 213

satellite earth stations at certain transmission sites; and $4.7m to complete the rehabilitation of the Radio Australia transmitting facilities at Cox Peninsula, Darwin, which were devastated by Cyclone Tracy in 1974, and for certain other minor works and equipment required for the Radio Australia stations at Shepparton, Victoria, and Carnarvon, Western Australia. Included also is $0.2m for the installation of UHF translators to improve Channel 0/28 reception in certain parts of Sydney and in the Dandenongs in Victoria, and $1 m for the extension of multicultural television to Canberra and its environs in 1982-83.

Regulation of the Broadcasting Industry
An amount of $3.8m has been provided for the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal to enable it to conduct public inquiries into the granting and/or renewal of commercial and public broadcasting station licences, and to carry out other functions under the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942 relating to regulation of the radio and television industries.

Planning ofBroadcasting and Other Related Expenditure, nec
The Department of Communications is responsible for policy concerning radio and television services in Australia, including the examination of technical matters relating to the adequacy and location of national, commercial and public broadcasting stations. Outlays by the Department on these functions in 1982-83 are estimated at $5.2m, compared with $4.5m in 1981-82. This includes $0.6m for a program of field tests and laboratory investigations into the technical standards to be set for the small earth stations to be used for reception of the Homestead and Community Broadcasting Satellite Service planned when Australia's proposed domestic satellite system becomes operational in 1985.

Libraries
The 1982-83 provision for the expenses of the National Library of Australia is $19.2m. This includes $11.6m for salaries and related costs and $4m for the purchase of library materials (up 20% on 1981-82 expenditure). The materials planned for purchase by the Library include a wide range of books and periodicals, films, pictorial material, maps, sound recordings, music scores and manuscripts. These acquisitions are additional to the general collection acquired through the requirement under the Copyright Act 1968 that copies of Australian publications be deposited with the Library.
In 1982-83 the Library will continue with the development of an Australian Bibliographic Network with plans to increase the number of terminals installed over the period from 12 to 25. The Network enables on-line consultation of the National Library's data base of cataloguing information by libraries throughout Australia.
A major project to be commenced in 1982-83 is the construction of extensions to the National Library at a total estimated cost of $12.6m. There will be little or no expemliture in 1982-83 because of the lead times involved in the calling and analysing of tenders for such a major project.
Also included in this category is $0.7m for the non-salary operating expenses of the Canberra Public Library Service (CPLS). Expenditure on salaries and overtime by the

214 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

CPLS is included in the Department of the Capital Territory's administrative votes under the function 'General Public Services-Administrative Services'.
Australian National Gallery and Collection
The Gallery's allocation for 1982-83 is $15.4m compared with $15m in 1981-82. Of this amount $4m is provided for acquisitions of works of art to supplement the growing National Collection and $1.7m is provided for display fitout and loose furniture for the Gallery building as part of a program, now estimated to cost $8.3m, to be completed in time for the Gallery's scheduled opening in October 1982. Provision is also made for the costs associated with a further increase in the staffing of the Gallery. In addition, the Gallery estimates that it will receive gross revenue of $2.3m from admission charges, Gallery membership and publications program, a Gallery shop and support from the private sector.
The Australian National Gallery Act 1975 is to be amended to provide for an Australian National Gallery Fund, into which will be paid all net revenue from admission charges, community membership, the publications program, corporate sponsorships and the Gallery Shop. This Fund will be available for the purposes of the Gallery, subject to an amount equal to the net proceeds of admission charges being applied to acquisitions.
An amount of $2m is being provided in 1982-83 to allow for final fitting out and completion of the Australian National Gallery, compared with $9.1m in 1981-82. The lower provision in 1982-83 reflects completion of most of the major contracts. The total construction cost of the Gallery is now estimated at $53.4m.
Film Industry Development
The Australian Film Commission assists the local film industry by providing equity capital and loans for the production, promotion and distribution of Australian films and television programs. Grants are also provided to encourage script-writers and assist in the development of new projects. The recent taxation concessions for the film industry have resulted in the Australian Film Commission reducing its loan and investment support for new films, and increasing its involvement in marketing and developmental activities. The Budget provides $6.8m for these purposes in 1982-83, an increase of 12% on 1981-82.
Assistance to the Arts
The Australia Council administers the Commonwealth's major programs of assistance to the Arts through Boards responsible for theatre, community arts, music, literature, Aboriginal arts, crafts and visual arts. The total allocation for the Council in 1982-83 is $33.6m and consists of the following components:

Australian Opera . . . . . . . Australian Ballet Foundation Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust Or-
chestras . . . . . General Support for the Arts Administration . . . . . . . .

1981-82
$m 3.337 1.602
2.741 18.094 4.598
30.372

1982-83
$m 3.692 1.772
3.032 20.017
5.087
33.600

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 215

The 1982-83 allocations for General Support for the Arts and the three major performing arts companies will permit about the same real level of activity as in 1981-82.
Included in the Council's General Support for the Arts program is the final instalment of $0.2m of a three year $O.8m Commonwealth contribution towards the Arts Festival planned to coincide with the 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane.
The Public Lending Right scheme is expected to cost $1.4m in 1982-83. Under this scheme authors and publishers of Australian books are compensated for loss of income in cases where fifty or more copies of an eligible book are available for loan from public libraries.
Artbank, which co-ordinates all lending programs of Commonwealth-owned art works and acquires works of art from Australian artists for placement on hire in public places, is to be provided with $O.4m in 1982-83.
A payment of $O.5m will be made in two equal instalments in 1982-83 and 1983-84 to the Australian Ballet Development Fund as the Commonwealth's contribution towards a permanent building for the Australian Ballet in Melbourne.
Also included in this category is provision for a final payment of $O.2m to the International Cultural Corporation of Australia, which was established in 1979-80 to manage international art exhibitions touring Australia with the expectation that it would in time become self-sufficient.
War Memorial
An amount of $5.5m, $1.9m more than in 1981-82, is provided for operating costs and repairs and maintenance, for an upgrading of exhibition areas and maintenance of collections at the Australian War Memorial. Work on planning of extensions to the War Memorial building is also to begin in 1982-83.
Archives
In 1982-83 an amount of $lOm is provided to preserve and maintain archival material of national significance or public interest. The costs of increased archival workloads are largely offset by a reduction in capital expenditure on additional repository capacity.
Youth, Sport and Recreation
An amount of $26.7m is provided under this heading in 1982-83, compared with $19.4m in 1981-82. Provisions for assistance to sport in 1982-83 include the following:
- $8.2m to provide assistance on a $ for $ matching basis to the States and Territories for the development of international standard sports facilities. This is part of a total $25m program.
- $3.7m for Sports Assistance Programs (previously the Sports Development Program) under which assistance is provided to national sporting bodies for administration, coaching and other activities such as participation in international competition. The program has been expanded to include, from 1982-83 onwards, assistance for sport and recreation for the disabled and funds for the development of the Australia Games which will be held biennially commencing in 1984. Assistance for team preparation and travel for the 1982 Commonwealth Games Australian team is also included under this item.

216 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

- $O.5m special assistance as the first instalment of the $1.4m program towards teams preparation for the 1984 Olympic Games.
- $4m for the operating expenses of the Australian Institute of Sport which has been established in Canberra to give potential top class Australian sportsmen and sportswomen access to specialised coaching programs while allowing them to pursue their studies and careers; the Institute's program also allows for competition travel and scholarships as well as the purchase of plant and equipment.
- $7.1m to complete construction of the Swimming and Tennis Training Centre for the Australian Institute of Sport. It is proposed to commence construction in 1982-83 of an indoor sports training facility for the Institute; the total cost is estimated at $8m, with estimated expenditure of $O.2m in 1982-83.
Also included in 1982-83 under this item are $O.8m for grants-in-aid to youth organisations and international youth exchanges, $O.6m for grants-in-aid to life saving bodies, and $1.4m for grants-in-aid to Aboriginal communities and groups for cultural, recreational and sporting activities.

Other Cultural Organisations
Outlays under this heading in 1982-83 are estimated at $7.2m, compared with $8.3m in 1981-82. The decrease in this item is mainly due to decreased expenditure in 1982-83 on Australia's exhibition and presentation at the 1982 International Energy Exposition in Knoxville, USA. An amount of $O.8m is included for this purpose in 1982-83, compared with expenditure in 1981-82 of $3.7m. Total expenditure on this project is estimated at $4.5m.
An amount of $2.1m is provided in 1982-83 for the operating expenses of the Australian Bicentennial Authority which was established to prepare for the Australian Bicentenary celebrations in 1988. This, together with funds already held by the Authority, provides for total expenditure in 1982-83 of $2.8m compared with expenditure of $2.2m in 1981-82.
Also included in 1982-83 are amounts of $2m and $O.3m as part payments of grants of $5m and $2m respectively towards preparations for sesquicentenary celebrations in Victoria and South Australia.
An amount of $O.5m is included for the costs of the Museum of Australia Interim Council and Secretariat, including $O.1m for acquisitions for the National Historical Collection. The Interim Council is due to report to the Government by the end of 1982 on the proposed development of the Museum of Australia.
Provision is made for $O.5m for the Australian Children's Television Foundation, a private company limited by guarantee that was established early in 1982 with the assistance of the Commonwealth ($O.2m in 1981-82) and some States. The objectives of the Foundation are to encourage the development, production and broadcasting of quality television programs for children. The Commonwealth has committed a total of $1.5m in support over a period of three years ending in 1984-85, after which period the Foundation is expected to be self-supporting.
Grants totalling $O.3m have been provided for the National Trusts and $O.3m is included for the National Women's Advisory Council. Also included are provisions for the observance of Australia Day ($O.4m), and administration of the Historic

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 217

Shipwrecks Act 1976 under which funds are provided for rewards as and when approved and for servicing the Australian/Netherlands Committee on Old Dutch Shipwrecks.
Wildlife and National Parks
An amount of $9.6m is being provided in 1982-83 (compared to outlays of $14.7m in 1981-82) for wildlife conservation and management and the development of national parks. The reduction reflects the payment of $5.5m in 1981-82 for settlement of the purchase of the Mudginberri and Munmarlary pastoral leases in the Northern Territory acquired for incorporation in the future Stage II of the Kakadu National Park.
Significant outlays in this category in 1982-83 include $2.9m for the operations of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (GBRMPA), $5.7m for the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service (ANPWS) and $0.7m for expenditure by the Department of the Capital Territory on nature reserves in the ACT.
Outlays for the GBRMPA are planned to increase by $0.8m in 1982-83 and reflect a decision by the Government to accelerate the declaration and zoning of sections of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. Increased funding is also being provided to meet the Commonwealth's share of costs for the first full year of day-to-day management of the Capricornia Section of the Park. Of the allocation for the ANPWS, $2.lm is for the development and operation of the Kakadu National Park in the Northern Territory. A specific allocation of $l.lm has been identified for payment to the Northern Territory Government in 1982-83 for the operations and management of the Uluru National Park.
National Estate
As in 1981-82, an amount of $2.2m is provided to finance programs of assistance for the restoration, preservation and improvement of buildings and areas of special significance. In addition, $1.3m is to be provided to the Tasmanian Government on a $2 for $1 matching basis for the fourth year of a seven-year program to restore and develop the Port Arthur region. The cost to the Co.mmonwealth of this program is currently estimated to be of the order of$6m over the seven-year period.
Australian Heritage Commission
The Australian Heritage Commission is responsible for the identification of places of National Estate significance and for providing advice on measures for their protection. An amount of $0.7m is provided for the running costs of the Commission.
Cultural and Recreational Activities in the ACT nec
This heading covers the net cost of construction and maintenance of parks, gardens and reserves, as well as the provision of assistance to cultural, recreational and community activities in the ACT (including Jervis Bay).

8. ECONOMIC SERVICES
This category covers the various economic services and forms of economic assistance provided by the Commonwealth to industry and the community generally. It includes the provision of economic infrastructure, the regulation of private sector economic activity, and more direct forms of Government participation in economic activity.

218 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

A. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION
The following table shows the Commonwealth's expenditure for transport and communication purposes in 1980-81 and 1981-82, and the estimates for 1982-83. In aggregate, these outlays are expected to increase by $295.lm or 25% in 1982-83. The bulk of this large increase is accounted for by the new Australian Bicentennial Roads Program and by special payments to some States in 1982-83. There have also been large increases in Aerodrome Local Ownership Plan and other airport works.
A number of the Commonwealth authorities which operate transport and communications services now borrow on their own behalf. Transactions between these authorities and the Budget have in recent years been largely confined to the repayment of earlier loans from the Budget, together with interest and dividend payments to the Budget recorded in Statement No.4 under 'Interest, Rent and Dividends'. Figures for the Commonwealth sector as a whole up to 1981-82, which take account of the activities of these authorities, are shown in Table 10 of Statement No.6.

CommunicationNational Communications Satellite System Radio Frequency Management Administrative and Other
Total Communication

1980-81 Actual $m
10.S 3.0 13.S

1981-82 Actual
$m
6.0 12.3 4.7
23.0

1982-83 Estimate
$m
18.0 13.2 3.3
34.S

Change
$m
+ 12.0 + 0.9
1.3
+ II.S

Air TransportCapital Contribution to Qantas Qantas Repayment of Advances Australian National Airlines Commission (TAA) Repayment of Advances Assistance to Operators and Aviation BodiesAir Service Subsidies Grants to Aviation Organisations Aerodrome Local Ownership Plan Provision of Civil Aviation ServicesOperational and Administrative Expenditure . Plant and Equipment for Airways and Navigational Facilities Buildings and Works RecoveriesAir Navigation Charges Airport Rentals and Business Concessions Other
Total Civil Aviation Services
Total Air Transport
Road Transport-Road Grants to States and NT Road and Related Works in the ACT Public Transport and Equipment in ACT Special Payment to Tasmania for Tourist Roads Special Grant for Second Hobart Bridge Road Research and Investigations Repayment of Advances
Total Road Transport

24.SCr
6.8Cr
0.7 0.4 4.2
241.2
11.7 37.1
9S.9Cr 3S.8Cr 10.2Cr
148.1
122.2

2S.0 10.SCr
2.9Cr
4.7 O.S 6.7
300.2
IS.8 46.8
101.8Cr 38.7Cr 13.2Cr
209.0
232.6

8.2Cr
2.9Cr
5.8 O.S 40.9
327.1
24.6 118.6
119.3Cr 40.2Cr 13.2Cr
297.6
333.7

2S.0 + 2.3
+ 1.1 + 0.1 + 34.2 + 26.9 + 8.8 + 71.8
17.S I.S
+ 88.S +101.1

628.0 19.8 2.8
6.4 0.3 0.6Cr
6S6.7

68S.0 IS.4 4.3
16.4 1.9 0.6Cr
722.4

884.0 19.6 3.2 10.0 17.0 2.0
935.7

+199.0 + 4.2
1.1 + 10.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.6
+213.3

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 219

Rail TransportAustralian National Railways CommissionOperating Loss . . . . . Capital Works . . . . . Alice Springs-Darwin Railway
Preliminary Planning Assistance to States-
Mainline Upgrading Repayments of Advances Other Rail Transport . .

Total Rail Transport

Sea Transport-

Australian Shipping Commission-

Subsidies for Services

Other Payments . . . . .

Repayment of Advances

Assistance to Shipping Bodies and Shippers-

Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme

Australian Shippers' Council

Provision of Services-

Buildings and Works

Marine and General Services

..

Payment to OTC for Maritime Communications

Repayments

Total Sea Transport

Pipelines-Pipeline Authority Repayments

Total Pipelines

Special Payments to Victoria, Queensland and South Australia for Transport . . . . . . .
Urban Public Transport . . . . . . . Transport Planning and Research General Administrative and Other Expenditure Other Recoveries . . . . . . .

TOTAL TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICAT!ON

1980-81 Actual
$m

1981-82 Actual
$m

1982-83 Estimate
$m

Change $m

56.0 20.0
0.3
14.8 5.6Cr 0.9
86.4

70.4 5.0
1.9
24.3 5.2Cr 0.8
97.1

71.S 3.0
3.0
21.8 5.SCr 0.7
94.5

+ 1.1 2.0
+ 1.1
2.S 0.3 0.1
2.7

3.8
12.6Cr
29.5 0.2
1.8 2.5 3.5 0.3Cr
28.3

3.8 1.8 2.0Cr
29.4 0.2
1.9 4.8 4.0 0.2Cr
43.7

4.0
S1.4Cr
32.0 0.2
2.3 4.7 4.4 0.2Cr
4.0Cr

+ 0.2 1.8
49.4
+ 2.6
+ 0.3 0.1
+ 0.5
47.7

25.9

24.5

22.1

2.4

16.ICr

17.4Cr

18.6Cr

1.2

9.8

7.1

3.5

3.6

44.1 8.8
48.4 29.0Cr

35.0 1.5 2.8
45.0 30.ICr

65.0
3.0 43.9 34.6Cr

+ 30.0 1.5
+ 0.2 1.1 4.5

989.3

1180.2

1475.3

+295.1

COMMUNICA nON
National Communications Satellite System
The Budget provides $18m for a further equity contribution by the Commonwealth to AUSSAT Pty Ltd, which has been established to own and operate the proposed domestic satellite communications system to be introduced in Australia in 1985. An amount of $6m was provided for this purpose in 1981-82. AUSSAT's total equity capital requirement is expected to be $75m spread over the years 1981-82 to 1985-86. It is envisaged that the private sector will be permitted to take up a 49% equity interest in AUSSAT Pty Ltd in due course.
Radio Frequency Management
Administration of the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1905 includes the regulation and monitoring of the activities of many different categories of radio-communications

220 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

licensees (including those with 'Citizen Band' radios). The provision of $13.2m for this purpose in 1982-83 will enable such administrative activities by the Department of Communications to be maintained at about the same level as in 1981-82.
Administrative and Other Expenditure
This item consists largely of the salary and administrative expenses ($2.8m) of the Department of Communications not attributed to other functions. It also includes an amount of $0.381 m to meet the costs of the ongoing public Committees of Inquiry into the monopoly position of the Australian Postal Commission, and into the possibility of allowing the private sector to playa greater role in the provision of telecommunications services in Australia in future. These Committees are scheduled to report in the latter part of 1982.

AUTHORITIES PROVIDING COMMUNICATION SERVICES
Communications services are provided by the Australian Telecommunications Commission (Telecom), the Australian Postal Commission (Australia Post) and the Overseas Telecommunications Commission (OTC), all of which operate outside the Budget. Transactions between these authorities and the Budget in the three years to 1982-83 have been confined to the payment of interest and dividends, recorded in Statement No.4, though there were also advances and repayments of advances in earlier years (see Table 4 of Statement No.6 for an historical series). Figures for the Commonwealth sector as a whole, which take account of the activities of these authorities, are presented in Statement No.6.
Australian Telecommunications Commission (Telecom)
Telecom is required to operate on a commercial basis with the financial objective of generating, by way of charges for its services, such amounts as will enable it to cover its operating costs and to meet at least half of its capital expenditures in each year. Telecom's capital works program in 1982-83 is estimated to be about $1500m, compared with about $1285m in 1981-82. To finance this program, Telecom is to borrow $220m on the domestic capital market in 1982-83, although the bulk of the funds required will continue to come from Telecom's internal sources (mainly depreciation provisions and retained profits). The last capital advances made to Telecom from the Budget occurred in 1977-78.
Australian Postal Commission (Australia Post)
Australia Post also is required to operate on a commercial basis with the financial objective of raising, by way of charges, such amounts as will enable it to cover operating costs and to meet at least half of its capital expenditures in each year. Since its inception in 1975, Australia Post has been able to finance all of its capital works from internal sources, and also repay some of the initial capital advanced to it by the Commonwealth.
Overseas Telecommunications Commission (OTC)
OTC, which provides telecommunications services between Australia and other countries, is required to operate on a commercial basis. In 1982-83, OTC is expected to pay dividends totalling $24m to the Commonwealth, compared with $20m in 1981-82.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 221

AIR TRANSPORT
Capital Contribution to Qantas Airways Ltd
In 1981-82 the Commonwealth provided Qantas with an additional $25m by way of share capital; total subscribed capital now stands at $89.4m. No provision has been made for a capital contribution to Qantas in 1982-83 although the Commonwealth has undertaken, without commitment, to further review the matter during the year.

Repayments ofAdvances by Qantas Airways Ltd and Australian National Airlines Commission (TAA)
Past advances to Qantas and TAA comprised mainly the proceeds of loans raised by the Commonwealth on behalf of the airlines to assist in the financing of aircraft purchases. Amounts repaid by the airlines to the Commonwealth in respect of past loans (estimated at $11.1 m in 1982-83) are in turn repaid to the lenders. The forecast reduction (from $13.4m in 1981-82) reflects the timing of repayments. The balance expected to be outstanding in respect of these loans as at 30 June 1983 is about $37m (based on exchange rates a'S,at 30 June 1982), which is due for repayment over the next four years. Qantas and TAA'now raise loans on their own behalf, in some cases under Commonwealth guarantee, or finance projects under lease finance arrangements, and have not borrowed from the Budget since 1976-77.
Interest and, when they are made, dividend payments from the airlines to the Budget are recorded in Statement No.4. The activities of Qantas and TAA are comprehended in Table 10 of Statement No.6, which provides figures for the Commonwealth sector as a whole.

Assistance to Operators and Aviation Bodies
As announced in March 1982, the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments are providing a subsidy to TAA to ensure the continuation of airline services to communities in Western Queensland. Each Government provided $0.167m in 1981-82 for this purpose and is to provide a further $1m in 1982-83. The subsidy arrangements are to be reviewed at the end of 1982-83.
The Government will continue to provide assistance to reduce air fares charged by the airlines on routes between Melbourne and Tasmania below the fares applicable on comparable routes on the mainland. An amount of $4.4m has been made available in 1982-83 for this purpose. In addition, $0.44m has been provided for the continuation of financial assistance to operators of certain air services to ensure that communities in remote areas receive a basic level of air service.
Provision has been made in 1982-83 for contributions of $450 000 to the International Civil Aviation Organisation, $28000 to the Gliding Federation of Australia, $25000 to the Commonwealth Air Transport Council, $28000 to the Royal Federation of Aero Clubs of Australia, and $10 000 to the General Aviation Association. The total provision for these aviation bodies represents a 13% increase on 1981-82 expenditure.

222 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Aerodrome Local Ownership Plan
A provision of $40.9m has been made in 1982-83 (compared to expenditure of $6.7m in 1981-82) to meet the Commonwealth's share of expenditure on approved aerodrome development and maintenance projects under the Aerodrome Local Ownership Plan. Of this amount, $38m is for development works, including $12m on new projects.
The Commonwealth's commitment to the Plan over the next 3 years currently totals $92.9m of which $84m is for development works at major regional aerodromes. Major projects in respect of aerodromes already transferred to local ownership are at Cairns ($19.5m), Tamworth ($6.9m), Devonport ($4.75m), Karratha ($1.84m) and at Albury, Dubbo and Maroochydore ($7m) where upgrading to F28 standard will take place. New major development works are proposed at a numbet of aerodromes, including Port Hedland, Coffs Harbour, Bundaberg and Wynyard, subject to the local authorities accepting transfer of the aerodromes under the Plan.

Provision ofCivil Aviation Services
The Department of Aviation provides many services to the air transport industry, including air traffic services and the operation of over 60 aerodromes and a network of air navigation facilities. These activities account for the major portion of operational and administrative expenditures and outlays on buildings, works, plant and equipment.
Civil Aviation Services-Operational and Administrative Expenditure
Operational and administrative expenditure on air transport activities in 1982-83 is estimated at $327.lm, an increase of $26.9m over 1981-82; salaries including overtime account for $233.5m, up $16.5m on 1981-82. The total provision represents an 8.9% increase in expenditure in 1982-83 and caters for the forecast growth in air traffic (estimated at 2.4% in 1982-83), other increases in demand for services and the introduction of new aircraft types.
These estimates include a provision of $0.495m for the activities of the Independent Air Fares Committee which was established in January 1982 under the Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1982 to determine the domestic air fares charged by operators of regular public transport services.
Civil Aviation Services-Plant and Equipment for Airways and Navigational Facilities
An amount of $24.6m is provided in 1982-83, an increase of $8.8m on 1981-82, for purchases of navigational, communication and other plant and equipment. Major projects include the upgrading of radar display systems at major airports, the continuing replacement of the fleet of vehicles for the rescue and fire fighting services, the rationalisation and replacement of the Department of Aviation's light aircraft and motor vehicle fleets, the acquisition of air traffic control simulators for training purposes and the replacement and upgrading of the Department's radio communications and navigational aid systems. Approval has been given for a program of expenditure on the purchase and installation of earth stations ($30.9m) to provide for the Department's use of the national communications satellite when it becomes operational in 1985-86 and for equipment costing $llm (control tower equipment, instrument landing system and

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 223

navigation aids) associated with the redevelopment of Brisbane airport. The only expenditure in 1982-83 for these items is expected to be $1 m on equipment for Brisbane Airport.
Civil Aviation Services-Buildings and Works
Provision for outlays on buildings, works and related acquisitions totals $118.6m in 1982-83, an increase of $71.8m or some 154% on 1981-82 outlays. Estimated expenditure in 1982-83 on work currently in progress includes $29.5m on the redevelopment of Brisbane Airport, $16.7m on works associated with the introduction of wide-bodied aircraft, $1O.7m in respect of a new international terminal complex at Adelaide Airport and $4.8m on upgrading the Norfolk Island Airport.
In addition, expenditure on airport works planned for commencement in 1982-83 is estimated at $35.5m which includes the following major proposals with total estimated costs as shown:
- further works associated with the redevelopment of Brisbane International Airport ($219.6m)
- provision of a new international terminal complex and parallel taxiway at Perth Airport ($44m)
- upgrading of both international and domestic terminal complexes at Townsville Airport ($8.1m)
- air traffic control facilities at Dubbo, Coffs Harbour and Wagga Wagga ($1.5m) and movement area upgrading works at Wagga Wagga ($1.8m) associated with the introduction of medium jet aircraft.
Also included is $7m for the acquisition of sites and buildings, $5.4m of which is for the purchase of Commonwealth-owned property; the proceeds of these sales are recorded under 'Receipts'.

Recoveries
Air Navigation Charges
Revenue in 1982-83 from this source is estimated to be $119.3m, $17.5m more than in 1981-82. Of this increase, $7.1m is attributable to the receipt in 1982-83 of amounts which were expected to have been received from the airlines in 1981-82. The additional amount of $1O.4m reflects expected growth of 3.3% in airline movements and 2.2% in general aviation sector activity, the full-year effect of variations in air navigation charges in 1981-82, and the Government's decision, as announced in the Budget Speech, to increase air navigation charges in 1982-83. With effect from 1 October 1982, the rate of charges is to increase by 20% for domestic trunk and regional airlines and by 12% for the general aviation sector. Charges for the international sector will remain unchanged. The higher charges are expected to yield additional revenue of $8.4m in 1982-83 and $12.5m in a full year.
Overall cost recovery in 1982-83 is estimated at about 53% compared to approximately 59% in 1981-82. The recovery rate is expected to be close to 100% for international airlines, approaching 90% for the domestic trunk sector, nearly 25% for regional airlines and about 15% for the general aviation sector.

224 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Airport Rentals and Business Concessions
Revenue from airport rentals in 1982-83 is estimated to total $16.6m, about the same as in 1981-82. Revenue from business concessions at airports in 1982-83 is estimated at $23.6m, an increase of $1.6m over 1981-82. The increase is mainly attributable to an expected 10% increase in the return from car rental activities and higher returns from other business concessions.
Other Recoveries Recoveries in 1982-83 from other departments and organisations for services provided by the Department of Aviation are estimated at $10.6m, up $0.2m on 1981-82. Charges levied on a range of regulatory services provided by the Department are expected to total $0.2m in 1982-83, a fall of $0.3m due mainly to once-only charges introduced in 1981-82. Other recoveries are expected to total $2.4m.

ROAD TRANSPORT
Road Grants to States and NT
The Commonwealth is to provide $734m under the Roads Grants Act 1981 as part of the commitment announced by the Commonwealth in June 1980 to provide $3650m in roads assistance to the States and the Northern Territory over the period 1980-81 to 1984-85.
In addition to the current five-year program, the Commonwealth is introducing an Australian Bicentennial Road Development (ABRD) Program with the overall aim of developing the road system to a high standard by 1988, the bicentennial year. The ABRD program is to be financed by an excise surcharge on motor spirit and distillate, the revenue from which will be paid into a trust account and specifically earmarked for expenditure under the ABRD Program. The surcharge in 1982-83 will be 1 cent per litre, increasing to 2 cents per litre on 1 July 1983 until its termination on 31 December 1988. Expenditure from the trust account in 1982-83 is estimated at $150 million.
It is estimated that about $2.5 billion will be provided under the ABRD program over the period 1982-83 through 1988-89.
In total, Commonwealth assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for road construction and maintenance under both programs is estimated at $884m in 1982-83, a 29% increase over 1981-82.
Road and Related Works in the ACT
This heading covers outlays on the construction, improvement and maintenance of urban, arterial, and rural roads, highways and bridges in the ACT. In 1982-83 an initial payment of $0.3m is to be made to the NSW Government as a contribution to the construction of the Burbong Bridge (which, although to be located in NSW, will replace an older bridge on the ACT side of the border). Further payments will be made as the construction proceeds. Other outlays under this heading include $10.7m for constuction of new roads and improvements to existing roads, $7m for road maintenance and $1.6m for improvement of street lighting.
The increase in outlays mainly reflects progress with construction on roadworks, replacement of the Dairy Flat Road bridge and commencement of roadworks to service the new Parliament House.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 225

Public Transport Equipment in the ACT
Expenditure under this heading includes the purchase of buses for Canberra's bus service (ACTION). Estimated expenditure in 1982-83 is $3.2m compared with $4.3m in 1981-82. This reduction reflects the transfer of responsibility for the special duty vehicle fleet previously operated by the Department of the Capital Territory to the Department of Administrative Services on 1 July 1982 and the effective reclassification of associated purchases in 1982-83 to 'Storage and Transport' within the 'Common Services' block in the 'Administrative Services' function.
Special Payment to Tasmaniafor Tourist Roads
The Commonwealth is to provide $lOm to Tasmania in 1982-83 for the improvement and development of the State's tourist roads.
Special Grantfor the Second Hobart Bridge
The Commonwealth is funding (by way of special grants) the full cost of providing a second bridge across the Derwent River at Hobart. The total cost of the bridge and its immediate approaches is estimated to be about $47m of which $23m has already been provided and an estimated $17m is to be made available in 1982-83. The bridge is expected to be completed late in 1983.
Road Research and Investigations
The provision under this heading is for the Commonwealth's financial contribution of $2m to the Australian Road Research Board.

RAIL TRANSPORT
Australian National Railways Commission (ANR)
ANR-Operating Loss
Provision has been made for a subsidy of$71.5m to meet ANR's anticipated operating losses in 1982-83. This compares to the subsidy of $70.4m in 1981-82 and $56m in 1980-81. The increasing level of subsidy mainly reflects the inability of ANR to fully offset higher costs (particularly wages) by fare and freight rate increases in the short term. However, it also reflects the increasing level of interest payments on off-budget borrowings for work on the Adelaide-Crystal Brook Railway, which is not expected to generate any revenue until December 1982 and will not be fully operational until 1983-84.
ANR-Capital Works
Estimated expenditure by ANR in 1982-83 on its capital works program is $58.7m. This will be financed by outlays under this item ($3m), borrowings from the domestic capital market ($37m), and internal funds ($18.7m, of which $15.8m will be provided through the operating loss subsidy).
Estimated expenditure by ANR on major projects in 1982-83 includes $3m (the outlays mentioned above) as part of a ten-year program (estimated to cost $20m) begun in 1977-78 for the rehabilitation of the Tasmanian railway system.
An estimated $31m is planned to be spent in 1982-83 on the construction of the standard gauge railway between Adelaide and Crystal Brook. The first stage covering

226 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the introduction of standard gauge services into Adelaide is expected to commence operations in December 1982, and completion of the project is expected in March 1984. The project, which is estimated to cost $86m, is being financed by borrowings from the domestic capital market.
Alice Springs-Darwin Railway Preliminary Planning
A further $3m is being provided in 1982-83 for the preliminary planning stage of the proposed Alice Springs to Darwin standard gauge railway. The route identification survey, detailed design and preparation of cost estimates are being undertaken by ANR at an estimated cost of$1 Om; expenditure to 30 June 1982 totals $2.3m..
Assistance to the States
Mainline Upgrading
Under the National Railway Network (Financial Assistance) Act 1979, the Government provides loans to those States which operate their own non-metropolitan railway systems to finance strategic, high-benefit projects designed to improve the efficiency of the national mainline railway network. An amount of $21.8m has been provided for this purpose in 1982-83, the final year of a five-year program, bringing total grants to $66m. Of this amount New South Wales will have received $22.8m, Queensland $20.3m, Victoria $19.1m, and Western Australia $3.8m.
The agreements with the States provide for the loans to be repaid over fifteen years commencing 15 June 1984 and to attract rates of interest approved by the Loan Council for the longest term private semi-government borrowing at the time of drawdown.
Assistance to States-Repayment ofAdvances
Repayments of past advances from the Commonwealth for State rail projects (mainly standardisation) are estimated to amount to $5.5m in 1982-83. After allowing for loans totalling $21.8m to be provided in 19§2-83 under the National Railway Network (Financial Assistance) Act 1979, the outstanding balance of 30 June 1983 will be $108.1m.
Other Rail Transport
The amount provided under this heading in 1982-83 is for the Commonwealth's financial assistance of $0.7m to the Australian Railways Research and Development Organisation (ARRDO) made through the Department of Transport and Construction. This amount is in addition to the Australian National Railways Commission's contribution to ARRDO which is based on the level of the Commonwealth's direct involvement in railway operations.

SEA TRANSPORT
Australian Shipping Commission Subsidies for Services The 1982-83 estimates include $2.5m to subsidise the operations of the Australian
Shipping Commission's 'Empress of Australia' passenger service between Tasmania and the mainland. A further $1.5m is being provided to subsidise the Commission's East Coast/Darwin shipping service in 1982-83.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 227

Repayment ofAdvances
Past advances to the Commission comprise borrowings by the Commission from the Budget and the proceeds of loans raised by the Commonwealth on the Commission's behalf to assist in the financing of capital expenditure, mainly ship purchases. About $11.9m will be repaid by the Commission in 1982-83 in respect of past loans raised by the Commonwealth on its behalf. Commercial re-financing of several ship purchases will enable the Commission to make an early repayment of $39.5m in 1982-83 in respect of interest-bearing borrowings from the Budget. This includes $30m scheduled for repayment in 1981-82 but deferred to 1982-83. These borrowings would normally have been repaid in 1984-85 and 1985-86. This will leave loans outstanding totalling some $101m which are repayable over the next five years. The Commission now raises loans on its own behalf and has not borrowed from the Budget since 1976-77. Interest payments to the Commonwealth by the Commission are recorded in Statement No.4 and the activities of the Commission are comprehended in the information on the total Commonwealth sector presented in Statement No.6.
Assistance to Shipping Bodies and Shippers
An amount of $32m is provided in 1982-83 for the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme. The Scheme aims to bring the door-to-door freight costs of eligible cargoes shipped by sea between Tasmania and the mainland into approximate equality with the door-to-door costs of moving similar goods by road or rail over comparable interstate routes on the mainland. Of the $29.4m paid under the Scheme in 1981-82, $27.7m related to Tasmanian commodities shipped to the mainland and $1.7m to materials shipped to Tasmania for use in local primary, mining and manufacturing industries. Shipments of Tasmanian frozen fruit and vegetables, timber and paper (including newsprint) accounted for 61 % of expenditure in 1981-82.
The Commonwealth is to provide assistance of $193 000 to the Australian Shippers' Council in 1982-83, compared with $184 000 in 1981-82.
Provision ofServices
Buildings and Works
In 1982-83 a provision of $2.3m has been made for expenditure on the construction, replacement and improvement of marine navigational aid structures.
Marine and General Services
Included under this heading is an allocation of $3.7m in 1982-83 for expenditure on marine navigational aids and on equipment required for the provision of transport services to remote aids. These funds will be used to replace worn-out and obsolete equipment and to implement improvements to the navigational aid network for the safety and efficiency of commercial shipping. Of this amount $1.5m will cover final payments for four new lightvessels.
Also included under this heading is $lm for oil pollution control equipment. This expenditure is fully recovered through a levy on shipping.
Payment to OTCfor Maritime Communications
Provision has been made for payment of $4.4m to the Overseas Telecommunications Commission in 1982-83 for the provision of maritime safety communications services; expenditure on this item in 1981-82 was $4m.

228 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

PIPELINES
Interest-bearing loans of $22.1m to be made to the Pipeline Authority in 1982-83 are to meet the estimated shortfall between the Authority's revenue ($40.6m), derived primarily from the carriage of natural gas from Moomba in South Australia to Sydney and other cities in New South Wales and to Canberra, and its expenditures, including operation, maintenance and administrative expenses ($6.8m), interest on private sector borrowings ($3.7m), and interest ($33m) and loan repayments ($18.6m) to the Commonwealth.
The $2.4m decrease in the Budget provision for the Pipeline Authority compared to expenditure in 1981-82 reflects expected increases in the Authority's revenue following a revision of tariffs for the carriage of natural gas through the various pipelines. The Authority is continuing to seek a review of its Haulage Agreement for the SydneyMoomba pipeline with The Australian Gas Light Company to ensure that it will secure sufficient revenue to cover its costs.
Approval has been given for the Authority to borrow up to $2m from the private sector in 1982-83 for new capital works.

SPECIAL PAYMENTS TO VICTORIA, QUEENSLAND AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA FOR TRANSPORT
The Commonwealth is to make special payments totalling $65m to Victoria, Queensland and South Australia in 1982-83 for transport purposes. Of this amount, Victoria is to receive $35m and South Australia $lOm for upgrading their transportation systems, and Queensland $20m for upgrading the State's northern roads and transportation system.
URBAN PUBLI~ TRANSPORT
The Commonwealth's involvement in the urban public transport function was transferred to the States in 1980-81. Assistance of $1. 5m provided in 1981-82 represents the Commonwealth's final payment under the States Grants (Urban Public Transport) Act 1978 in respect of commitments entered into by the States in previous years.

TRANSPORT PLANNING AND RESEARCH
$3m is provided in 1982-83 for the Bureau of Transport Economics, which conducts research into the economics and operations of all modes of transport.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER EXPENDITURE
The 1982-83 provision for running expenses of the Department of Transport and Construction relating to surface transport matters is $43.9m (excluding $3m for the functions of the Bureau of Transport Economics which are mentioned above). Of this amount, $30.8m is for salaries and payments in the nature of salaries. A major component of this item-recurrent expenditure on the provision of marine navigational aids-is fully recoverable (see below).
Also included in the amount is $1.lm for civil coastal surveillance, down from $3.2m in 1981-82. This reduction is a consequence of the extension of the user pays

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 229

principle from 1 July 1982 to all major user departments. Previously, only the Department of Health contributed directly to the costs of the program, which is now managed by the Department of Transport and Construction. The 1982-83 total program is expected to cost $19.8m compared with $18.2m in 1981-82. While including $9.1m for Defence consumables (fuel, lubricants, stores and civil contractor servicing), this excludes the cost of Defence Force personnel and equipment which provide much of the surveillance effort under the program. Without the availability of these Defence resources the program could be expected to cost in the order of $40m annually. The program, which does not encompass the customs role, mainly covers quarantine, fisheries, transport and environment functions, and departments' contributions are classified to the relevant functions.
OTHER RECOVERIES
Most of the recoveries under this heading come from light dues levied on commercial shipping for the use of marine navigational aids provided by the Commonwealth. The present charge of 41 cents per net registered ton per quarter will be increased to 49 cents on 1 October 1982 to maintain full recovery of the costs incurred by the Commonwealth in the provision of these facilities. This will be the first increase since 1977. Revenue in 1982-83 is expected to increase to $26.5m compared to $23.5m in 1981-82.
An amount of $3.7m is expected to be received from other Departments for the charter of Department of Transport and Construction vessels, including $1.9m from the Division of National Mapping for bathymetric mapping and $1.3m from the Australian Development Assistance Bureau for a hydrographic survey aid program in the Solomon Islands.
The cost of services provided to the maritime transport industry by the Department of Transport and Construction under the Navigation Act 1912 (estimated at $5.6m in 1982-83) is partly recovered by a system of fees and charges levied under that Act. In 1982-83 these fees and charges are expected to yield revenue of $2.4m, about the same amount as in 1981-82.
The full costs of providing technical and administrative support to the Australian Design Rule Certification system for new motor vehicles are recovered by charges levied on vehicle compliance plates. These are estimated to provide revenue of $1.5m in 1982-83, the same level as in 1981-82.

230 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

B. WATER SUPPLY, ELECTRICITY AND GAS
Outlays under this function are currently estimated to be $96.5m in 1982-83, an increase of $29.9m or 44.9% on last year's outlays. It should be noted that part of the Budget provision for the National Water Resources Program is yet to be allocated to specific projects, some of which may relate to this function. The unallocated portion is included under 'Industry Assistance and Development-Irrigation and other Pastoral Water Projects'.

Urban Water SupplySpecial Payment to South Australia Other Outlays
Electricity Supply in the NT Subsidy on Liquefied Petroleum Gas Other Payments Repayments
TOTAL WATER SUPPLY, ELECTRICITY AND GAS

1980-81 Actual
$m
4.4 43.0 20.3
0.2 13.7Cr

1981-82 Actual
$m
5.8 45.7 30.8
0.1 15.8Cr

1982-83 Estimate
$m
10.0 0.2 64.4 34.2
12.2Cr

Change
$m
+\0.0 - 5.7 +18.7 + 3.4 - 0.1 + 3.5

54.2

66.6

96.5

+29.9

Urban Water Supply
The Commonwealth is to provide $10m to South Australia in 1982-83 as a special payment for upgrading the State's water supply facilities.
An amount of $0.2m is being provided in 1982-83 for water storage and reticulation work in the ACT. This continues the pattern of reducing levels of expenditure in recent years and reflects a levelling off of demand for new facilities.
As noted above, assistance for urban water supply projects in the States will depend upon subsequent decisions on the allocation of the $41.7m to be provided in 1982-83 under the National Water Resources Program. In1981-82, $2.4m was provided under this Program to assist with the construction of water treatment plants in the Adelaide metropolitan area, $1.7m for the construction of Tanjil Dam to serve the Latrobe Valley, $0.6m for additional water supply facilities for the West Pilbara region, $0.3m for the construction of supplementary water supply facilities for Port Hedland, and $0.2m for the construction of water filtration plants on the Morgan-Whyalla pipeline.
Electricity Supply in the Northern Territory
The Commonwealth and Northern Territory Governments have agreed to new arrangements for Commonwealth financial assistance towards the operational costs of electricity supply in the Northern Territory for the five-year period ending in 1986-87. Under these arrangements, an amount of $56.1m is provided for operational costs in 1982-83.This compares with a subsidy payment of $45.7m in 1981-82 under the previous arrangements. The new financial arrangements are not strictly comparable with the previous subsidy provisions; however, the main reasons for the increase in 1982-83 are allowances for load growth and general price increases, and the fact that there was a downward adjustment in the 1981-82 payment for an earlier over-advance.
The Commonwealth has also agreed to provide total grant assistance to the Northern Territory of $124m in 1980-81 prices towards the construction cost of a coal-fired power station for Darwin, to replace and expand the existing 140MW oil-fired plant.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 231

The grant is to be provided over the construction period for the power station. The station will be located on Channel Island and is expected to come on stream in 1987. An amount of $8.3m is being provided in 1982-83.
Subsidy on Liquefied Petroleum Gas
The Government introduced a scheme, effective from 28 March 1980 for three years, to subsidise at the rate of $80 per tonne certain non-commercial uses of liquefied petroleum gas. The scheme was extended as from 30 September 1980 to certain commercial and industrial users. On 29 June 1982 the Government announced that the subsidy would be extended for a further year until 27 March 1984, at the existing rate. Expenditure for 1982-83 is estimated at $34.2m compared with $30.8m in 1981-82.
Other Payments
An amount of $0.1m was provided in 1981-82 for the costs of the Committee of Inquiry into Electricity Generation and the Sharing of Power Resources in South-Eastern Australia. The report of the Inquiry was released in November 1981.
Repayments
Estimated repayments in 1982-83 include $7.9m from the Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority (SMHEA) in respect of advances and interest accumulated during construction by the Authority, and receipts from the sale of surplus land.
The SMHEA funds capital expenditure for the operations and maintenance of the scheme principally using loans from the private capital market. In 1981-82 the borrowing program amounted to $0.95m; a further borrowing program of$1.2m will be undertaken in 1982-83. These funds are to be used primarily for communication and protection works, and for the construction of staff accommodation.
Repayments are also being made in respect of assistance provided to Queensland for the Gladstone Power Station ($2.5m), and from the Northern Territory in respect of electricity assets transferred to the Northern Territory Electricity Commission on 1 July 1978 ($1.5m).

C. INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE AND DEVELOPMENT
The Commonwealth assists industry through a variety of measures including direct financial assistance, taxation concessions, guaranteed domestic price and other marketing arrangements, financial guarantees, the customs tariff and import quota restrictions.
Direct financial assistance from the Budget is provided in the form of bounties and subsidies, price support and reconstruction or adjustment schemes, development projects in support primarily of industry, disease eradication schemes, contributions to research and promotion, and other payments to or for the benefit of industry. It includes outlays of some departments and instrumentalities which service industry (eg the Departments of Industry and Commerce and of Primary Industry and the Australian Tourist Commission). These departments and instrumentalities provide many services either free of charge or for charges which do not recover fully the costs involved.
Outlays recorded in some other functional headings also are of assistance to industry. Examples are the provision of airports and airway services, roads and shipping subsidies, expenditure to maintain or improve the defence capacity of industry and certain expenditures by the CSIRO.

232 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Apart from these direct outlays from the Budget, considerable assistance is provided from the Budget to industry through special provisions in the Taxation system which, as they result in reduction of Government revenues, are as much a call on the Budget as are direct outlays. Some such provisions (eg those for the investment allowance and accelerated depreciation deductions) have been of wide application; others affect only particular industries (eg the exemption from income tax of incomes from gold mining; the averaging provisions for income arising from primary production) or specific activities of particular industries (eg the accelerated or immediate write-offs available to primary producers for certain capital expenditure). In many years, the revenue forgone under such provisions has been estimated to be at least of the same order of magnitude as direct outlays for industry assistance and development.
Further information concerning such 'tax expenditures' is provided in the Appendices to Budget Statement No.4.
Net direct assistance from the Budget (ie after deducting amounts collected by way of industry levies and charges such as the wool tax and livestock slaughter levies) is estimated at $1016.4m in 1982-83, an increase of $99.3m or 10.8% on 1981-82. Outlays on direct assistance to major industry categories are summarised in the following table.

Forestry and Fishing Industries Agricultural and Pastoral Industries-
Specific Industries General Assistance not allocated to Specific
Industries
Total
Mining and Manufacturing Industries Tourist Industry Other Assistance to Industry
TOTAL INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE AND DEVELOPMENT

1980-81 Actual
$m 4.8
50.9
111.1
162.0
477.4 9.1
167.6
821.0

1981-82 Actual
$m 4.6
119.0
95.5
214.5
485.0 9.5
203.5
917.1

1982-83 Estimate
$m 3.0
188.2
122.1
310.3
515.1 10.5
177.5
1016.4

Change $m
- 1.5
+69.2
+26.5
+95.7
+30.1 + 1.0 -26.0
+99.3

Detailed information on each of these industry categories is set out below.

FORESTRY AND FISHING INDUSTRIES

Softwood Forestry Development (net) . . . . Other Forestry . . . . . . . . . . . Fisheries Research, Promotion and Development Fisheries Charges . . . . .
TOTAL FORESTRY AND FISHING INDUSTRIES

1980-81 Actual
$m 4.3 0.2 3.9 3.6Cr

1981-82 Actual
$m 3.5 0.3 3.9 3.2Cr

1982-83 Estimate
$m 0.2Cr 0.3 6.1 3.2Cr

Change
$m -3.7
+2.2

4.8

4.6

3.0

-1.5

Softwood Forestry Development (net)
Under the Softwood Forestry Agreements Act 1978 the Commonwealth provided assistance to the States towards the maintenance cost of the softwood forestry plantations established under the Softwood Forestry Agreements Act 1967, 1972 and 1976.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 233

An amount of $0. 5m is provided in the 1982-83 estimates for the final payments under these arrangements which expired at the end of 1981-82. Repayments of earlier loans are estimated at $0.7m.
Other Forestry
During the five year period commencing in 1978-79, the Commonwealth is providing loan assistance to Tasmania of $0.1 m per annum towards the cost of certain silviculture projects. The Commonwealth is supplementing that assistance, over the four years to 1982-83, with additional loan funds of $O.lm per annum to assist the establishment of eucalypt plantations on marginal farmland and for the purchase of such farmland. The loans are all repayable over forty years commencing twenty years after each advance is made. Interest is being capitalised during the twenty years in which repayments are deferred. Tasmania will receive $0.2m in 1982-83, the same amount as in 1981-82. The Government has announced that this assistance is to be discontinued when the current arrangements expire at the end of 1982-83.
Fisheries Research, Promotion and Development
An amount of $2.8m is provided in 1982-83 to reimburse the States and the Northern Territory for the costs of observer, administration, patrolling and enforcement activities carried out on behalf of the Commonwealth. Of the balance, $2.1 m is for grants for fisheries research (which are matched by the State Governments), $0.3m for fisheries surveys and development, $0.3m for coastal surveillance and $0.3m for a joint Commonwealth/State fisheries research program in the Torres Strait.
Fisheries Charges
The 1982-83 estimate of $3.2m includes licence fees ($O.4m) and payments for access to the Australian Fishing Zone negotiated with foreign governments and foreign fishing interests ($2.8m).

234 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL INDUSTRIES
Net Commonwealth outlays on the agricultural and pastoral industries are estimated at $31 a.3m in 1982-83. These outlays consist of direct Commonwealth financial assistance, industry contributions collected by the Commonwealth on the industry's behalf and interest earned on industry contributions held in trust funds. The increase in net outlays of $95.7m in 1982-83 reflects increased outlays on the wheat industry, primarily due to the increase in interest subsidy payable to the Australian Wheat Board, on the sugar industry and on irrigation and other pastoral water projects.

Specific IndustriesWool IndustryWool Marketing Assistance Growers Levy
Total Wool Marketing Assistance
Research, Promotion and Other Expenditures Charges and Repayments
Total
Wheat IndustryWheat Finance Fund Wheat Board-Interest Subsidy Research and Other Charges and Repayments
Total
Sugar IndustryLoans to Queensland Repayments
Total
Dairy IndustryDairy Industry Stabilization Price Support for Dairy Products Research, Promotion and Other Expenditures Charges and Repayments
Total
Fruit IndustryStabilization, Research and Promotion Charges and Repayments
Total
Poultry IndustryStabilization and Research Charges and Repayments
Total

1980-81 Actual
$m

1981-82 Actual
$m

1982-83 Estimate
$m

Change $m

87.9 83.0Cr
4.8
76.5 49.8Cr
31.5

90.3 86.6Cr
3.7
78.6 51.9Cr
30.4

89.5 89.5Cr
82.7 53.7Cr 29.0

0.8 2.9
3.7
+ 4.1 1.8
- 1.4

60.5 23.2
5.7 70.3Cr
19.1

38.7 22.2 5.7 28.3Cr
38.4

57.4 39.2 6.6 41.8Cr
61.5

+18.7 +17.0 + 0.9 -13.5
+23.1

27.4Cr 27.4Cr

39.1

+39.1

39.1

+39.1

84.7 1.6 6.7
91.0Cr
2.0

79.7 1.3 7.8
89.6Cr
0.7Cr

85.6 0.4 8.0 94.9Cr
0.9Cr

+ 5.9 0.9
+ 0.1 5.3
- 0.2

2.4 4.1Cr
1.7Cr

10.5 3.0Cr
7.4

25.4 16.7Cr
8.7

+14.9 -13.6
+ 1.3

21.0 21.2Cr
O.ICr

22.1 21.0Cr
1.1

20.6 20.2Cr
0.4

1.5 + 0.8
- 0.6

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 235

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Change

Cattle, Sheep and Pig Meat IndustryEradication of Cattle Diseases and Compensation (net) Inspection Services (net) Beef Industry Assistance Animal Health Services Research, Promotion and Other Expenditures Charges and Repayments

$m
1.2 21.8 0.4
1.2 16.9 15.0Cr

$m
1.7 31.3
3.5 1.3 17.8 14.8Cr

$m

$m

3.3 36.9 0.8
1.8 24.0 17.9Cr

+ 1.6 + 5.6
2.7 + 0.5 + 6.3
3.1

Total

26.6

40.8

48.9

+ 8.1

Other Agricultural and Pastoral Industries Charges and Repayments, nec

3.6 2.7Cr

4.3 2.7Cr

4.7 3.2Cr

+ 0.4 - 0.5

Total Specific Agricultural and Pastoral Industries

50.9

119.0

188.2

+69.2

General Assistance Not Allocated to Specific Agricultural and Pastoral Industries-
Primary Industry Bank Rural Adjustment Fertilizer Subsidies Inspection Services nec Other Recoveries and Repayments

0.1 17.2 51.4 6.6 6.7 11.4Cr

16.4 48.7 6.0
1.7 24.ICr

18.4 53.0 5.5 2.0 27.7Cr

+ 2.0 + 4.3
0.4 + 0.3
3.6

Total

70.5

48.7

51.3

+ 2.6

Irrigation and Other Pastoral Water ProjectsIrrigation, Investigation and Other Water Projects(o) Salinity Mitigation and Drainage Flood Mitigation Recoveries and Repayments

15.7
6.8 0.6 2.8Cr

16.31 6.7~
\.lJ
3.0Cr

48.2 3.1Cr

+24.1 - 0.1

Total

20.3

21.2

45.2

+24.0

Land Development ProjectsWar Service Land Settlement Other Repayments

1.6 0.6 3.2Cr

1.5 0.6 2.7Cr

1.6 0.6 3.0Cr

+ 0.2 0.3

Total

1.0Cr

0.6Cr

0.7Cr

0.1

General Administrative and Other Expenditure Recoveries

23.7 2.4Cr

28.7 2.4Cr

28.9 2.6Cr

+ 0.3 - 0.2

TOTAL AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL INDUSTRIES

162.0

214.5

310.3

+95.7

(0) The 1982-83 estimates include the total provision under the National Water Resources Program. Part of these funds may be allocated to urban water projects, past expenditures on which are recorded under the function 'Water Supply, Electricity and Gas'.

236 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

WOOL INDUSTRY
Wool Marketing Assistance
The Government has authorised the Australian Wool Corporation to operate a minimum reserve price of 422 cents per kilo clean, averaged over the whole clip for the 1982-83 wool selling season, and a floor price of at least 422 cents per kilo for the 1983-84 season, compared with a minimum reserve price of 410 cents per kilo for the 1981-82 season. The Corporation will continue to operate its reserve price scheme with the objective of reducing wool price instability.
The Wool Tax (8% of the gross returns from wool sales) is estimated to yield $143.2m in 1982-83. This tax includes a special levy of 5% on the gross returns from wool sales, which is paid to the Corporation's Market Support Fund to finance any losses from the operation of the reserve price scheme. It is estimated that the special levy will provide $89.5m in 1982-83. The remaining 3% is used to finance wool research and promotion.
Research, Promotion and Other Expenditures
The 1982-83 estimates provide for Commonwealth contributions of $20m towards wool promotion and $9.1m towards wool research. The Commonwealth contribution to promotion is $20m per annum for the three years concluding in 1983-84. These contributions are supplemented by the industry contributions, included in the Wool Tax, of an estimated $44.7m for promotion and $9m for research.
The following table summarises Commonwealth Budget assistance to the wool industry.

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Outlays on the Industry (Net of charges and repayments)
Financed byCommonwealth Contributions from CRF Interest on InvestmentsCommonwealth Securities (a) Other (b) Change in Relevant Trust Fund Balances

$m 31.5 34.7
3.2Cr

$m
30.4
33.6
0.3 1.5 5.0Cr

$m
29.0
29.1
0.2 2.9 3.3Cr

(a) This interest is offset against outlays under 'Public Debt Interest'. (b) These receipts are recorded under 'Interest, Rent and Dividends' in Statement No.4.

Change
$m
-1.4
-4.5
-0.1 +1.4 +1.7

WHEAT INDUSTRY
The current Wheat Marketing Plan covers the five crop seasons 1979-80 to 1983-84. Under the Plan the Commonwealth guarantees a minimum return for a particular wheat pool which is equal to 95% of the average of the estimated net returns from the pool in question and those of the previous two pools. On delivery of their wheat to the Australian Wheat Board (AWB), growers receive a first advance payment equal to the guaranteed minimum price. In 1982-83 these advances will be fully funded by loans raised by the AWB on the domestic capital market, continuing the practice adopted in 1981-82. Previously, advances were financed by borrowings from the Rural Credits Department (RCD) of the Reserve Bank under Commonwealth guarantee or by a mixture of borrowings from the RCD and commercial sources.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 237

The substitution of commercial borrowing for RCD advances by the Wheat Board was undertaken at the Government's request to reduce the expansion of private sector liquidity and the money supply which resulted from the RCD advances. The Commonwealth meets the difference between the interest incurred by the AWB on its commercial borrowings and that which would have been incurred on RCD advanceseffectively replacing the subsidy previously provided through the lower rates charged by the RCD with a 'direct' subsidy from the Budget. Due to a substantial increase in borrowings by the Wheat Board, it is estimated the Commonwealth will provide some $39.2m towards the higher interest cost in 1982-83, an increase of $17m over 1981-82. The amount actually required could, however, vary substantially and will depend on movements in interest rates and the quantity of wheat delivered to the AWB during 1982-83.
The Wheat Finance Fund established under the current Wheat Marketing Plan is financed by an industry levy of $2.50 per tonne on deliveries to the Wheat Board. The Fund is being maintained at the statutory maximum balance of $1OOm. Excess levy receipts and interest earnings are refunded to growers on a first-in-first-out basis. Total fund receipts in 1982-83 are estimated at $57.4m, comprising $38.7m from the levy on the 1981-82 pool and $18.7m in interest earnings and realisation of profits on investments, all of which will be refunded to growers. Moneys retained in the Fund are available to refinance outstanding RCD borrowings.
In addition to the levy, wheat growers pay a Wheat Tax of 20 cents per tonne on wheat delivered to the Wheat Board to fund research on behalf of the industry. It is proposed that the rate of tax will increase to 25 cents per tonne for the 1982-83 season commencing 1 October 1982. In 1982-83 Wheat Tax receipts are estimated at $3m and will be supplemented by a Commonwealth contribution for wheat research of $3.6m. The Industries Assistance Commission has been asked to report on the marketing, pricing and assistance arrangements for the industry beyond the 1983-84 season.
The following table summarises Commonwealth Budget assistance to the wheat industry.

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Outlays on the Industry (Net of charges and repayments)
Financed byCommonwealth Contributions from CRF Interest on InvestmentsCommonwealth Securities(a) Other(b) Other Trust Fund Receipts(c) Change in Relevant Trust Fund Balances

$m 19.1 26.0 5.7 3.3 15.9Cr

$m
38.4
25.3
5.6 5.1 3.6 1.2Cr

$m
61.5
42.8
0.1 18.4 0.5 0.3Cr

(a) This interest is offset against outlays under 'Public Debt Interest'. (b) These receipts are recorded under 'Interest, Rent and Dividends' in Statement No.4. (c) These receipts are recorded under 'Other Financing Transactions'.

Change
$m
+23.1
+ 17.5
- 5.5 + 13.3 - 3.1 + 0.8

238 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

SUGAR INDUSTRY
Loans to Queensland Under the price stabilisation arrangements of the International Sugar Agreement,
Australia was required to accumulate 152 363 tonnes of special reserve stocks of raw sugar in 1982. To help defray the costs of accumulating and holding these special stocks, Australia has sought drawings from the Stock Financing Fund of the International Sugar Organisation and the Buffer Stock Financing Facility of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) of around $1.4m and $36m respectively. It is also eligible for further loans of around $1.8m from the Stock Financing Fund.
Upon receipt of these funds and completion of appropriate agreements with the Queensland Government on the terms and conditions of on-lending, the moneys are expected to be on-lent to Queensland in 1982-83.

DAIRY INDUSTRY
Notwithstanding the Commonwealth direct financial assistance to the dairy industry (outlined below) receipts in 1982-83 will exceed expenditure by $0.9m due mainly to repayment by the States of loans of $2.lm in respect of dairy industry adjustment programs.
Dairy Industry Stabilization
The existing marketing arrangements for dairy products were introduced by the Government on 1 July 1977. They provide for a stabilization levy (equal to the difference between the domestic bulk wholesale price and the assessed export price) on the production of certain prescribed dairy products. The levy proceeds (for each of the prescribed products) are disbursed among manufacturers, and in turn, are passed on to producers. The arrangements are designed to protect the domestic price structure and to equalise the unit return for each prescribed product, based on total domestic and export sales. Levy collections and payments to manufacturers are each estimated at $85.6m in 1982-83 and reflect an increase in the differential between the estimated domestic bulk wholesale price and assessed export price returns.
Price Support for Dairy Products
During 1982-83 the Commonwealth will continue to underwrite the equalised domestic and export returns for prescribed dairy products (butter, skim milk powder, casein, certain cheeses and whole milk powder). Under this arrangement the Commonwealth guarantees a gross pool return equal to 95% of a three-year moving average of gross equalised pool returns. In 1982-83, returns to the industry are expected to exceed the underwritten values and a Commonwealth payout is not anticipated. However, $O.4m has been provided in the 1982-83 Budget to meet outstanding commitments in respect of underwriting for the 1979-80 season. The current arrangements are to be reviewed before the end of the 1982-83 season.
Research, Promotion and Other Expenditures
Dairy promotion expenditure, research expenditure and Australian Dairy Corporation administrative costs are financed primarily through a levy collected from the industry on all wholemilk and butterfat produced in Australia. The revenue from the levy

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 239

is estimated at $7.1m in 1982-83. The research component will be supplemented by a matching Commonwealth contribution of $0.6m for expenditure on approved research programs.

FRUIT INDUSTRY
Stabilization. Research and Promotion
Under the current underwriting arrangements, which apply for the 1981 to 1985 export seasons inclusive, the Commonwealth guarantees apple and pear export returns in each season at 95% of the weighted average return for the preceding four seasons. The stabilization arrangements for pears terminated at the end of 1980 and those for apples are being phased out over four years with stabilization payments being reduced by amounts due under the underwriting scheme. Stabilization and underwriting assistance is estimated at $3.5m in 1982-83. The industry makes no contribution to these arrangements.
The Commonwealth is also providing supplementary assistance for apples and pears for the four seasons 1981 to 1984 inclusive, on a $1 for $1 basis with participating States, with a view to facilitating structural adjustment within the apple and pear industry. Expenditure in 1982-83 is estimated at $0.9m.
The Commonwealth is to provide underwriting assistance to the dried sultana industry over the 1982 to 1986 seasons inclusive at a rate of 90% of a three-year average return during the 1982, 1983 and 1984 seasons, and 95% for the 1985 and 1986 seasons. Assistance under this arrangement is estimated at $2.1m in 1982-83.
Under marketing arrangements for the dried vine fruits industry $14m will be paid to the Australian Dried Fruits Corporation in 1982-83 for the purpose of equalisation of domestic and export market returns. These payments are fully funded by industry levies which are shown under 'Charges and Repayments'.
The Commonwealth will provide a bounty of $100 per tonne for berryfruit sold for processing over the five-year period commencing 1 July 1982. The estimated cost in 1982-83 is $0.3m.
In addition, the Commonwealth will participate with State Governments in providing adjustment assistance to growers of deciduous fruit for canning-for the 1982-83 season by way of tree pull assistance limited to growers with no prospects of future viability, and carry-on finance to growers who may be able to operate profitably given a market recovery to the long-term trend. Up to $1.75m will be provided by the Commonwealth under the tree pull scheme. Provision for expenditure of up to $0.5m for carry-on finance assistance is made under the heading 'Rural Reconstruction/ Adjustment'.
An amount of $2.8m, financed largely through industry levies, is provided to finance the operations of various fruit marketing authorities, promotion activities and research.

240 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

POULTRY INDUSTRY
Outlays on stabilization (estimated at $19.7m in 1982-83) are financed from industry levies which flow back to the industry through State egg marketing authorities in accordance with the terms of the Egg Industry Stabilization Scheme. The Budget provides for Commonwealth contributions towards agreed research programs ($0.2m in respect of poultry and $0.2m in respect of chicken meat) to match expenditure for that purpose from industry levy receipts.

CATTLE, SHEEP AND PIG MEAT INDUSTRY
Eradication ofCattle Diseases and Compensation (Net)
Net payments on cattle disease eradication and compensation are estimated at $3.3m in 1982-83.
An estimated $27.6m is payable to the States and Northern Territory in 1982-83 for bovine brucellosis and tuberculosis eradication, of which $22.3m is for eradication operations and $5.2m is for grants to compensate owners for cattle slaughtered under the eradication program.
Recoveries from the disease eradication component of the Livestock Slaughter Levy and the Livestock Export Charge are estimated at $24.4m in 1982-83 and are offset against total Commonwealth outlays on disease eradication operations. The Levy and Charge are to be increased from $3 to $4 per head (cattle equivalent) from 1 October 1982. The Commonwealth has in the past provided loans to the National Cattle Disease Eradication Trust Account to meet shortfalls between industry contributions and campaign costs. As announced in the Budget Speech, the Government has decided to write off the industry's debt of approximately $23.5m at 30 June 1982. This decision does not affect 1982-83 outlays but will be reflected in reduced recoveries from the industry in future years.
The current financial arrangements for the eradication program are due to expire in 1984. Following its consideration of the recent Industries Assistance Commission (lAC) Report on the program, the Commonwealth has decided to continue to provide financial assistance beyond 1984 to enable completion of the eradication program. In doing so, the Commonwealth has undertaken to increase its grant for compensation for slaughtered tuberculosis reactors from 50% to 75% of net assessed compensation value, the same rate as applies to slaughtered brucellosis reactors, and to provide loan finance to the States to ensure that complete herd destocking is carried out promptly, where necessary, to prevent infection of surrounding disease-free herds. Also included under this heading is an amount of $0.1 m for purchase of a gamma irradiator for use in countering any screw worm fly infestation.
Inspection Services (Net)
Direct expenditure on meat export inspection services undertaken by the Department of Primary Industry is estimated at $56.1m in 1982-83, an increase of $7.1m over 1981-82. Offset against this is estimated revenue of $19.2m, comprising $18.7m from charges on exporters for meat inspection and other recoveries of $0.5m. The Government's policy is to recover 50% of the total cost of all export inspection services, including those for meat, provided by the Department of Primary Industry. In view of the difficulties facing the meat industry, however, meat export inspection charges are to be

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 241

maintained at their 1981-82 level in 1982-83; accordingly cost recovery in 1982-83 is estimated to be of the order of 30%.
Beef Industry Assistance
The Commonwealth is committed to provide up to $6m towards the cost of implementing a beef cattle carcase classification system. As part of this commitment an amount of $0.8m is to be provided in 1982-83 (assistance provided for this purpose in the five years to 30 June 1982 totalled $2.6m). The reduction in outlays under this heading reflects a payment in 1')81-82 to satisfy the Commonwealth's joint guarantee with the Victorian Government of a borrowing by Co-operative Farmers and Graziers Direct Meat Supply Limited. A claim by the lender for further payment under the guarantee is currently before the High Court.
Animal Health Services
In 1982-83, the Commonwealth will provide $1.8m to finance the activities of the Bureau of Animal Health whose functions are the supervision of livestock export health certification testing and co-ordination of national animal health programs for endemic and exotic animal diseases.
Research, Promotion and Other Expenditure
The Commonwealth matches industry expenditure funded from industry levies on approved research programs for the meat and pig industries. It also makes payments, which are fully funded from industry levies, for pig meat promotion and to the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation for its administrative and operational expenses including promotion. Estimated outlays in 1982-83, including those funded from industry contributions, are $12.8m for meat and pig research and pig meat promotion and $10.1 m for the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation.
The Commonwealth is also to provide $lm in 1982-83 to the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation to enable establishment of a training program and employment of staff for quality control and supervision of contract specifications.
The Government is currently negotiating with the meat industry and meat industry unions on the establishment of a program for the development and expansion of markets for Australian hogget and mutton in the Middle East. The Government has offered to provide up to $1 m per annum over three years towards such a program.
The lAC is to conduct an inquiry into the Australian abattoir and meat processing industry and is to report to the Government by 31 January 1983.

242 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Charges and Repayments
Included here are the industry levies in respect of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation and of meat and pig research and promotion, ($16.5m) and repayments of advances ($I.4m in 1982-83) under a beef industry assistance scheme.
The following table summarises Commonwealth Budget assistance to the cattle, sheep and pig meat industry.

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Outlays on the Industry (Net of charges and repayments)
Financed from~ Commonwealth Contributions from CRF Interest on Investments~ Commonwealth Securities(a) Other (b) . . . . . . . . . Change in Relevant Trust Fund Balances

$m
26.6
28.7
0.2 0.6 2.9Cr

$m 40.8 41.1
0.7 I.1Cr

$m 48.9 49.8
1.3 2.lCr

(a) This interest is offset against outlays under 'Public Debt Interest'. (b) These receipts are recorded under 'Interest. Rent and Dividends' in Statement No.4.

Change $m
+8.1 +8.7
+0.5 -\.O

OTHER AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL INDUSTRIES
This heading covers outlays, mainly for promotion and research, in respect of the honey, oilseed, tobacco, wine and barley industries. Industry contributions towards these activities are included in 'Charges and Repayments nec'. Commencing with the 1983 harvest a research scheme for cotton is to be established; levy receipts in 1982-83 will be an estimated $0.2m. No Commonwealth outlay will be required in 1982-83 but subsequently the Commonwealth will match industry contributions to the scheme.

GENERAL ASSISTANCE NOT ALLOCATED TO SPECIFIC AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL INDUSTRIES
Primary Industry Bank of Australia
The Primary Industry Bank of Australia Limited was established in 1978 to increase the availability of longer-term loans to primary producers (including foresters and fishermen). Shareholders are the major private banks, State banks and the Commonwealth. The Bank operates as a re-financing institution, borrowing funds for on-lending to other financial institutions which in turn lend to individual primary producers. There have been over 5800 loans to primary producers, totalling some $425m, since the Bank commenced operations in December 1978. Those loans have been primarily for land acquisition, loan restructuring, property improvement and purchase of plant and machinery. The Commonwealth subscribed $0.6m in equity capital to the Bank in 1978-79 and subscribed a further $O.lm in 1980-81 following the reallocation among the remaining shareholders of the shares formerly held by the Bank of Adelaide, following its acquisition by the Australian and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. The Commonwealth has deposited a total of $101m ($30m in 1978-79, $45m in 1979-80 and $26m in 1980-81) with the Bank from the Income Equalisation Deposits Trust Account at a concessional interest rate. (The latter assistance is recorded in financing transactions rather than in outlays.)

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 243

Rural Reconstruction/Adjustment
The Rural Adjustment Scheme established by the States and Northern Territory Grants (Rural Adjustment) Act 1976 provides Commonwealth assistance, the amount of which is determined annually, to the States and the Northern Territory for purposes of farm debt reconstruction, farm build-up, farm improvement and rehabilitation, carry-on finance and household support. Assistance for debt reconstruction, farm build-up, farm improvement and rehabilitation is made available by the Commonwealth, 85% of assistance being by loan and 15% by grant. For carry-on finance, the States and the Territory share equally with the Commonwealth the financing of loans together with repayments of principal and payments of interest received from producers. The Commonwealth funds all household support and receives any principal repayments and interest payments recouped by the States and the Territory.
The Commonwealth meets half of the administrative cost incurred by the States and the Territory in the provison of carry-on finance and contributes towards the administrative costs of providing the other assistance. Outlays under the Scheme in 1982-83 are estimated at $18.4m, compared with $16.4m in 1981-82. They include an estimated Commonwealth contribution of $0.5m for carry-on finance to the canning fruit industry which is to be matched by contributions from the Victorian, New South Wales and South Australian Governments. This finance will be used to provide loans to growers who are assessed as viable in the long term. A further $10m will be required in 1983-84 to fund approvals made but not expected to be financed in 1982-83.
Fertilizer Subsidies
The estimate for 1982-83 includes $48m for the phosphate fertilizer subsidy of $12 per tonne, and $5m for the nitrogenous fertilizer subsidy of $20 per tonne. These estimates are based on the legislation currently before Parliament being passed and assistance being payable from 1 July 1982. The legislation provides for both subsidies to be continued at their current rates until 30 June 1985 and for imports of phosphatic fertilizers also to attract the subsidy. The question of assistance beyond that date is to be reviewed by the Government.

Inspection Services nec
In addition to meat export inspection services, the Commonwealth provides export inspection services in respect of grains, fruits and other exports requiring quality certification. Expenditure on these services is estimated at $1O.2m in 1982-83, offset against which is estimated revenue of $4.7m from export inspection charges. The Government's policy is to recover 50% of the total cost of inspection services provided by the Department of Primary Industry. The need for these inspection services and the costs involved are to be reviewed in 1982-83.

Other
This includes the provision of agricultural services in the ACT ($1.5m), assistance for minor agricultural research ($0.3m) and projects sponsored by the Australian Agricultural Council ($0.2m). Full responsibility for agricultural extension services has been passed to the States (which always had the main role in this area) with Commonwealth funding being incorporated within tax sharing grants to the States.

244 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Recoveries and Repayments
The Commonwealth Development Bank is to make a special loan repayment to the Commonwealth of $15m, in addition to its normal $2.9m repayments.

IRRIGATION AND OTHER PASTORAL WATER PROJECTS
Expenditure under this heading comprises Commonwealth assistance, mainly to the States and the Northern Territory, for rural water conservation, irrigation, salinity mitigation and drainage, and flood mitigation.
The Government is providing funds for water-related purposes under the five-year National Water Resources Program (NWRP) and, outside this program, to Queensland for the Burdekin Dam. A total of $109.1 m was spent in the first four years of the NWRP, including $32.7m in 1981-82. An amount of$41.7m is being provided for the Program in 1982-83,27.5% more than in 1981-82.
Of the 1982-83 allocation for the NWRP, $33.lm has not yet been allocated to specific projects, and is (pending allocation) included under the item 'Irrigation, Investigation and Other Water Projects'. Further details on the NWRP are contained in Budget Paper No.7, Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities, 1982-83.
Irrigation, Investigation and Other Water Projects
Final allocations for irrigation projects under the NWRP in 1982-83 have still to be settled, but will include an estimated $4m for the Bundaberg irrigation scheme and $l.lm for the Commonwealth's contribution under the River Murray Waters Agreement to the costs of the River Murray Commission ($lm for works and $O.lm for administrative expenses). The Government is also providing $6.5m in 1982-83 outside the NWRP for construction of the Burdekin Dam.
The Commonwealth will provide $lm for water research in 1982-83 (an increase of 67% over 1981-82) and, to ensure greater emphasis is placed on water research, will establish a National Water Research Council to advise on national research priorities and funding requirements. The Northern Territory is expected to receive $1.9m for water resources assessment projects in 1982-83 (the same amount as in 1981-82), but allocations for water resources assessment and related studies in the States are still to be determined. The Commonwealth is also providing $0.5m in 1982-83 to complete the National Water Resources Perspectives Study commenced in 1981-82.
Salinity Mitigation and Drainage
In 1981-82 the Commonwealth provided $5.4m as further assistance for a coordinated program designed to alleviate salinity and drainage problems in the Murray Valley and $1.3m for salinity control in the Collie River area of Western Australia. Assistance in 1982-83 under this heading will depend on the allocation of assistance under the NWRP.
Flood Mitigation
Assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for flood mitigation (excluding urban flood mitigation) totalled $1.1m in 1981-82, including $0.6m for New South

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 245

Wales flood plain management works and studies and $OAm for Queensland flood mitigation. Possible assistance under the NWRP for flood mitigation projects in 1982-83 is still to be determined.
Recoveries and Repayments
Repayments are estimated at $3.1m in 1982-83 and include $2m from New South Wales in respect of earlier advances for the construction of the Blowering Reservoir.

LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
War Service Land Settlement The provision of $1.6m in 1982-83 includes $IAm towards the operation and main-
tenance of the Loxton irrigation project in South Australia and $0.3m for agent States to make credit facilities available to eligible settlers.
Repayments Of the $3m repayments estimated for 1982-83, $1.7m relates to War Service Land Settlement and $0.7m to repayments under the Queensland Brigalow Lands Agreement.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE AND OTHER EXPENDITURE
This item includes the salaries and administrative costs of the Department of Primary Industry ($20m) and the Bureau of Agricultural Economics ($7.5m), and the Commonwealth's contribution to the Australian Plague Locust Commission ($0.6m).

246 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

MINING AND MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Change

Mining IndustryUraniumExploration and Development Commonwealth Uranium Stockpile (net) Bureau of Mineral Resources Other Mining (net)

$m

$m

$m

$m

2.4

8.2

2.4

5.8

6l.l

23.2

18.5

4.7

15.2

18.6

19.9

+ 1.3

2.2

11.6

2.1

9.4

Total

80.9

61.7

42.9

-18.7

Manufacturing IndustryShipbuilding Assistance Industrial Research and Development Agricultural Tractors Bounty Machine Tools Bounty Book Bounty Heavy Commercial Vehicles Bounty Textile Industry Bounties Other Bounty Payments . . . Export Expansion Grants Scheme Export Market Development Grants Scheme Development of Microwave Landing System Other Assistance General Administration (net) (0)

18.6 50.7
7.0 13.6 15.0 6.3
1.4 5.4 200.0 60.0 2.4 4.7 11.4

26.8 24.2
6.9 14.5 15.7 6.4 23.8 5.2 197.0 84.0 2.1 4.8 12.2

33.7 49.1
7.0 15.0 18.0 7.0 74.0 4.8 150.0 105.0 2.2 3.8 2.6

+ 7.0 +24.9 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 0.6 +50.2 - 0.3 -47.0 +21.0 + 0.1 - 1.0 - 9.6

Total

396.6

423.3

472.2

+48.8

TOTAL MINING AND MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES

477.4

485.0

515.1

+30.1

(0) Recorded under this item is the expenditure on the industry policy function of the Department of Industry and Commerce prior to the new administrative arrangements which were announced on 7 May 1982. Estimated 1982-83 administrative costs and expenditure from that date for the 'new' Department are recorded under 'Other Assistance to Industry'.

MINING INDUSTRY
In addition to the direct assistance outlined below, the Commonwealth assists the development of the mining industry through the taxation system by way of various special provisions applying to certain mining companies or to their shareholders. Examples of such special provisions, which constitute a call on the Budget as much as do direct expenditures, are:
- rebates to shareholders in respect of capital subscribed for both on-shore and offshore petroleum exploration and development (conditional on the company forgoing certain deductions); and
- exemption from tax of income from gold mining.
The mining industry also benefits from the general investment allowance and from the recently announced liberalisation of depreciation provisions. Further details of assistance provided through the taxation system are included in the Appendices to Budget Statement No.4.
Uranium-Exploration and Development
The Commonwealth will make payments in 1982-83 of $O.2m to the Northern Land Council (NLC) in accordance with an Agreement made under the Aboriginal Land

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 247

Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976. That Agreement authorises mining in the Ranger Project Area and provides, inter alia, for payments to the NLC during the currency of the Agreement. The Commonwealth will also continue to meet the expenses (estimated to be $15 000 in 1982-83) of the Ranger Assessor, who will estimate periodically the cost of rehabilitation of the Ranger Project Area. Both of these expenditures will be recouped from Energy Resources of Australia Ltd, which acquired the Commonwealth's interest in the Ranger Uranium Joint Venture in 1980-81.
The Memorandum of Understanding between the Commonwealth and the Northern Territory provides that the Commonwealth will reimburse the Northern Territory Government for the additional capital and other expenditures incurred as a result of uranium developments, to the extent that such expenditures are incurred by the Northern Territory Government in accordance with prior specific arrangements agreed between the two Governments. Under that arrangement, an amount of $1.9m is provided in 1982-83 to complete the construction of state-type social infrastructure at Jabiru township to support the Ranger uranium development.
An amount of $0.2m is provided in 1982-83 for the direct administrative costs of the Uranium Advisory Council which provides independent advice to the Government, the Parliament and the public on all matters relating to the exploration, development and export of Australian uranium.
In addition $0.3m has been provided in 1982-83 for the Australian Uranium Export Office; a similar amount was provided in 1981-82.

Commonwealth Uranium Stockpile (net)
Under agreements entered into with certain Australian companies, the Commonwealth granted access to its uranium stockpile to enable those companies to meet initial delivery obligations under contracts approved prior to December 1972. The agreements provide for amounts equivalent to the net proceeds from the sale of these borrowed uranium concentrates to be paid to and held by the Commonwealth, pending the return of such concentrates to the stockpile. As part of these arrangements, it is expected that Energy Resources of Australia Ltd will be reimbursed $18.5m in 1982-83 in respect of material to be returned to the Commonwealth this year (compared with $28.9m paid to that company in 1981-82). Commonwealth receipts from the sale by companies ofborrowed uranium concentrates amounted to $5.7m in 1981-82 and are estimated to be only $25 000 in 1982-83. It is anticipated that these arrangements will be completed in 1984, when the last of the borrowed uranium concentrates are scheduled to be returned to the Commonwealth. The Commonwealth is currently exploring the possibility of disposing of its uranium stockpile.

Bureau ofMineral Resources
An amount of $19.9m is provided in 1982-83 for the continuing activities of the Bureau of Mineral Resources, Geology and Geophysics ($18.6m was spent in 1981-82). This provision includes $0.9m ($2m in 1981-82) for the second and final year of a geological framework study relating to the assessment of the oil producing potential of the Bass Basin region. It also includes a $0.8m addition to the Bureau's ongoing plant and equipment vote for the acquisition of major items of equipment in 1982-83.

248 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Other Mining (net)
A provision of $0.9m ($0.7m in 1981-82) has been included to meet Australia's contributions to the administrative costs of several international mineral commodity organisations.
Following the establishment recently of the Sixth International Tin Agreement, tin metal to the value of $10.8m standing to Australia's credit under the Buffer Stock of the Fifth Agreement was transferred to the Sixth Agreement. To reflect Australia's contribution to and return from the Sixth and Fifth Agreements respectively, fully offsetting outlays and revenue of $10.8m are included under this heading. Australia contributed an additional $9.5m to the Buffer Stock of the Fifth Agreement in 1981-82.
An amount of $1.3m is provided for the Commonwealth's contribution towards the administrative costs (shared with NSW) of the Joint Coal Board.

MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
Shipbuilding Assistance
Under the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980, bounty is assessed as a percentage of the cost of construction of vessels. The current rate of bounty of 27t% applies until 30 June 1984. Thereafter, it phases down to a long term rate of 20% which is to apply from 1 July 1986. Outlays in 1982-83 are estimated at $32m and represent subsidies towards the cost of 86 ships.
Bounty for vessels for which tenders closed before 1 July 1981 will continue to be provided under the Ship Construction Bounty Act 1975. Payments in 1982-83 under that Act are estimated at $1.5m, being applied towards the cost of 24 ships.
The $7m additional shipbuilding assistance for 1982-83 reflects an increase both in the number of bountiable vessels in 1982-83 and in production costs, the latter mainly arising from wage increases and the introduction of a 38 hour week in the metal trades industries.
Industrial Research and Development
As part of the Government's response to the report of the Committee of Inquiry into Technological Change in Australia, a further five-year program of grants under the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 was commenced on I July 1981, to encourage research and development by industry.
The scheme was also recently reviewed by the Government in the context of its consideration of the Industries Assistance Commission's report on Certain Budgetary Assistance for Industry. The Government decided the scheme should continue without any major changes until its scheduled expiry date (1986) before which the scheme will be again reviewed.
Under the Act, companies can apply for commencement grants (intended to encourage the build-up of a research and development capability) and project grants in respect of specific research projects. The maximum grant rate for commencement and project grants is generally 50% of eligible research and development expenditure. A ceiling on grant payments limits individual companies or groups to a maximum grant of $40000 per annum for commencement grants and $750000 per annum for project grants. Under directions issued by the Minister for Science and Technology, project

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 249

grant applications are ranked according to their potential contribution to industry policy objectives. Commencement grant applications, provided they meet the eligibility criteria, are generally to be funded in order of receipt.
Assistance is also provided for industrial research projects which are considered to be in the public interest; these normally involve the commercial development of the research results of public sector or non-profit research institutions.
Outlays for the above programs are estimated at $49.1m in 1982-83, compared with $24.2m in 1981-82. The 1982-83 provision includes $11.3m for commencement grants (1981-82 outlays of $9.7m), $32.8m for project grants ($12.1m) and $5m for public interest projects ($2.4m).
The 1981-82 Budget provision of $49.2m was not fully spent, primarily because of lower than expected applications for advance payments in respect of project grants and the lower than anticipated rate at which companies progressed projects. As a consequence, a significant proportion of the financial commitments which had been expected to fall due for payment in 1981-82 will now be discharged in 1982-83 and later years. These effects are not expected to be repeated in 1982-83, so that expenditure under this program is estimated to rise substantially in 1982-83, thereafter returning to a more normal ongoing level.
In addition to the above direct incentives for research and development, expenditure on 'scientific research', including expenditure on certain plant, equipment and buildings, continues to be an allowable deduction under the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936.

Agricultural Tractors Bounty
Under the Bounty (Agricultural Tractors) Act 1966, assistance is payable to eligible producers of certain agricultural tractors until 31 December 1984 or such later date as is fixed by proclamation. To be eligible for bounty, tractors must meet a minimum local content provision of 55%. The bounty rates are indexed quarterly to reflect import price movements and currently range from $615 to $5844 per tractor, depending on the power of the tractor. Payments in 1982-83 are estimated at $7m, compared with $6.9m in 1981-82.
Machine Tools Bounty Under the Bounty (Metal-working Machine Tools) Act 1978, bounty assistance is
to be provided until 30 June 1984 to Australian manufacturers of non-portable power operated metal working machine tools, at a rate of 33t% of factory cost, subject to certain local content requirements. In addition a bounty, at the rate of 25% of design costs incurred in Australia, is payable to machine tool manufacturers for the Australian design cost component of machines covered by the Act.
Bounty payments are estimated to increase from $14.5m in 1981-82 to $15m in 1982-83 reflecting the net effect of increased costs through higher wages and the introduction of a 38 hour week in the metal trades and a lower expected level of activity within the industry.

250 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Book Bounty
Under the Bounty (Books) Act 1969, a bounty is paid on the cost of production of eligible books manufactured in Australia. Bounty assistance, currently at a rate of 33t%, is to be provided until 31 December 1986, with the rate of bounty gradually phasing down to 25% by 1 January 1984.
Payments in 1981-82 amounted to $15.7m and $18m is being provided for 1982-83. The increase reflects material cost increases which are expected to be slightly offset by the reduced bounty rate to apply from 1 January 1983.

Heavy Commercial Vehicles Bounty
The Bounty (Commercial Motor Vehicles) Act 1978 provides for bounty payments on assembly of certain general purpose vehicles, including buses, which incorporate prescribed components used as original equipment. Bounty assistance will be provided until 31 December 1984 at the rate of 20% of the into-store value of eligible local components.
Bounty payments are estimated at $7m in 1982-83 compared with $6.4m in 1981-82, reflecting a higher into-store cost of vehicle components.

Textile Industry Bounties
A broad program of assistance for the textiles, clothing and footwear industries, intended to encourage the development of a more efficient industry structure, was introduced on 1 January 1982. The program is to operate for a period of seven years from that date and includes bounty assistance for a number of textile products.
The Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 provides for the payment of bounty on the value added by Australian producers of eligible yarns. The rates of bounty vary for different yarn types and range from 33% to 59% of value added.
Bounty payments are expected to be $71m in 1982-83 compared with $23m in 1981-82. The increase reflects the first full year of the bounty's operation and the resolution of administrative delays experienced in 1981-82 following the introduction of the new bounty arrangements.
Under the Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 bounty assistance is provided at a rate of 70% of the value added by Australian printers of certain lightweight woven fabrics.
There were no payments under this Act in 1981-82 (its first year of operation) as no claims were lodged due in the main to rationalisation undertaken by companies operating in the industry. Payments are estimated at $2.5m in 1982-83.
The Bounty (Bed Sheeting) Act 1977 provides a bounty, at a rate of 20 cents per square metre up to a maximum payment of $0.6m per bounty year, on the production of bed sheeting made up into bed linen. Payments for 1981-82 were $0.6m and it is estimated that payments for 1982-83 will be $O.4m.
Bounty assistance on the production of yarns under the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978 terminated on 31 December 1981. Payments in 1981-82 totalled $0.2m. Assistance for such yarns is continued under the Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 251

Other Bounty Payments
Under the Bounty (Paper) Act 1979, bounty is payable (at a rate of $90 per tonne on specified coated paper and $70 per tonne on specified uncoated paper) up to a maximum of $2.5m per year until 5 February 1987. Payments in 1982-83 are estimated at $1.7m, compared with $1.6m in 1981-82.
Under the Automatic Data Processing Equipment Bounty Act 1977, bounty is payable until 28 March 1984 on eligible equipment at the rate of 7t% of the value added by Australian manufacturers. Payments in 1982-83 are estimated at $lm, compared with $1.3m for 1981-82, the decrease being attributable in part to the reduced bounty rate (formerly 15%) which came into force on 29 March 1982.
The Bounty (Injection-moulding Equipment) Act 1979 provides for the payment of a bounty on the value added by Australian manufacturers of eligible equipment. The bounty rate is currently 15% and this rate will be reduced to 5% for the remaining year for which the Act applies. Payments in 1982-83 are estimated at $lm.
Under the Bounty (Penicillin) Act 1980 subsidy assistance is provided to local manufacturers producing penicillin for the further manufacture of antibiotics in Australia. Total bounty payments for any given bounty period are subject to a ceiling amount. Under the provisions of the Act this ceiling and the rate of bounty can be altered by regulation. On the basis of manufacturers' expected production schedules, $0.8m is expected to be expended in 1982-83.
Bounties are also payable until 31 December 1982 on eligible non-adjustable wrenches ($0.2m in 1982-83), primary refined tin ($0.2m), and certain drilling bits ($50000).

Export Expansion Grants Scheme
The Export Expansion Grants Scheme seeks to encourage increased exports of Australian goods and services, industrial property rights and know-how through the provision of grants based on increases in eligible export earnings over a base period.
The future of the Export Expansion Grants Scheme was recently considered by the Government as part of a major review of its industry and related policies. The review was undertaken following receipt of the Industries Assistance Commission's reports on Export Incentives, Certain Budgetary Assistance and General Reductions in Protection. The Government decided not to extend the Scheme's enabling legislation beyond its current expiry date of 30 June 1983. This decision reflected its belief that funds could be more effectively utilised under a strengthened Export Market Development Grants Scheme and took into account international developments in respect of performancebased export incentives.
The 1982-83 Budget provision of $150m is estimated to reduce obligations outstanding from $206m at 30 June 1982 to $156m at 30 June 1983 and to increase the carry over of outstanding claims from $51m to $56m over the same period.
Export Market Development Grants Scheme
The Export Market Development Grants Scheme is designed to encourage exporters and prospective exporters to seek out and develop overseas markets. Grant payments are based on a grant rate of 70% of eligible expenditure.

252 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The Government recently decided to substantially strengthen the Scheme following the above mentioned review of industry and related policies. The strengthened Export Market Development Grants Scheme is to take effect from 1 July 1982 and will operate until 30 June 1988, with a review by the Industries Assistance Commission prior to that date. Major changes to the Scheme include the lifting of the annual grant ceiling applying to each claimant to $200 000 (previously $100 000 with an additional $25 000 for Government sponsored promotions) and the payment of travelling expenses of $50 a day (for up to 10 days for each export promotional visit). Increased costs arising in the 1982-83 grant year will not fall on the Budget until the 1983-84 financial year.
The 1982-83 Budget provision of $105m compares with expenditure of $84m in 1981-82. The 1982-83 allocation is estimated to reduce the carry over of outstanding claims from $40m at 30 June 1982 to $30m at 30 June 1983, with estimated outstanding obligations increasing from $135m to $165m over the same period in line with the Government's decision to increase benefits payable under the Scheme from the 1982-83 grant year.

Development ofMicrowave Landing System
The Government decided in 1981 to provide support of up to $4.9m for a further three-year joint Commonwealth/industry program for the development of the Interscan microwave landing system. An amount of$2.2m is provided in 1982-83 for the second year of this further program. Expenditure in 1981-82 under this program and the initial program amounted to $2.1m.

Other Assistance
Other assistance provided to manufacturing industry in 1982-83 includes $OAm as the Commonwealth's final contribution towards the Project Australia campaign ($0.5m in 1981-82) and $0.2m in closure compensation under the Structural Adjustment Assistance program held over from 1981-82.
A number of other programs under this heading were the subject of decisions taken in the context of the Review of Commonwealth Functions (RCF). A committee of independent persons from private enterprise was appointed to review the Productivity and Innovation Programs of the Department of Science and Technology. The Committee reported in December 1981 and in line with its findings and the RCF decisions, amounts to be provided in 1982-83 are $0.7m for Technology and Innovation Programs ($0.7m in 1981-82), and $0.6m for the Technology Transfer Council ($OAm in 1981-82). Assistance for these activities was previously provided under the Productivity Improvement Programs and the Pilot Programs for Industrial Research and Development.
Following the RCF decision to phase out Commonwealth staff involvement in Productivity Promotion Council of Australia activities over a two year period, direct financial support of $0.6m is to be provided in 1982-83 ($0.2m in 1981-82) to enable the Council to hire its own staff. Commonwealth staff support will be terminated by 30 June 1983. The Commonwealth has indicated to the Council its willingness to provide continued financial support in 1983-84 and 1984-85 to enable the Council to restructure its activities and become predominantly self-supporting.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 253

General Administration (net) This heading covers administrative costs of the Export Development Grants Board
($2.6m in 1982-83 compared with $2.5m in 1981-82). Also recorded under this item is the expenditure of the industry policy function of the Department of Industry and Commerce prior to the new administrative arrangements which were announced on 7 May 1982. 1982-83 administrative costs and expenditure from that date for the 'new' Department of that name are recorded under 'General Administration'.
TOURIST INDUSTRY

Australian Tourist Commission Other Assistance to the Tourist Industry
TOTAL TOURIST INDUSTRY

1980-81 Actual
$m 8.9 0.2
9.1

1981-82 Actual
$m 8.9 0.6
9.5

1982-83 Estimate
$m 9.7 0.8
10.5

Change
$m +0.8 +0.2
+ \.0

The 1982-83 Budget provision of $9.7m for the Australian Tourist Commission represents a 9.2% increase over the Commission's 1981-82 outlays.
The provision of $0.8m for 'other assistance' covers general operational expenses of the ACT Tourist Bureau and Australia's contribution to the World Tourism Organisation.

OTHER ASSISTANCE TO INDUSTRY

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Change

Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy Scheme Energy Research and Conservation Australian Industry Development Corporation Export and Trade Promotion Compensation Payments EFIC General Administration (a) Recoveries

$m 120.3
12.7
26.3 5.9 4.7 0.3 2.7Cr

$m 147.5 15.8
27.7 2.6 6.4 5.5 2.0Cr

$m 125.9
17.1 39.2Cr 29.8 0.1 17.5 29.8
3.5Cr

$m -2\.6
+ 1.3 -39.2
+ 2.0 - 2.4
+ Il.l +24.3 - \.5

TOTAL OTHER ASSISTANCE TO INDUSTRY

167.6

203.5

177.5

-26.0

(a) Recorded under this item are estimated 1982-83 administrative costs and expenditure incurred by the Department of Industry and Commerce (other than for Customs) since 7 May 1982. At that date the Department gained certain functions of the former Departments of Business and Consumer Affairs which were classified under 'Other Economic Services' and Housing and Construction which were classified under 'Administrative Services'. Expenditure under the industry policy function of the Department of Industry and Commerce prior to 7 May 1982 is recorded under 'Mining and Manufacturing Industries'.

Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy Scheme
The Scheme, which has been operational in country areas in its current form since 1 July 1978, provides for the payment of a freight subsidy on the cost of distributing motor spirit, power kerosene, aviation fuels and automotive distillate.
As announced, it has been decided to amend the Scheme so that the subsidy will be payable only on freight differential costs in excess of 1 cent per litre rather than 0.44

254 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

cents per litre as previously applied. An amount of $125.9m is being provided for 1982-83 compared with expenditure of $147.5m in 1981-82. This reflects the net effect of savings to be realised by the decision to increase the subsidy margin and anticipated increases in freight costs and the consumption of eligible products.
Energy Research and Conservation
Grants for the support of projects under the National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Program are provided through the Energy Research Trust Account. Since 1979-80, successive Budgets have appropriated funds for payment into the Trust Account. Because of slower than expected progress on some of the projects being supported, the unexpended balance of the Trust Account reached $14.9m at 30 June 1982. This Trust Account balance will suffice, without the need for a Budget appropriation to the Trust Account in 1982-83, to fund estimated Trust Account expenditures of $12.5m in 1982-83, an increase of some 17% on 1981-82 expenditure. Budget appropriations will be required in future years for existing commitments of $14.8m, and for new commitments of $15m which may be entered into in 1982-83.
In addition to these provisions for energy research, coal research is also funded by proceeds of 5 cents per tonne from an excise on coal production and contributions on an equivalent basis received from Victorian and South Australian authorities in respect of their coal production. The coal research levy is expected to continue at the current rate until the end of 1984-85. Receipts into the Coal Research Trust Account are expected to total $4.4m in 1982-83, and expenditure from the Trust Account is estimated at $4.5m, 13% lower than expenditure in 1981-82 mainly because of lower receipts from the levy.
The Minister for National Development and Energy approves the distribution of funds for energy research, development and demonstration projects in the light of advice from the National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Council.
The Commonwealth provision for the National Energy Conservation Program in 1982-83 is $0.6m compared with $1.3m in 1981-82. This program funds advertising and publishing activities promoting liquid fuel conservation, conservation of other energy sources such as electricity, and energy conservation in buildings.
The Budget provision of $0.2m for the National Industrial Energy Management and Audit Scheme is double the amount spent in 1981-82. This Scheme funds seminars and workshops, publications and films, awards, and reimbursement of consultancy costs for small and medium sized firms to encourage and assist industry to use energy more efficiently and reduce energy costs.
A provision of $123 000 for the Energy Policy Information Program, $20000 less than expenditure in 1981-82, is for the promotion of LPG use in vehicles, for publications and for education and information programs.
Australian Industry Development Corporation
The Australian Industry Development Corporation provides finance for industries concerned with the manufacture, processing, treatment, transportation and distribution of goods, and with the development and use of natural resources and technology. Its paid up capital of $62.5m has been fully provided by the Commonwealth. In 1982-83, the Corporation is expected to repay $39.2m of an overseas loan to the Commonwealth which in turn will be repaid by the Commonwealth to the lenders.

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 255

Export and Trade Promotion
Export and trade promotion outlays are estimated at $29.8m in 1982-83. They encompass expenditure on the Trade Commissioner Service ($21.8m), matching grants to primary product marketing boards and corporations for overseas promotion ($1.1m), and general trade promotional activities undertaken by the Department of Trade and Resources ($6.lm). Also included are $OAm for the promotion of Australian consultancy services in developing countries and $OAm for a technical support facility to meet the costs of Australian experts advising on and formulating development projects for countries in the Middle East.
Compensation Payments
A net provision of $0.13m is made in 1982-83 for payment of compensation or other assistance to persons or firms adversely affected as a direct result of the Government's actions during 1980 in respect of Afghanistan and Iran. This compares with net outlays of $2.6m in 1981-82. Payments under the compensation arrangements are expected to be finalised in 1982-83.
Export Finance and Insurance Corporation (EFIC)
The Export Finance and Insurance Corporation provides export credit insurance and guarantee facilities, insurance cover for direct investment overseas against non-commercial risks and, where necessary, export finance for medium and long term credit sales of capital goods.
EPIC's export finance facility is financed by trading bank loans at commercial rates of interest. The Corporation lends these funds to overseas buyers at concessional interest rates consistent with the minimum credit terms specified under the OECD Arrangement on Export Credits. The difference between the commercial interest rates at which EPIC borrows and the interest rates at which it lends is met from the Budget by way of a subsidy payment to EPIC each year. The subsidy payment was $6Am in 1981-82 and is estimated to increase to $17.5m in 1982-83. The increase in estimated payments in 1982-83 reflects the widening gap between the minimum credit terms specified under the OECD Arrangement and commercial interest rates in Australia, higher levels of loans outstanding, and increased lending for the Ok Tedi Project in Papua New Guinea (in respect of which the interest subsidy is expected to increase by $2.9m to $4.6m in 1982-83).
Budgetary control over the facility is exercised through the Subsidy Commitment Authority (SCA), which seeks to limit the total amount of interest subsidy falling on future Budgets. Under new arrangements introduced in 1982-83, approval has been given to an 'anticipated SCA' of $75m (which reflects the expected calls on future Budgets arising from existing loans and new loans to be entered into during 1982-83) and a 'maximum SCA' of $1 10m (which also includes unutilised parts of credit lines). The maximum SCA corresponds to the previous single-tiered SCA which was set at $60m for 1981-82. (The large increase in the level of the maximum SCA is a result of increases in the value of loans which are expected to be entered into in 1982-83 and the level of commercial interest rates in Australia.)
At 30 June 1982, the Corporation had entered into loan agreements in support of capital goods exports amounting to almost $325m, involving an outstanding maximum subsidy commitment of about $61 m and an estimated subsidy commitment of about

256 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

$39m. The Corporation has made advance commitments to lend around $38m, involving use of a further $11 m of the SCA. In addition, credit lines totalling $224m have been offered to finance procurement from Australia for the Ok Tedi project for which a separate SCA of $73m has been approved.
On the basis of contracts entered into by EPIC as at 30 June 1982, it is estimated that the minimum costs to the Budget in the financial years 1983-84 to 1985-86 would be, respectively, $llm, $8m and $5m for EPIC's general business, and an additional $13m, $14m and $14m for Ok Tedi. To these amounts will be added interest subsidies payable in respect of contracts entered into after 30 June 1982.
General Administration
This heading includes administrative costs of the Department of Industry and Commerce with the exception of those related to the Customs responsibilities of the Department ($29.5m in 1982-83 as compared with $5.2m in 1981-82). The increase is mainly attributable to the Department gaining responsibilities from the former Departments of Business and Consumer Affairs and Housing and Construction as part of the new administrative arrangements announced on 7 May 1982. Expenditure prior to that date is recorded under the functions relevant to the former Departments. This item also includes $0.3m for the operating expenses of the Canberra Development Board to enable it to continue its promotion of private enterprise development in the Australian Capital Territory.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 257

D. LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT
The Commonwealth funds a number of activities relating to the management and settlement of industrial disputes, oversight of industrial awards and agreements, manpower and training schemes, employment services and immigration services. The 1982-83 provisions for this range of activities are set out in the table below.

Industrial RelationsConciliation and Arbitration Industrial Relations Bureau Payment to Stevedoring Industry Coal Mining Industry Long Service Leave Trade Union Training Administration Recoveries
Total
EmploymentTrade Training Skills Training Youth Training Special Training Employment Services Administration Recoveries
Total
ImmigrationAssisted Migration Administration Recoveries
Total
TOTAL LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT

1980-81 Actual
$m
8.2 4.7 19.5 8.7 3.4 7.6 O.ICr
51.9

1981-82 Actual
$m
9.6 5.4 17.4 8.1 4.0 9.5 0.3Cr
53.8

1982-83 Estimate
$m
10.8 5.9 21.0 4.5 5.1 12.6 0.2Cr
59.7

Change
$m
+ 1.2 + 0.4 + 3.6 - 3.6 + 1.0 + 3.1 + 0.1
+ 5.9

68.1 14.9 47.5 16.6 90.2 30.5 0.6Cr
267.3

82.1 16.3 63.3 25.5 101.9 35.1 0.5Cr
323.6

89.0 21.0 86.0 29.0 106.7 35.7 O.5Cr
366.8

+ 6.9 + 4.7 +22.7 + 3.5 + 4.8 + 0.6
+43.2

28.0 45.0
5.6Cr
67.4

33.3 54.7 5.5Cr
82.5

28.1 60.9
5.5Cr
83.6

- 5.1 + 6.2
+ l.l

386.6

459.9

510.2

+50.2

INDUSTRIAL RELAnONS
Conciliation and Arbitration
Outlays under this heading provide for the operations of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission ($9.4m), the Public Service Arbitrator ($O.6m) and the Remuneration Tribunal ($O.4m), whose main functions are to settle disputes and determine wage and salary claims. The increase in expenditure in 1982-83 primarily reflects the full year effect of salary increases awarded in 1981-82 and additional staff for the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
Industrial Relations Bureau
The role of the Industrial Relations Bureau is to ensure that persons and organisations with obligations under the federal conciliation and arbitration system comply with statutory requirements, and that individuals' rights and entitlements under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act and regulations and under federal awards are safeguarded.

258 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

In the twelve months ended 31 December 19~ 1, the Bureau conducted 29 ~64 inspections, entered 19 525 work places and detected 17 928 breaches of awards and agreements. The increase of $O.4m in the Bureau's provision for 1982-83 mainly reflects increased salary costs.

Payment to Stevedoring Industry
Payments are made to the Stevedoring Industry Finance Committee from a levy imposed on stevedoring employers under the Stevedoring Industry Levy Act 1977. The 1982-83 estimate is $21m compared to $17.4m in 1981-82. These funds :;tre used primarily to fund the balance of the industry deficit on long service liabilities taken over from the Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority on 5 December 1977, to meet employer contributions to the Stevedoring Employees' Retirement Funds, for payments of award entitlements, for the provision of services and amenities for waterside workers, and to meet certain administrative costs. A matching receipt item records the stevedoring industry collections; details may be found in Statement No. 4-'Other Taxes, Fees and Fines'.
Coal Mining Industry Long Service Leave
A Trust Fund was established in 1949 to finance long service leave payments for miners engaged in black coal production. The States reimburse employers for long service leave payments to miners and recoup from the Trust Fund the cost of these payments and administrative expenses. The Trust Fund's income is derived from payments made by the Commonwealth (estimated at $9.5m in 1982-83) equivalent to a four-fifths share of its receipts from a 25 cents per tonne levy imposed on black coal production. In implementing the recommendations of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Commonwealth is arranging with the States, the industry and unions to terminate the current arrangements by 1 January 1983. Long service leave payments from the Trust Fund in 1982-83 under the present arrangements are estimated at $4.5m.
Trade Union Training
The Trade Union Training Authority Act 1975 provides for training services for unionists and for operation of State training centres and a national training college at Albury-Wodonga. The estimate of$5.1m in 1982-83 (an increase of$lm) includes provision for additional staff and for approximately 30 500 student training days to be offered by the Authority at its State Centres and the Clyde Cameron College at Albury Wodonga; this compares with 26 382 training days in 1981-82 and will ensure that the Authority's facilities are more fully used.

Administration
This item records the administrative expenditure of the Department of Industrial Relations prior to the new administrative arrangements announced on 7 May 1982, from which date the Department of Industrial Relations was abolished and its functions transferred to the newly created Department of Employment and Industrial Relations. It also records the administrative expenditure relating to the industrial relations functions of the new Department, which is estimated to increase by $3.1m to $12.6m in 1982-83, reflecting the full year effect of salary and other cost increases, increased staff,

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 259

the transfer of the working environment function from the Department of Science and Technology and the relocation of industrial relations activities from Melbourne to Canberra.

EMPLOYMENT
Trade Training
The Commonwealth's involvement in trade training is directed toward improving supplies of skilled labour to assist Australia's economic growth and development and providing training opportunities for young Australians.
Assistance for trade training is provided by the Commonwealth under a number of schemes; proposed expenditure on the main schemes in 1982-83 is summarised in the following table.

Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Fulltime Training (CRAFT)-
Employer Rebate - Technical Education - Off-the-job Training - $1000 Cash Rebate Trainee Living Away From Home Allow-
ances
Total CRAFT
Group One-Year Training Scheme Special Apprenticeship Assistance Support of Group Apprentice Schemes Special Commonwealth/State Trade Training
Schemes Additional Apprentices in State Establishments
Total Trade Training

1979-80 Actual $m
33.4 6.0
3.3 42.7
1.4 1.7
l.l 46.9

1980-81 Actual $m
37.1 9.5 13.7 4.2 64.5 1.5 1.2
0.8 0.1 68.1

1981-82 Actual
$m

1982-83 Estimate
$m

52.6

62.5

11.6

14.5

9.9

1.0

4.6

6.0

78.7

84.0

1.7

1.8

0.8

1.2

0.2

0.7

0.7

1.3

82.1

89.0

Change $m
+9.9 +2.1 -8.9 +1.4 +5.3 +0.1 +0.4 +0.5 +0.6
+6.9

The Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training (CRAFT), introduced in January 1977, is the Commonwealth's major apprenticeship support program. CRAFT is a scheme of tax-exempt subsidies aimed at encouraging employers to take on and train apprentices by subsidising the cost of releasing apprentices to undertake technical education and other off-the-job training.
The subsidies are:
- a Technical Education Rebate in respect of attendance at prescribed basic trades courses in technical and further education institutions; and
- an Off-the-job Rebate in respect of approved full-time off-the-job training, other than prescribed basic trades courses, in an employer's establishment or other acceptable venue for up to 130 days of training. This training must usually be undertaken in the first year of apprenticeship.
Assistance levels are set according to the trade concerned, year of apprenticeship and stage of technical education. Increased levels of rebate, ranging from $21 to $41 a day are to come into effect from January 1983.

260 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Employers may also qualify for a 40 per cent premium on the first year technical education rebate by engaging an apprentice who has completed an approved preemployment training course which results in a minimum reduction of 6 months in the normal period of apprenticeship as well as an exemption from at least one stage of technical education.
CRAFT also assists apprentices by providing an allowance to those in their first and second years of training who are required to live away from home to take up or remain in apprenticeship. Weekly rates are $33 for first year apprentices and $14 for second year; these allowances are taxable.
Provision continues to be made in 1982-83 to meet carry over payments of the $1000 cash bonus (additional to the normal CRAFT rebate) to metal, electrical and building trades employers for each first year apprentice indentured during the period 1 December 1980 to 30 June 1981 over and above the number indentured during the same period in 1979-80. The 1981-82 provision covered 9950 additional apprentices; the final payments in 1982-83 are expected to cover 1000 additional indentures.
The $5.3m increase in the 1982-83 provision for CRAFT reflects expected further growth in apprenticeship intakes and the increased levels of rebates, partly offset by reduced outlays as the $1000 rebate scheme winds down.
In all, employers are expected to receive assistance through CRAFT in respect of some 111 000 apprentices in 1982-83, compared to 99 000 in 1981-82 and 92 000 in 1980-81; increases on 1982 of 157000 days of technical education and 42000 apprentice-days of off-the-job training are being allowed for.
Number ofApprentice-days ('000) Funded under CRAFT

Technical Education Off-the-job Training
Total

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

( est.)

(est.)

1707

2291

2350

2834

3089

3246

259

308

363

716

827

869

1966

2599

2713

3550

3916

4115

Several other schemes are directed to more specific trade training needs.
Under the Group One-Year Apprentice Scheme, apprentices indentured to private employers may receive full-time training for the whole of their first year of apprenticeship in Commonwealth and State Government establishments that would otherwise have surplus training capacity. The costs (including wages) of this training are met in full by the Commonwealth, at a current average cost of $8500 per apprentice. At the end of the first year, the apprentices commence work with their employers. The number of apprentices in training during 1982 is 198 compared with 245 in 1981.
The Special Assistance Program was introduced in 1975 to provide financial assistance to employers who need assistance to retain an apprentice in their employment or to enable them to engage an apprentice who has not been able to complete his apprenticeship with a previous employer for reasons of business hardship. Such cases arise, for example, where work shortages will otherwise lead to retrenchment of apprentices; an employer may receive a subsidy for up to 12 months to continue on-the-job training.
Besides the assistance available under CRAFT, employers may also obtain additional support for group apprenticeship arrangements (i.e. where indenture is to an

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 261

industry body rather than to a single employer). This scheme is jointly administered with the States, who also share the costs. It is expected that grants totalling $0.7m will be paid in 1982-83 to employer groups to underwrite administrative support facilities for 30 group apprenticeship projects. In 1982-83, 2200 apprentices are expected to benefit from the scheme compared with 1200 in 1981-82.
Jointly-funded Commonwealth/State Special Trade Training Schemes, including accelerated training for adult apprentices, are also being developed in response to various geographic and skill-specific shortages of tradesmen. Four projects are currently supported, the most significant being in the Hunter Valley and on the North-West Shelf project. The costs associated with such schemes are expected to increase to $l.3m in 1982-83, compared with $0.7m in 1981-82 and involve about 550 apprentices.
Skills Training
The Commonwealth provides assistance outside the trade skills area to help overcome specific skills shortages, to train unemployed persons towards employment in occupations that are in demand, and to encourage industry's own internal staff training and other personnel development schemes. Estimated expenditure on these schemes in 1982-83, and earlier, is shown below.

'Skills in Demand' Projects General Training Assistance
for Individuals - On-the-job - in Educational Institutions Industry Training Services
Total Skills Training

1979-80 Actual
$m

1980-81 Actual
$m 0.5

1981-82 Actual
$m 2.5

1982-83 Estimate
$m 7.0

Change
$m +4.5

6.9

8.5

6.5

5.6

-0.9

3.3

3.0

2.8

3.0

+0.2

2.0

3.0

4.5

5.4

+0.9

12.2

14.9

16.3

21.0

+4.7

In 1982-83, with an amount of $21m being allocated, emphasis will continue to be given to joint projects with industry organisations, major resource developers, and other (private and State Government) sponsors to meet specific skills shortages where training arrangements are not adequate. In 1981-82 there was a total of 1213 approvals for training; the estimate of $7m for Skills in Demand Projects provides for about 2500 new training positions in 1982-83. As most training is on-the-job and training arrangements vary, a training 'package' for each project is negotiated with the industry participants; classroom training may also be supported, with allowances similar to those for general training assistance (see below) being paid to trainees selected from unemployed Commonwealth Employment Service (CES) registrants. Preference in selection is given to the unemployed, and project sponsors undertake to provide employment when training is completed and to meet the cost of ongoing training when the agreed shortages have been overcome.
General Training Assistance continues to be available for unemployed persons registered with the CES where further training would fit them for particular employment opportunities or help them find suitable employment.
Where the CES cannot find experienced persons for jobs on offer, and training on the-job is an appropriate way to develop the particular skills required, the Commonwealth will pay a wage subsidy (currently $69.30 a week for adults and $50.80 a week

262 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

for juniors) to employers who undertake to provide such training. Trainees are paid normal award rates. A higher level of support ($157.10 a week) over a longer training period is available for persons who are particularly disadvantaged in the labour market (e.g. migrants with language difficulties, single breadwinners with dependants, ex-prisoners).'
Assistance for formal training in educational institutions (i.e. off-the-job) is also available to unemployed CES registrants who wish to train for occupations where vacancies are expected to exist on completion of training. Full-time trainees receive an income-tested allowance equivalent to unemployment benefit and a tr~ining allowance (currently $37 a week for adults, $15.30 a week for juniors) income-tested on the combined income of trainee and spouse. Part-time trainees not in full-time employment receive a training allowance only. All trainees are reimbursed (up to $220 a year) for costs of essential books and equipment and for fees.
An amount of $8.6m is being provided in 1982-83 for these two categories of general training assistance for individuals, compared to $9.3m spent in 1981-82.
Taken together, the funds for skills in demand and general training assistance are expected to allow for 10 750 on-the-job and 1200 formal training approvals in 1982-83, compared to 9448 and 1086 approvals, respectively, in 1981-82.
Also under this heading is the support provided for Industry Training Services to encourage the systematic development of training programs through all sectors of industry and commerce, including small business. Expenditure for this purpose is estimated at $5.4m in 1982-83, compared to $4.5m in 1981-82.
This assistance is mainly for the employment of manpower development executives and industrial training officers by industry training committees and industry associations; grants are also available for the development of new training programs, research into training needs, the production of basic training manuals (sales now average 60 000 copies a year) and group training schemes to allow groups of small firms to employ training specialists.
These funds also support the operations of the National Training Council and tripartite industry training committees in industries throughout Australia. It is estimated that some 85 Industry Training Committees in 20 industry sectors and 42 industry associations will receive support in 1982-83.
Youth Training
Continued emphasis is being given to increasing the opportunities for further education, training and work experience that are available to the young unemployed, especially those who have been out of work and away from education for a long period. Classroom-based transition education and training is provided through the five-year School to Work Transition program begun in 1980. Details of this expenditure are given within the function 'Education'.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 263

Transition allowances are also provided so that young unemployed need not be discouraged for financial reasons from taking up courses that would add to their skill and their employability. Subsidies are also available to employers who provide work experience opportunities for the young unemployed. Details of expenditure on these schemes are as follows.

School to Work TransitionEducation Program for Unemployed Youth 'Transition' Allowance Pre-apprenticeship Allowance TAFE Courses
Assistance for Work Experience (SYETP)Standard Extended Commonwealth Establishments
Total Youth Training

1979-80 Actual $m
3.0 1.1
21..0.
3.2 28.3

1980-81 Actual
$m

1981-82 Actual
$m

1982-83 Estimate' Change

$m

$m

} 3.5
1.2

8.4

1.6

1.2

31.3

27.1

1.9

16.9

8.1

9.7

47.5

63.3

10.0

+1.6

1.2

+ 0.1

1.0

+ 1.0

40.7

+13.6

21.0

+ 4.1

12.1

+ 2.4

86.0

+22.7

An income-tested Transition Allowance, equivalent to Unemployment Benefit plus $6 a week for fares and incidentals, has been available since the beginning of 1981 to participants in approved, Commonwealth-funded, school to work transition courses offered in technical and further education (TAFE) institutions-i.e. preapprenticeship, pre-vocational and pre-employment courses, and short Education Program for Unemployed Youth (EPUY) courses concerned with basic literacy, numeracy, social skills and motivation. Coverage extends to similar State-funded courses.
Those eligible are CES registrants aged 15 to 19 years (15 to 24 years for EPUY courses) who have been unemployed and away from full-time education for at least 4 of the previous 12 months. In 1981-82, 12809 trainees were assisted; 16713 are expected to be assisted in 1982-83 at a cost of $8.8m.
The Transition Allowance is also available for the longer-term unemployed (ie those aged 15 to 24 years who have been away from full-time education and unemployed for at least 8 of the previous 12 months) who undertake approved 'mainstream' TAFE courses that teach occupational skills and lead to greater employability. An estimated 600 new trainees in this category will be assisted in 1982-83 at a cost of $0.8m.
In addition, $1.4m will be provided in 1982-83 to fund two new initiatives. Special courses of particular relevance for the unemployed will be directly supported in TAFE institutions to provide training places for 500 young unemployed. A books and equipment allowance of $30 will also be made available to transition students to offset the inhibiting effects of these costs on some young unemployed people's willingness to participate in the Transition Program.
As an encouragement to students to undertake training leading to an apprenticeship, an allowance of $20 per week continues to be available to students in full-time pre-apprenticeship courses at TAFE institutions where neither the Transition Allowance nor assistance under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme is available. Expenditure in 1982-83 is estimated at $1.2m, providing for about the same number of new trainees (1500) as in 1981-82.

264 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Complementing this support for classroom-based training is the assistance available to employers who provide opportunities for work experience in full-time jobs to young unemployed who lack the prior experience, specific job skills or personal qualities that employers commonly require. From September 1982, it has been decided to increase by $20, to $75 a week, the 'standard' rate of allowance paid to private employers who offer up to 17 weeks of work experience. Participants are CES registrants aged 15 to 24 years who have been unemployed and away from education for at least 4 of the last 12 months.
Since February 1981, the Work Experience program has been extended to provide a higher subsidy for the initial 17 weeks and to provide a second 17 weeks of work experience (subsidised at the 'standard' rate) for CES registrants aged 18 to 24 years who have been unemployed and away from full-time education for at least 8 of the past 12 months. A $20 increase in the 'extended' rate, to $100 a week, is also to apply from September 1982.
Work experience placements may also be offered in Commonwealth establishments, with full costs in this case being met from the program.
For 1982-83, it is estimated that 74200 new work experience placements will be made and 13 300 existing placements continued at a cost of $73.8m; this compares with 69700 participants (51 700 new and 18000 existing) and expenditure of $53.7m in 1981-82.
The numbers of young people in receipt of transition allowances and of those participating in work experience placements in recent years are as follows:

1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83 (est)
(a) EPUY only

Transition allowance (including EPUY)
4200(a) 9300 12800 16700

Pre-apprenticeship
allowance
n.a. 3000 2900 2600

Assistance for work
experience
55000 76000 69700 87500

Total
n.a 88300 85400 106800

Special Training
The Commonwealth provides special employment counselling and training, through the Commonwealth Employment Service, for job seekers disadvantaged because of mental or physical disability, different cultural or language background, or through being unemployed for lengthy periods.
A variety of arrangements (similar to those for general training assistance to individuals) are available to assist Aboriginals to gain employment skills and experience and so to aid their access to open employment. The main form of assistance is on-thejob training (for up to twelve months) in clerical, semi-skilled and technical areas of Commonwealth and State Government establishments. Expenditure in 1981-82 was $11.5m for 1400 new trainees; $13.5m is provided for 1982-83 to cater for an additional 1450 new trainees and to allow for a trend to longer periods in training.
Training allowances and employer subsidies are also available to unemployed Aboriginal CES registrants on a similar basis to general skills training assistance. An amount of $2.5m is provided for formal training allowances to cover an estimated 560 new

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 265

trainees, and subsidies to cover 2300 trainees are expected to cost $4.2m. Special projects are developed where no other forms of training are appropriate; 60 projects are expected to be supported in 1982-83 at a cost of $1.2m. In all, $21.7m has been provided in 1982-83 for Aboriginal training.
An amount of $7.3m is available in 1982-83 for employment and training programs to assist disabled persons whose social, physical or mental handicaps hinder their access to open employment. This includes allowances for formal training and employer subsidies for on-the-job training (along similar lines to assistance for the able-bodied), which will account for an estimated $5.9m, involving some 3600 new trainees.
Employment Services
Outlays under this heading relate mainly to the identifiable administrative expenditure of the Commonwealth Employment Service, which provides a nationwide jobplacement and career reference and advisory service through a network of 257 local offices and 54 branches. The CES also provides the administrative support for the Commonwealth's employment and training programs, including selection of trainees from among CES registrants. During 1981-82, the CES processed 1 867837 registrations and assisted in 576 779 placements; 83 500 participants were approved for employment and training programs, with 110 600 expected to be approved in 1982-83. Expenditure on the CES in 1981-82 amounted to $99.9m and is expected to increase by $3.9m in 1982-83. This increase includes provision for the purchase of computer equipment for the CES Job Bank computerised vacancies information system, which is to be progressively installed in CES metropolitan and regional centre offices over an 18-24 month period to 1984-85.
Administration
Estimated outlays of $35.7m under this heading cover the costs of administration of the employment and youth affairs functions of the new Department of Employment and Industrial Relations and include central and regional offices, the Office of Youth Affairs and the Bureau of Labour Market Research. Identifiable administrative costs relating to the Department's industrial relations responsibilities and CES administrative costs are excluded-see 'Industrial Relations' and 'Employment Services' above.
In addition to industrial relations matters, the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations is responsible for the formulation and implementation of national manpower policies, including the operation of the CES. The Office of Youth Affairs, established in February 1977, has the role of improving co-ordination and consultation between the Commonwealth and State and local government organisations in respect of Commonwealth programs and policies which affect young people. The Bureau of Labour Market Research, established in December 1979, co-ordinates existing research and provides information and analysis on labour market matters.

IMMIGRATION
During 1981, a review of the former migration selection system-the Numerical Multi-factor Assessment System (NUMAS)-was undertaken. As part of the review process, an independent committee of review on migrant assessment was established to report on the views of the Australian community. Among the issues highlighted by this latter review were that family and friends are important to settlement success and the

266 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

concern in the community that migrant entry criteria should be sensitive to current and forseeable demands for labour. On the basis of these reviews, the Government has adopted, from 19 April 1982, a new selection system which emphasises both family reunion and the need to satisfy skill shortages in Australia.
Pending completion of the NUMAS review, the 1981-82 objective of the immigration program was a gross intake of between 115 000 and 120 000, a 9% increase on 1980-81. To accommodate increased refugee movements (particularly from Poland), this upper limit was subsequently raised to 123000. Preliminary indications are that this order of gain will be achieved.
Based on the revised selection policy, the Government has decided to plan for the issue of between 115 000 and 120 000 migrant visas in 1982-83. Significant elements of this intake are the expected arrival during the year of 24 000 persons in the refugee and special humanitarian categories (mainly from South-east Asia and Eastern Europe), 44000 in the family reunion category, and 28 000 in the labour shortage and business categories. These figures exclude New Zealand citizens, who are not subject to migrant selection processes.
Assisted Migration
Arising from the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Government decided in 1981 to discontinue the Assisted Passage Scheme for migrants. Assisted passages are now only available to refugees and to migrants where outstanding commitments under some Migrant Agreements have still to be met. Provision is made for 21 500 assisted passages at a cost of $12.2m in 1982-83, compared with $16.5m in 1981-82, to cover remaining migrant passage entitlements and the planned refugee intake. Contributions to operating expenses of migrant centres managed by Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd are to decrease by $1.lm to $14.5m, primarily reflecting increased tariffs but also because of an expected lower intake of migrants into the centres in 1982-83. In addition, $0.8m has been provided for the preparation of information material for migrants in Australia and overseas and $0.6m to cover the cost of transporting assisted migrants and refugees from the port of arrival in Australia to migrant centres and private accommodation.
Administration
Outlays under this heading relate to the administrative expenditures of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. The increase of $6.2m in 1982-83 is due mainly to increased salary costs, the inclusion of a $1.5m payment by the Department to the coastal surveillance program and the full year effect of increased postal and telephone charges.
Recoveries
The Central Office of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs is the prime tenant in the Benjamin Office Complex and is responsible for meeting the building's telephone charges, which are then recovered from the Departments originally incurring them. Such recoveries are estimated to increase in 1982-83 by $0.3m due to increased usage and higher call rates. Contributions to assisted passages are expected to decline from $0.5m in 1981-82 to $0.2m in 1982-83 following the discontinuation of the Assisted Passage Scheme.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 267

E. OTHER ECONOMIC SERVICES
This grouping covers outlays on economic services provided by the Commonwealth which are not readily classified to the more specific functional groupings. Included are outlays relating mainly to wage, salary and administrative expenses, for certain forms of economic and trade regulation, and for specialised activities and administrative expenses not directly identifiable with specific industries or groups of industries. The function includes the administrative expenditures of the central office of the former Department of Business and Consumer Affairs, apart from Customs and bankruptcy administration, prior to its abolition on 7 May 1982. After that date, these expenditures have been recorded elsewhere, in the administrative votes of those departments that took over the responsibilities of the abolished Department. (See 'Notes on Tables' at the end of Statement No.6.)

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Change

Economic and Trade RegulationPatent, Trade Marks and Designs Office Industries Assistance Commission Trade Practices Prices Justification Consumer Protection nec National Companies and Securities Commission Other Recoveries

$m
10.0 8.5 5.0 1.8 0.1 1.0 0.9 II.0Cr

$m
11.9 9.5 5.1 1.4 0.1 1.4 0.8 12.7Cr

$m
13.2 9.3 5.1 0.9 0.1 1.6 1.0 14.3Cr

$m
+ 1.2
- 0.1
- 0.5
+ 0.2 + 0.1
1.6

Total

16.2

17.4

16.9

0.6

Specialised ActivitiesMeteorological Services (net) National Mapping
Total

34.1

39.8

44.0

+ 4.2

10.2

10.9

12.2

+ I.3

44.3

50.7

56.1

+ 5.5

General Administration and Other Expenditure

(net) (a)

62.2

65.6

49.6

-16.0

TOTAL OTHER ECONOMIC SERVICES

122.7

\33.7

122.6

-11.1

(a) From 7 May 1982 relevant responsibilities of the former Department of Business and Consumer Affairs have been transferred to the Department of Industry and Commerce (see 'Industry Assistance and Development') and the Department of Administrative Services (see 'Administrative Services').

ECONOMIC AND TRADE REGULATION

The bulk of outlays for the various regulatory bodies listed under this heading is in respect of salaries and administrative expenditure.

The Patent, Trade Marks and Designs Office oversights and administers Australian property systems for the protection of inventions, trade marks and industrial designs,

I

examines applications for Letters Patent of invention and for the registration of designs

and trade marks and publishes details of successful applications.

The allocation of $13.2m to the Office in 1982-83 (which is fully offset by recoveries) includes provision for salaries and allowances ($lO.1m), administrative and equipment costs ($2.5m) and membership of international organisations ($O.5m). The

268 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

increase of $1.2m in outlays estimated for 1982-83 comprises the effects of wage and salary increases granted in 1981-82 ($0. 3m), higher administration and equipment costs associated with ongoing operations including the continuation of the program of recording Australian and overseas patents on film ($0.5m), and the move from payment in arrears to payment in advance for Australia's membership of the World Intellectual Property Organisation ($0.3m).
The Industries Assistance Commission holds inquiries and reports to the Government in accordance with the Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973 on matters which affect assistance to industries and which are referred to it. The 1982-83 estimate is slightly below the 1981-82 expenditure, reflecting an expected reduction in staff numbers offset to some extent by cost increases due mainly to new wage and salary awards.
The item Trade Practices covers the activities of both the Trade Practices Commission and the Trade Practices Tribunal. The Commission administers the Trade Practices Act 1974, which proscribes restrictive trade practices and provides for consumer protection. The Tribunal considers appeals against decisions by the Commission on authorisation applications. The small increase in the 1982-83 estimate reflects the fact that higher costs, mainly wages and salaries, have been largely offset by the reduction in the number of paydays in 1982-83.
Outlays under the Prices Justification heading in 1982-83 relates to the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority which was created in June 1981 under the Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 to conduct inquiries and report to the Government on the prices for the wholesale supply of petroleum products and related services. Following abolition of the Prices Justification Tribunal in 1981, some Tribunal staff were attached to the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority pending resolution of their employment status. The reduction in the Authority's estimate for 1982-83 reflects the placement elsewhere or retirement of most of these staff.
The estimate for Consumer Protection nec in 1982-83 relates to a grant of $O.lm (the same as in 1981-82) for the Australian Federation of Consumer Organisations, to assist in the cost of co-ordinating the activities of consumer bodies in Australia and presenting their views to governments and industry in consumer protection matters.
The National Companies and Securities Commission administers a uniform scheme of regulation on companies and securities matters, including the Companies legislation and counterpart State law. It is financed on a joint Commonwealth/State basis with the Commonwealth contributing half the funds required and the States providing the balance in proportion to their respective population. The increase in the Commonwealth contribution to $1.55m in 1982-83 is due to increased staff and costs, mainly salary and wage rates.
The major item included in the Other category is expenditure by the National Standards Commission ($0.8m). The increase in outlays estimated for 1982-83 for the Commission comprises higher wage and salary costs and increased municipal and electricity charges.
Recoveries largely comprise fees charged by the Patent, Trade Marks and Designs Office in line with the policy objective of full cost recovery for the services rendered by the Office.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 269

SPECIALISED ACTIVITIES
Meteorological Services (net) includes the activities of the Commonwealth Bureau of Meteorology ($61.3m) and the Ionospheric Prediction Service ($I.3m) less recoveries in respect of those services ($18.6m).
The Bureau of Meteorology provides a range of weather services and forecasts for the general public and specialised users, particularly the aviation industry and the de-
L
fence forces. Estimated expenditure by the Bureau in 1982-83 is mainly for salaries, and administrative and operational expenses. The provision for plant and equipment in 1982-83 ($5.6m) has increased over expenditure in 1981-82 ($1.5m), mainly because of delays in the purchase of the Bureau's new computer, originally planned for 1981-82. An amount of $4.3m is being provided in 1982-83 to complete the acquisition and installation of this computer. Expenditure on other plant and equipment items will increase in 1982-83 and future years to allow for a long term equipment acquisition program to improve the cost-effectiveness and quality of services.
The costs attributable to the major specialised users of Bureau services (civil aviation and defence) are recoverable with receipts being estimated at $18.3m in 1982-83. Taking into account other minor revenues, the net outlay from the Budget on the Bureau in 1982-83 is estimated at $42.7m compared to $38.6m in 1981-82.
The Ionospheric Prediction Service (IPS) provides predictions on the state of the ionosphere for use by the major users of radio communications systems in Australia (Defence services, Telecom Australia and the Overseas Telecommunications Commission). Estimated expenditure by the IPS of $1.3m in 1982-83 is mainly for salaries and administrative expenses.
For National Mapping, $12.2m is included in the 1982-83 estimates compared with net expenditure of $1O.9m in 1981-82. This amount includes $1.9m for the continuation of the enlarged bathymetric mapping program resulting from the Government's decision to employ a surplus Department of Transport navigational aid vessel for this purpose, pending construction of a research vessel for CSIRO. It also allows for a onceonly increase of $O.2m in the Division of National Mapping's capital program for the acquisition of a digital interactive editing facility which will provide the capability for topographic mapping in digital form. In addition, the above figures reflect the commencement of National Mapping's development of a lunar laser ranging facility in 1982-83 in co-operation with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) of the USA. Under the terms of the agreement a trust account has been established for receipt of contributions from NASA and expenditure of moneys in connection with contracts arranged for the development of the system. Trust account receipts in 1982-83 are expected to be $O.6m and disbursements $O.7m. Receipts in 1981-82 were$O.3m.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND OTHER EXPENDITURE (NET)

For 1982-83 these outlays relate to the operating and capital costs (other than those

allocated to specific or regulatory functions) of the Departments of National Develop-

ment and Energy ($13.5m), and Trade and Resources ($28.7m), together with the pro-

ductivity development functions of the Depar~ment of Science and Technology

($8.6m).

/

270 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

The $16m decrease in this item in 1982-83 mainly reflects the transfer (from 7 May 1982) of those responsibilities of the former Department of Business and Consumer Affairs shown under this function in previous years to the Departments of Administrative Services and Industry and Commerce shown under the functions 'Administrative Services' and 'Industry Assistance and Development' respectively. (See 'Notes on Tables' at the end of Statement No.6.)

9. GENERAL PUBLIC SERVICES
This grouping covers a broad range of general public services and activities relating to the organisation and operation of the Commonwealth Government, including legislative services, administrative services, administration of the courts and law enforcement, and foreign affairs, overseas aid and administration of external territories.
A. LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
Following the Government's consideration of the Report of the Senate Select Committee on Parliament's Appropriations and Staffing, it was decided that the annual appropriations for the five Parliamentary Departments would be included in a separate Appropriation Bill entitled 'Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act' (see Budget Paper No.4). The following table includes the amounts to be appropriated by that Bill, together with other appropriations relating to the Governor-General's Office, the Parliament House Construction Authority, the ACT House of Assembly and the Australian Electoral Office.

Governor-General's Office and Other Official Establishments
Parliamentary ExpenditureSalaries and Allowances of Senators and Members Other (net)
Parliament House Construction Authority ACT House of Assembly Australian Electoral Office
TOTAL LEGISLATIVE SERVICES

1980-81 Actual
$m
3.0
17.6 52.0 8.1 0.5 30.7
112.0

1981-82 Actual
$m
3.5
18.4 64.4 24.6 0.5 20.9
132.3

1982-83 Estimate
$m
3.7
17.1 71.2 45.4 0.6 22.6
160.6

Change
$m
+ 0.2
- 1.4 + 6.8 +20.8 + 0.1 + J.7
+28.2

Parliamentary Expenditure
The estimated decrease in outlays under the heading Salaries and Allowances of Senators and Members arises mainly as a result of a decrease of $2.3m in the estimate of benefits payable under the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act 1948. This reflects an expected reduction, compared to 1981-82, in the number of former members becoming entitled to retiring allowances during 1982-83.
Outlays under Other, which include salaries, administrative costs and capital works associated with the functioning of Parliament and administrative costs of electorate offices of Senators and Members, are estimated to increase by $6.8m in 1982-83. Higher salary and allowance payments account for $1.8m of this increase, mainly reflecting the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 271

full year effect of salary increases awarded in 1981-82. The estimated cost of conveyance of members of Parliament and others is expected to increase by $l.lm reflecting increases in official hire car rates, the full-year effect of domestic and overseas air fare increases in 1981-82 and the expected level of Parliamentary travel. The remainder of the increase is largely accounted for by cost increases affecting a range of administrative items.
Parliament House Construction Authority (PHCAj
Outlays under this item include an amount of $1.7m for the administrative costs of the Parliament House Construction Authority, $9.6m for architectural and professional fees and $32.lm for construction of the new Parliament House. In addition, an amount of $2m will be provided in 1982-83 to allow commencement of the provision of non-building items. The increase in outlays over 1981-82 reflects progress on the project as construction gathers momentum.
Australian Electoral Office
Provision is made under this heading for outlays by the Australian Electoral Office for the administration of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918, the conduct of Commonwealth elections and referenda and industrial elections. The increase of $1.7m mainly reflects additional work associated with the maintenance of Commonwealth Electoral rolls.

272 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

B. LAW, ORDER AND PUBLIC SAFETY
Commonwealth outlays on law, order and public safety functions for 1982-83 are estimated at $293m, an increase of $35.2m or 13.7% on 1981-82.

Courts and Legal Services--High Court Federal Court Family Law Courts of the ACT Bankruptcy Administration Crown Solicitor Australian Law Reform Commission Legal Aid Protection of Human Rights
Total
Police, Security and Criminology-Security Services and Organisations Police and Prison Services Other
Total
Attorney-General's DepartmentGeneral Administrative and Other Expenditure Reporting Service
Total
Public Safety and ProtectionRoad Safety Other
Total
Building, Works and Equipment nec Recoveries
TOTAL LAW, ORDER AND PUBLIC SAFETY

1980-81 Actual
$m
6.0 4.1 14.5 2.1 3.1 9.8 1.1 33.7 0.4
74.7

1981-82 Actual
$m
4.5 5.2 17.5 2.7 4.0 11.2 1.2 39.3 1.0
86.7

1982-83 Estimate
$m
4.2 5.5 19.5 2.4 5.9 11.9 1.3 45.7 1.8
98.2

Change
$m
- 0.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 - 0.3 + 1.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 6.4 + 0.8
+11.6

27.9 82.1 4.3
114.3

32.3 96.4
7.3
136.0

37.0 105.3
7.9
150.2

+ 4.7 + 8.9 + 0.6
+14.2

17.6

21.1

6.8

8.1

24.4

29.1

27.4

+ 6.4

8.6

+ 0.6

36.1

+ 6.9

0.9 7.4
8.3
6.0 6.2Cr

0.7 8.6
9.3
4.0 7.3Cr

1.3 9.0
10.2
7.3 9.0Cr

+ 0.6 + 0.4
+ 1.0
+ 3.3 1.7

221.5

257.8

293.0

+35.2

COURTS AND LEGAL SERVICES
High Court Under the High Court of Australia Act 1979 the High Court, which is the ultimate
court of appeal in Australia, administers its own affairs. An amount of $4.2m is being provided in 1982-83 for the operations of the Court in Canberra and the States and includes an amount of $0.7m for salaries and allowances of Justices.
Federal Court The Federal Court was established by the Federal Court of Australia Act 1976 and
has an Industrial Division and a General Division and original and appellate jurisdiction. An amount of $5.5m is being provided in 1982-83 for the operations of the Court, of which $1.7m relates to salaries and allowances for Judges.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 273

Family Law
The Family Court of Australia, established by the Family Law Act 1975, exercises original and appellate jurisdiction in all matrimonial causes in all States and Territories except Western Australia where the jurisdiction is exercised by the Family Court of Western Australia. The Court also provides a counselling service to assist people with marital problems.
The provision of $19.5m in 1982-83 includes $2.5m for reimbursement to Western Australia of the costs of running the State Court and $4.2m for reimbursement to other States of the cost of performing family law services on behalf of the Commonwealth.
Courts of the Australian Capital Territory
An amount of $2.4m is provided for the operations of the ACT Supreme Court and Court of Petty Sessions, including the Children's Court and Small Claims Court, in 1982-83. The reduction of $0.3m mainly reflects the completion of a program of replacement of court reporting equipment.
Bankruptcy Administration
An amount of $5.9m is provided in 1982-83 for the administration of bankruptcies. The increase of $1.9m over 1981-82 expenditure arises mainly from increases in wage and salary costs.
Crown Solicitor
The increase of $0.7m to $11.9m in 1982-83 for the Crown Solicitor's Office reflects mainly increases in wage and salary costs.
Legal Aid
The provision for legal aid in 1982-83 is $45.7m which includes $7.8m for Aboriginallegal aid and $O.4m for grants to voluntary legal aid organisations. Since 1976 it has been the policy of the Government to provide legal aid in Australia through a scheme involving co-operation between the Commonwealth and States (except for Aboriginal legal aid which is administered by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs). Under the scheme, legal aid is to be provided in each State and Territory (except for voluntary legal aid organisations) through a single independent statutory Commission established by State or Territory legislation. Commissions have been established in the Australian Capital Territory, Queensland, South Australia, Victoria, Western Australia and New South Wales although the latter commission has not yet taken over the operations of the Australian Legal Aid Office (ALAO) in that State.
Approximately 66000 people were provided with legal assistance in 1981-82, 13 000 through the services of salaried lawyers and 53 000 through referrals to private practitioners. It is expected that some 70 000 people will receive legal assistance in 1982-83.
The provision of $7.8m in 1982-83 for the Aboriginal legal aid program administered by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs will support 17 Aboriginal Legal Services providing advice, representation and related services for an estimated 70 000 cases. The Services employ some 185 Aboriginals and 86 non-Aboriginals.
The increase of $6.4m in 1982-83 for legal aid mainly reflects the expected increase in the number of cases, wage and salary increases, increased fees in respect of referrals

274 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

to private legal practitioners and the effect of the first full year of operations of the Victorian Commission.
Protection ofHuman Rights
The estimate of $1.8m in 1982-83, an increase of $O.8m, provides for the operations of the Human Rights Commission which was established under the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 and commenced operations on 10 December 1981.

POLICE, SECURITY AND CRIMINOLOGY
Security Services and Organisations This provision includes expenditure by the Australian Security Intelligence Organ-
isation ($24.4m) and the Australian Secret Intelligence Service ($1O.6m).
Police and Prison Services This item includes $102.3m for the operations of the Australian Federal Police
Force, $1.6m for anti-terrorist equipment and training for Australian police forces and $1.3m for the care of ACT prisoners in New South Wales institutions under the Removal of Prisoners (Australian Capital Territory) Act 1968. The increase of $8.9m reflects mainly salary increases awarded under a determination of the Australian Federal Police Arbitral Tribunal effective from 8 April 1982.
Other This item includes provision for the operation of the Office of National Assessments
($2.2m), the Australian Institute of Criminology ($1.2m), the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking ($I.3m), and the Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Ship Painters and Dockers Union ($O.8m).
Also included are provisions for police scientific research, the Commonwealth's contribution towards the Central Fingerprint Bureau and the International Police Commission, and the Commonwealth's share of the cost of operations of the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence. In addition, $O.2m has been provided for the initial operating costs of the National Police Research Unit, which is to be established by Commonwealth/State agreement to undertake and co-ordinate research into police methods, equipment and techniques. Under the terms of the agreement, two-thirds of the total estimated cost will be recovered from the States.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT
General Administrative and Other Expenditure The increase of $6.4m on 1981-82 expenditure reflects mainly the purchase of com-
puter and associated facilities originally scheduled for 1981-82 ($3.3m), and the effects of wage and salary increases awarded in 1981-82.
Reporting Service The Commonwealth Reporting Service is responsible for reporting proceedings of
federal courts and tribunals and government inquiries. The increase of $O.6m to $8.6m in 1982-83 reflects mainly salary and wage increases for reporting staff.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 275

PUBLIC SAFETY AND PROTECTION
Road Safety
The estimates for 1982-83 provide $l.lm for road safety promotion and research. The increase of $O.6m on 1981-82 expenditure reflects mainly the Commonwealth's contribution of $O.5m towards a national drink driving media campaign to be funded jointly by the Commonwealth, States and the Northern Territory. The estimates for 1982-83 also provide $O.2m for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for the promotion of road safety practices.
Other
This provision includes the operating expenses of the ACT Fire Brigade ($5.3m), fire protection services for Commonwealth property ($2.7m), and amounts for bush fire prevention, control and supervision on rural lands and public reserves in the ACT ($O.9m).

BUILDING, WORKS AND EQUIPMENT NEC
Expenditure under this heading relates mainly to the construction and refurbishing of Commonwealth Law Courts in the States and the police facilities in the ACT. An amount of $4.9m is included for the construction of new Hobart Law Courts.

RECOVERIES
Included under this heading are court fees of the High Court, Federal Court and Family Court ($5.5m); receipts of the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office, comprising mainly fees charged to Commonwealth statutory authorities and commercial undertakings for services rendered ($O.8m) and debt recovery ($O.7m); and payments by statutory authorities for fire protection services ($O.8m).

276 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

C. FOREIGN AFFAIRS, OVERSEAS AID AND EXTERNAL TERRITORIES (a)
Total outlays on foreign affairs, overseas aid and external territories are estimated to increase by 10% to $946.9m in 1982-83. This total includes most of the Commonwealth's expenditures under policies designed to promote relations with overseas countries and to assist in the economic and social development of developing countries; net expenditure on external territories is small. About three-quarters of all expenditure under this heading relates to various programs to assist developing countries, including Papua New Guinea; a more detailed account of Australia's aid programs is provided in Budget Paper No. 9-Australia's Overseas Development Assistance Program.

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Change

Aid PaymentsBilateral Aid-Papua New Guinea Projects, Technical Co-operation and Related Activities Training Food Aid Other

$m
245.0
122.7 16.8 64.9 8.4

$m
253.8
133.8 21.5 86.1 15.6

$m
264.8
160.2 26.2 74.4 22.6

$m
+ 11.0
+26.4 + 4.7 -11.7 + 6.9

Total Bilateral Aid

457.7

5\0.8

548.1

+37.3

Multilateral Aid-

International Development Finance Institutions

47.5

59.9

67.7

+ 7.9

UN Programs, Regional and Other International

Organisations

47.6

70.2

97.2

+27.0

Total Multilateral Aid

95.2

130.0

164.9

+34.9

Total Aid

552.9

640.8

713.0

+72.2

Membership of International Organisations and Other Non-Aid Expenditure
External Territories General Administrative Expenditure Recoveries and Repayments

33.5 4.9 164.0 7.8Cr

47.1 7.3
174.8 9.5Cr

40.7 4.3 197.1 8.3Cr

- 6.3 - 3.0 +22.4 + 1.3

TOTAL FOREIGN AFFAIRS, OVERSEAS AID AND EXTERNAL TERRITORIES (a) (b)

747.5

860.5

946.9

+86.4

(a) Referred to elsewhere in Budget documentation as 'Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid'. (b) Some figu.res in the t~ble differ from those shown in Budget Paper No.9 because of the use of different concepts
for recordtng Austraha's overseas aid performance and exclusion of costs associated with administering the aid program.

AID PAYMENTS

An amount of $713m is provided for expenditure on overseas aid in 1982-83, an increase of $72.2m or 11.3% over expenditure in 1981-82. Taking into account 'Assistance Additional to Aid Payments' (see below), assistance to developing countries in 1982-83 is estimated to be $765.8m.
This figure excludes the significant amounts spent by the Commonwealth and State Governments on the education and training of several thousand students from developing countries who are attending various tertiary and other training institutions in Australia. The cost to the Australian taxpayer of providing assistance of this kind,
(a) Referred to elsewhere in Budget documentation as 'Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid'.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 277

which is not brought to account directly under the overseas aid program, is estimated at about $54m in 1982. Australia also provides other indirect forms of economic aid through its contributions to the regular budgets of a number of international organisations (eg the United Nations and the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation) that assist in the financing of aid projects in developing countries. The aid component of Australia's contributions to these organisations in 1982-83 is estimated at about $4m. Other indirect economic assistance is provided by the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation through the financing, in certain circumstances, of exports of capital goods on concessional terms.

BILATERAL AID
Papua New Guinea
An amount of $264.8m is provided for expenditure on aid to or on behalf of the Papua New Guinea Government in 1982-83. This is $llm more than in 1981-82.
Under the terms of a five-year aid agreement covering the period 1981-82 to 1985-86 Australia provides Papua New Guinea with annual budget support grants which are determined on the basis of a formula involving a 5% annual real reduction in Australian aid. The five-year commitment, which is likely to involve expenditure of at least $1300m, gives the Papua New Guinea Government an assurance that substantial Australian assistance will be provided over the five-year period, while at the same time allowing for a gradual winding down in Papua New Guinea's dependence on Australian aid. The agreement also provides for re-examination of the level of assistance in certain circumstances and for a full review in 1983 of the arrangements embodied in the agreement.
In accordance with the terms of the formula, provision is made for a budget support grant of $252.8m in 1982-83, which represents an increase of $11.4m over the 1981-82 grant.
Outlays on the provision of education and technical assistance under the Papua New Guinea-Australia Technical Co-operation Program are estimated at $2.5m in 1982-83, an increase of 11.5% over 1981-82 expenditure. Payments of termination and retirement benefits and other pensions to expatriate officers (and their dependants) of former Papua New Guinea Administrations and the Australian Staffing Assistance Group, which are made under the Papua New Guinea (Staffing Assistance) Act 1973, continue to decline as the Commonwealth discharges its responsibilities under the Act. The estimate for 1982-83 is $9.6m, a reduction of$O.6m on the 1981-82 payment.
Projects. Technical Co-operation and Related Activities
Expenditure under this heading is estimated at $160.2m in 1982-83, an increase of $26.4m on 1981-82 expenditure. The major component is $140.7m for bilateral aid projects and related activities which provide Australian expertise and equipment to developing countries, mainly in the Asian and Pacific regions. The types of activity supported include the development of agriculture, general infrastructure, health care and the provision of specialist staffing assistance. Under a new program, an additional amount of $7.5m has been allocated for co-financing projects in association with the World Bank. Grant aid will be provided in association with World Bank loans to fund projects in developing countries.

278 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

Also included is $12m for the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)-Australia Economic Co-operation Program under which Australia provides support for a range of research projects and trade promotion activities bilaterally with the ASEAN group. The increase of 60.6% over 1981-82 will allow for increased expenditure on existing projects and commencement of new projects involving food and energy technologies.

Training
Expenditure in 1982-83 on training programs (excluding training provided under the Papua New Guinea-Australia Technical Co-operation Program mentioned above) is estimated at $26.2m, an increase of $4.7m on 1981-82. This expenditure covers the direct costs (including student fees) of officially sponsored students from developing countries who undertake studies in Australia, in their home country or in a third country, and provision of support for training institutions in some ASEAN and South Pacific countries. The increase in the provision for this item will allow about 150 additional awards to be offered, an expansion of the Australian Universities International Development Program by almost $lm or 52%, and provision of$0.6m to meet, for the first time, the overseas student charge for private students from the South Pacific and Papua New Guinea.

Food Aid
Outlays on bilateral food aid in 1982-83 are estimated at $74.4m. This is a decrease of $11.7m on 1981-82 expenditure and is mainly due to a shift from bilateral to multilateral contributions in the provision of food aid.
Of Australia's annual minimum commitment of 400 000 tonnes of wheat or wheat equivalent under the Food Aid Convention of the International Wheat Agreement, 280 000 tonnes or 70% will be given bilaterally at an estimated cost of $46.6m in 1982-83, compared to 320000 tonnes or 80% at a cost of $57.8m in 1981-82. The remaining 30% will be contributed to the World Food Program (WFP) (see heading 'United Nations Programs, Regional and Other International Organisations'). Associated with the bilateral part of the food aid commitment there is a provision of $6.2m for freight, handling and monitoring the use of food aid.
In addition to the minimum commitment of 400 000 tonnes, 50 000 tonnes of food grain aid valued at $12.4m, including freight, will be given on a bilateral basis to the International Emergency Food Reserve (lEFR) in 1982-83, an increase of 5000 tonnes over the amount provided for this purpose in 1981-82. The IEFR is an international facility administered by the WFP and the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) for responding quickly to emergency situations.
In addition to food grain aid, $4.7m is earmarked for the provision of non-grain food items, such as milk powder and high protein biscuits. This is an increase of $O.4m on 1981-82 expenditure.
Spending on food security measures will more than double from $2.1m in 1981-82 to $4.5m in 1982-83. Part of this will be disbursed as bilateral aid through the FAO and part will be used for bilateral projects which increase productivity and reduce postharvest losses.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 279

Other Bilateral Aid
Included under this heading is emergency humanitarian assistance provided partly on a bilateral basis and partly multilaterally. The Government attaches importance to Australia being in a position to respond quickly and effectively to emergency relief programs undertaken in different parts of the world. Provision has been made in 1982-83 for $8.9m to cover contributions to special appeals mainly from international organisations active in humanitarian relief operations, including assistance to refugees.
Also included is $3.8m for payment to the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research trust account. The Centre was established in 1981-82 to commission and fund research in Australian institutions on agriculture and related areas of benefit to developing countries.
An amount of $2.2m has been allocated to the Development Import Finance Facility which is a program recently established to enable ASEAN countries to import Australian goods and services for development projects on concessional terms matching those offered by other countries exporting similar goods and services.
Also included is an amount of $0. 3m to cover some of the costs to be incurred by the Fiji Government in holding the 1982 Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting.
Support for voluntary aid organisations is estimated at $7.2m in 1982-83, $2m more than in 1981-82. Some $5.8m will be given to support the activities of Australian voluntary organisations in developing countries. Assistance includes funding of projects under the project subsidy scheme and support for volunteer programs. The Australian Council for Overseas Aid will receive a grant of $0.2m for administrative purposes. Contributions to a number of international voluntary aid organisations are estimated to amount to $1.2m in 1982-83.

MULTILATERAL AID
The Commonwealth supports a wide range of international organisations, including development finance institutions, United Nations agencies and various regional organisations. Payments in 1982-83 are estimated at $164.9m, an increase of $34.9m or 27% over 1981-82.
International Development Finance Institutions
This heading covers payments by Australia to the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Bank Group and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). Expenditure in 1982-83 is estimated at $67.7m, compared with $59.9m in 1981-82. The provision comprises capital subscriptions to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) ($12.7m) and the International Finance Corporation ($2m) and contributions to the International Development Association (IDA) ($43.1m), the Asian Development Fund ($7.7m), and the IFAD ($2.3m).
Financial support for these institutions takes the form of cash payments and promissory notes which are drawn down by the institutions either as required to meet their commitments or on the basis of previously agreed schedules. After allowing for payment of the 1982-83 provisions, total outstanding obligations in future years to these organisations will amount to some $397.9m. The amounts included will be drawn down

280 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

over a number of years and comprise $126.3m for the ADB (including $108.2m for its concessionallending facility, the Asian Development Fund), $223.9m for the IDA (the concessionallending agency of the World Bank Group), $12.6m for the IFAD and $35.2m for the IBRD.

United Nations Programs, Regional and Other International Organisations
Total payments under this heading are estimated to amount to $97.2m in 1982-83, an increase of $27m or 38% over 1981-82.
Australia's contributions to various United Nations aid organisations are estimated at $73m in 1982-83, an increase of $21.9m over 1981-82. As part of the aim of increasing the proportion of food aid provided through multilateral arrangements, expenditure under the World Food Program (WFP) is estimated to increase by $13.9m or 57.4% to $38m in 1982-83. The total allocation comprises 120000 tonnes of food grain, worth an estimated $20m (30% of Australia's minimum commitment under the Food Aid Convention of 400000 tonnes); $10m as the first part of Australia's minimum pledge of cash and commodities to the WFP for the 1983-84 biennium; and $8m to meet freight costs on the food grain.
Also provided for are further major increases in Australia's contributions to several United Nations organisations including the United Nations Development Program, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency.
Assistance to regional and other international programs is estimated at $24.1m in 1982-83, an increase of $5m over 1981-82 expenditure. Organisations receiving support include the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation, the Commonwealth Youth Program, the South Pacific Commission, and the South Pacific Bureau for Economic Co-operation; support is also to be given to a number of international and regional research and training centres.

ASSISTANCE ADDITIONAL TO AID PAYMENTS
Some $3.3m of expenditure on Australia's Defence Co-operation Program (estimated to be $43m in 1982-83) will be spent on projects, such as malaria control, which are recognised as Official Development Assistance. The Defence Co-operation Program also supplements the overseas economic aid program to the extent that it releases for possible development assistance purposes resources that recipient governments might otherwise have used for defence purposes. Details of the Program, which is also undertaken as an extension of Australia's own defence effort, are described in the section on 'Defence Co-operation' under the 'Defence' function.
The administrative costs of the Australian Development Assistance Bureau are estimated to decline from $ll.1m in 1981-82 to $9.8m in 1982-83, largely as a result of decisions taken in the Review of Commonwealth Functions in 1981. These expenses, which are recorded under 'General Administrative Expenditure', represent an integral part of total expenditure on Australia's aid effort and are now recognised as Official Development Assistance for international reporting purposes.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 281

MEMBERSHIP OF INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS AND OTHER NON-AID EXPENDITURE
These outlays relate mainly to Australia's membership of a large number of international and regional organisations. Participation in these organisations entails contributions to their administrative expenses and, in some cases, their functional activities. Total expenditure for these purposes in 1982-83 is estimated at $40.7m including $1O.9m for the United Nations regular budget, $4m for the World Health Organisation (WHO), $3.9m for the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), $3.5m for the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), $2.2m for the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and $1.5m for the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
As announced at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Melbourne in 1981, Australia will fund an office in New York for the use of Commonwealth South Pacific Island members of the United Nations which do not presently maintain delegations there. The estimated cost of this initiative in 1982-83 is $0.45m.
This heading also includes provision for cultural relations overseas and exchange visits, together with expenditures by the Australia-Japan Foundation, the Australia-China Council and the Australia-New Zealand Foundation.
The estimated reduction in outlays under this item arises because substantial expenditures in 1981-82 were associated with CHOGM.

EXTERNAL TERRITORIES

Under this item are shown the costs (net of revenue) of administering the three external territories of Cocos (Keeling), Christmas and Norfolk Islands. Expenditure in respect of the Australian Antarctic Territory is primarily for scientific purposes, and is shown under the function 'General and Scientific Research nec'. Expenditure in respect of other external territories is negligible, and has not been separated from the expenditure items within which it falls. The net outlay in respect of each of the three territories is shown below.

Cocos (Keeling) Islands Christmas Island Norfolk Island
TOTAL

1980-81 Actual
$m 4.5 O.ICr 0.5
4.9

1981-82 Actual
$m 5.3 1.5 0.5
7.3

1982-83 Estimate
$m 4.6 0.9Cr 0.5
4.3

Change
$m -0.7 -2.3
-3.0

The decrease in estimated net expenditure on the Cocos (Keeling) Islands in 1982-83 is mainly due to an expected increase in revenue from philatelic sales and the introduction of more efficient arrangements to reduce the cost of operating the shop and hostel on the Island. The gross costs of administering Christmas Island in 1982-83 are estimated at $5.5m and are recovered from Island revenue and the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission, except for an estimated cost of $O.3m associated with the Administrator and his immediate staff. A further amount of $1.1 m will be recovered from the Commission in 1982-83 in respect of expenditure in 1981-82.

282 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

Estimated net expenditure on Norfolk Island again includes an amount of $O.3m for the restoration and maintenance of historic structures.
GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE
Outlays on administrative costs of the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Australian Development Assistance Bureau and the Overseas Property Office of the Department of Administrative Services are estimated to increase by $22.4m in 1982-83 to $197.1m.
RECOVERIES AND REPAYMENTS
Recoveries and repayments are estimated at $8.3m in 1982-83. These include repayments in respect of loans provided to the Papua New Guinea and Fiji Governments on concessional terms under the overseas aid program.

D. GENERAL AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH NEC

This heading covers outlays on scientific research and development which cannot readily be classified under other functional categories. It therefore excludes the substantial elements of Commonwealth support for scientific, industrial and general research directed to specific fields such as defence technology, medicine, education and industry research and development which are accounted for elsewhere in this Statement. Activities included under this heading cover the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO), the Australian Atomic Energy Commission, general research grant schemes and a variety of other research programs and supporting services undertaken by Commonwealth departments and instrumentalities, all of which involve several functions and disciplines.
Net total outlays in 1982-83 for the items included in this General and Scientific Research function are estimated at $425.7m, an increase of 8.2% over 1981-82. The increase reflects general cost increases and the strengthening of support for a number of research activities.

Australian Atomic Energy Commission Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organization Antarctic Division Research Grants Australian Institute of Marine Science Anglo-Australian Telescope Board Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies Other Research and Science nec (net)
TOTAL GENERAL AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH NEC

1980-81 Actual
$m 29.5
228.4 23.4 18.2 5.2 1.5 2.4 5.9
314.5

1981-82 Actual
$m 37.8
293.5 21.8 20.1 5.7 1.7 2.6 10.3
393.6

1982-83 Estimate
$m 36.3
312.7 33.6 22.2 6.2 1.9 2.9 9.9
425.7

Change
$m - 1.5
+19.2 +11.9 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 - 0.4
+32.2

Australian Atomic Energy Commission
The Commission's primary function is the maintenance of a nuclear research establishment. It conducts scientific and technical research and investigations into matters associated with uranium and atomic energy (including the running of the HIFAR reactor) and the production and sale of radio-isotopes.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 283

The Budget provision of $36.3m represents a decrease of 4% on 1981-82 outlays of $37.8m, reflecting the transfer of some elements of non-nuclear energy research from the Commission to the new CSIRO Institute of Energy and Earth Resources which is co-located with the Commission at Lucas Heights. Excluding the effect of this transfer, the 1982-83 Budget provision for the Commission represents a net increase of some 12% (or $4m) over outlays in 1981-82. Much of this increase (over $2m) reflects the full year impact of salary and wage rises awarded during 1981-82.
The 1982-83 provision allows $1.3m for the continuation of some buildings and works commenced in recent years, $1.4m for the third year of the five year safety upgrading program of the HIFAR reactor, and $lm towards the building of a pilot fabrication plant to produce and test the radioactive waste disposal technique of SYNROC. Once-only increases of $0.7m for the purchase of stores items and $lm for the purchase and update of plant and equipment are also provided for.
The Budget provision for the Commission is determined having regard to its receipts from other sources including funds from the sale of radio-isotopes and other items such as computer software. The Commission regularly reviews the prices charged for its products and services with a view to fully recovering costs from the private sector. The Commission also receives funds from the National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Program, referred to under the function 'Industry Assistance and Development' .

Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
CSIRO is the largest research organization in Australia, employing more than 7300 staff. Its main role is to carry out programs of predominantly strategic research, which includes collaborative, commissioned and other forms of joint projects with Government bodies and Australian industry. CSIRO is organised into five Institutes-Animal and Food Sciences, Biological Resources, Energy and Earth Resources, Industrial Technology and Physical Sciences-together with a Bureau of Scientific Services.
Direct appropriations to CSIRO in 1982-83 total $312.7m. This includes $249.4m for operations, $7m for capital items, $5.4m for repairs and maintenance to the Organization's plant and equipment and buildings and $50.9m for major capital works projects. The figure for major capital works projects makes provision of $35m for the Australian National Animal Health Laboratory (ANAHL), $4.8m for a laboratory complex for the Division of Chemical Technology at Clayton, Victoria and $3.5m for commencement of the marine laboratories in Hobart. In addition, $0.8m is being provided in 1982-83 to allow construction to commence on the new Australia Telescope which is expected to cost $25m over a five-year period.
The net increase in appropriations of $19.2m reflects major increases of $16.1m for wage and salary costs, $4m for other price increases, $6.6m for the cost in 1982-83 of the new oceanographic research ship and $6.5m for the transfer of staff and functions from the Australian Atomic Energy Commission. The main offsets to these increases were the non-recurring additional payday in 1981-82 ($5m), reduced building and land acquisition outlays ($6.6m) and unspent funds arising from savings achieved during 1981-82 which are to be used to reduce the appropriation in 1982-83 ($4.3m).

284 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

After taking into account revenues ($10.8m) and an estimated reduction in cash balances ($5m), it is estimated the CSIRO will have total funds of $328.5m available in 1982-83 for its activities. Details of expenditure for operations and equipment and capital works and services financed from these sources are provided in the table below.

Research ProgramsAnimal and Food Sciences Biological Resources Energy and Earth Resources Industrial Technology Physical Sciences Scientific Services Miscellaneous
Head Office Capital Works and Services-
Construction of Research Vessel Construction of Australia Telescope Other Buildings, Works and Acquisitions Repairs and Maintenance

Actual 1981-82
$m
39.359 61.315 24.849 29.835 48.739
9.192 3.965 15.500
0.064
4.581 57.545
4.380
299.324

Estimate 1982-83
$m
45.365 63.102 35.730 32.747 53.724
9.659 4.043 16.308
6.600 0.465 4.397 50.936 5.400
328.476

In addition, the Organization also expects to receive $30m in 1982-83 ($29.4m in 1981-82) as industry contributions and other forms of private and Government support for specific research projects to bring its total estimated expenditure in 1982-83 to $358.5m ($328.7m in 1981-82).

Antarctic Division
The Antarctic Division of the Department of Science and Technology carries out research programs in the Antarctic and organises and provides logistic support in that region both for its own scientists and those from other institutions. The Australian National Antarctic Research Expeditions (involving each year about 140 expeditioners) operate from three stations on the Antarctic continent and one on Macquarie Island. The research programs focus mainly on the fields of atmospheric physics, cosmic ray physics, glaciology, biology, medical science, geology and geophysics, with increasing emphasis being given to marine research in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean.
Expenditure in 1982-83 is estimated at $33.6m, up $11.9m or 54.5% on 1981-82. The increase is mainly due to the continuation of the Antarctic Rebuilding Program (an increase of $6.6m over 1981-82), and to a build-up of stocks and stores needed for Australia's Antarctic operations and research activities (an increase of $4.5m over 1981-82) .
Approval was given in 1980-81 to a 10 year rebuilding program in the Antarctic. The first stage was commenced in 1981-82 and its continuation will cost $5.2m in 1982-83. Initial works for Stage 2 of the Program will commence in 1982-83 at a cost of $5m.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 285

Research Grants
Total assistance for research grant schemes and fellowships is estimated to be $22.2m in 1982-83 ($20.1 m in 1981-82). This includes provision for the Australian Research Grants Scheme and Queen Elizabeth II Fellowships ($19.7m) which support research projects by teams and individuals in the physical, chemical, biological and earth sciences, in engineering and applied sciences and in the humanities and social sciences. In the field of marine science, $2.5m is being provided through the Queen's Fellowships and Marine Research Allocations Advisory Committee (whose main emphasis is presently on research related to the Great Barrier Reef). Expenditure on marine science research in the Antarctic and by the Australian Institute of Marine Science is separately identified.
Australian Institute ofMarine Science
The Institute collaborates with other institutions including the CSIRO and the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority in carrying out research in marine science. The Institute has its laboratory complex near Townsville and is directing its research mainly to tropical waters, particularly coral reefs.
Expenditure by the Institute in 1982-83 is estimated at $6.2m compared to $5.7m in 1981-82 (an increase of 9.1 %). The increase is mainly due to additional scientific and technical staff and the need for several large routine repairs and maintenance projects during the year.
Anglo-Australian Telescope Board This item provides for the Australian Government's contribution to the cost of
operations and instrument development of the Anglo-Australian 3.9 metre optical telescope at Siding Spring, NSW and its associated research facilities. The total cost of operations in 1982-83 (to be shared equally with the UK Government) is estimated at $3.8m.
Australian Institute ofAboriginal Studies
The Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies was established in 1964 to promote, encourage and assist studies and research in relation to Aboriginal people. The Institute also has a responsibility to monitor the social impact of uranium mining on Aboriginal communities in the Northern Territory. The provision for the Institute in 1982-83 is $2.9m.
An external review of the Institute's operations and its inter-relationship with other organisations commenced in 1981-82, and a report is expected to be presented to the Government towards the end of 1982.
Other Research and Science nec (net)
The estimated outlays in 1982-83 of $9.9m under this heading cover several activities associated with the support of scientific research and development in Australia. The net reduction of $OAm from 1981-82 arises because increases in outlays on various programs are more than offset by a reduction in net outlays for the Australian operation of NASA space tracking stations. This reduction arises because a substantial rundown in 1981-82 of US credit balances held in trust for this purpose, which constitutes an increase in outlays, will not recur this year.

286 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

The largest single item is the grant to the Standards Association of Australia ($2.6m). Other grants are being made to the Learned Academies ($0.6m), research associations ($1.3m) and the National Association of Testing Authorities ($0.8m). In addition, $0.5m is being provided for scientific and technical co-operation with several overseas countries and $0.3m for the recently established Committee of Inquiry into Commonwealth Laboratory Services and Facilities. A $120000 provision has been included for the Assistance to Inventors Scheme ($76000 in 1981-82). The increased provision for this scheme follows the Government's decision on the Report of the Committee to Review Productivity and Innovation Programs of the Department of Science and Technology.
Scientific service facilities provided for include the Australian LANDSAT Station (gross expenditure $2.7m in 1982-83). The increase from 1981-82 ($lm) relates to a requirement to provide additional computer software to enable the Station to continue to receive data from the new generation LANDSAT D satellite launched on 16 July 1982 and to an increase in the satellite fee charged by NASA. The remaining substantial expenditure is for the Australian Science and Technology Council (ASTEC) which advises the Government on matters involving science and technology policy. Expenditure in 1982-83 is estimated to be $0.8m.

E. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
This heading covers general administrative services not allocated to specific functions, and various common services provided for the general operations of Government. These outlays are estimated to increase by $120m or 9.7% in 1982-83 to $1363.3m.

Financial Affairs and Fiscal AdministrationCustoms and Excise Administration Taxation Administration Other
Total
Statistical Services General Administration of the ACT Other Administrative Services, nec Common Services-
Construction Services (net) Commonwealth Offices Printing and Publishing Property Management and Services Government Purchasing Rent Publicity Services Storage and Transport Services Other . . . . . . . .
Total
Net Superannuation Payments, nec Recoveries, nec
TOTAL ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

1980-81 Actual
$m
89.2 213.2
68.6
371.1
87.9 36.5 86.5
119.0 33.2
5.6 56.1
3.5 68.8 10.4 23.7
8.1
328.4
236.6 58.0Cr
1089.0

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

$m

$m

110.7 258.7
97.4

120.1 288.3
93.2

466.8

501.7

115.1

93.6

48.3

53.3

98.2

98.5

145.4 29.4
5.8 67.4 4.1 78.3 10.9 15.4
7.2

151.7 36.0 6.1 75.7 4.2 96.4 II.I 23.6 9.3

363.7

414.1

218.3 67.ICr

273.3 71.2Cr

1243.3

I 363.3

Change
$m
+ 9.4 + 29.6 - 4.1
+ 34.9
- 21.5 + 5.0 + 0.3
+ 6.4 + 6.6 + 0.3 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 18.1 + 0.1 + 8.2 + 2.1
+ 50.4
+ 55.1 - 4.2
+120.0

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 287

FINANCIAL AFFAIRS AND FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
Customs and Excise Administration
The estimated increase of $9.4m for 1982-83 mainly reflects a re-organisation of the Customs Bureau (including reclassification of positions) with a view to improvement in control activities; cost increases in administrative items, and estimated expenditure of $4.8m (up from $3m in 1981-82) to reimburse the Australian Postal Commission for the cost of assisting in the inspection of overseas mail. Provision has been made for an increase in outlays for furniture and fittings from $O.1m in 1981-82 to $0.9m in 1982-83 arising from the move of the Victorian Office of the Bureau of Customs into the Melbourne World Trade Centre. The Customs launch fleet will be further upgraded with the acquisition of replacement and new launches for coastal surveillance and port of entry work ($1.2m compared with $0.6m in 1981-82). The cost of computer services, associated with a computer re-equipment program, is estimated to increase from $3.4m in 1981-82 to $4m in 1982-83. Adelaide and Port Hedland airports will operate as international airports in 1982-83 and the additional cost of customs services at these locations is estimated at $O.4m.
Taxation Administration
The estimated cost of the operations of the Australian Taxation Office in 1982-83 is $288.3m, $29.6m greater than in 1981-82. The increase reflects increases in salary and administrative costs, as well as increased staffing levels and the implementation of a phased replacement and enhancement of computer facilities as part of an increase in the Office's capability to counter tax avoidance/evasion. Other
This heading includes outlays of the Departments of Finance and Treasury, the Auditor-General's Office and the Commonwealth Grants Commission. The $4.1m decrease in 1982-83 reflects a reduction of $8.3m in the provision for loan flotation expenses, mainly because of lower expected overseas loan raisings during 1982-83, partially offset by the cost of a special information campaign ($1.5m) concerning the economy, inflation, taxation and interest rates, and by cost increases for a range of administrative expenditures.
Following the adoption of a revised treatment for the Royal Australian Mint's Transactions, the profits from numismatic activities are now treated as a revenue item rather than offsets to outlays (see 'Appendix' to 'Budget Statements 1982-83').

STATISTICAL SERVICES
This provision is for outlays of the Australian Bureau of Statistics. The estimated overall decrease of $21.5m reflects the completion of the Census of Population and Housing undertaken on 30 June 1981 (down $25.9m), partially offset by an increase of $2.3m in the outlays on the Bureau's computer re-equipment program.

GENERAL ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACT
Outlays under this heading are for works and services of a general nature in the Australian Capital Territory undertaken by the Department of the Capital Territory and the National Capital Development Commission which cannot be readily classified under other functions.

288 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Estimated expenditure in 1982-83 includes salaries, allowances and overtime ($32m), administrative expenses ($4m), plant and equipment ($1.5m) and expenditure on works undertaken by the Department of the Capital Territory and the National Capital Development Commission ($9.2m).
Also included under this heading is expenditure from the ACT Community Development Fund (estimated at $4.2m in 1982-83) which provides for the disbursement of funds derived from ACT gambling sources to local welfare, cultural and community bodies.
OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES, NEC
Included here are the administrative expenses of the Departments of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Vice-President of the Executive Council; the Department of Home Affairs and the Environment (excluding environmental activities); the Central Office (excluding the productivity development function) and the Australian Government Analytical Laboratories of the Department of Science and Technology; and certain administrative expenditures of the Department of Administrative Services. Also included are expenditures related to the operational costs of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and the Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
The outlays of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet in 1981-82 included non-recurring salary and overtime expenditure of $O.8m for the Task Force established to plan and service the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting held in Melbourne in 1981.

COMMON SERVICES
Construction Services (net)
Outlays under this heading provide for the running costs of the construction function of the Department of Transport and Construction and include salaries, allowances and overtime ($112.8m), administrative expenses ($17.3m), plant and equipment ($5.5m) and consultants' fees ($17.9m). Consultancy costs relating to Defence works projects, which in previous years have been included under this heading, now appear under the Defence function.
Increases of $8m in salaries and allowances and $2.2m in consultants' fees are partially offset by an estimated reduction of $3.9m in expenditure on computing equipment and services, following the acquisition of major new computing facilities by the Department in 1981-82.
Commonwealth Offices
The major components of the 1982-83 estimate of $36m are $23.2m for the construction and $1 OAm for the maintenance of Commonwealth Offices. Significant construction projects, all of which are in the ACT, include the refurbishing and upgrading of the Robert Garran Offices, the Administrative Building and the ANZAC Park West Building, and construction of the Russell Drive Offices.
In addition, expenditure of $2m is planned in 1982-83 on the second year of a three year program to provide signs, improved access and specialised toilet facilities for disabled persons in Commonwealth buildings.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 289

Printing and Publishing
This heading covers the salaries, administrative and plant and equipment expenses of the Commonwealth's printing and publishing activities.

Property Management and Services
Costs associated with the maintenance and security of Commonwealth office accommodation and the property survey program for Commonwealth departments and authorities are included here.
Major components of the 1982-83 estimate of $75.7m are salaries and allowances ($24.7m), offices services ($19.4m), fitting-out work in leased office premises ($14.1m), and contract cleaning ($7.6m). The increase of $5.5m in the office services component largely reflects recent increases in electricity charges in the ACT and NSW. The increase of $3.1 m in expenditure on fitting-out work in leased premises is mainly attributable to the installation of a major computer for the Department of Social Security in Canberra, the fitting-out of the Department of Employment and Industrial Relation's premises for implementation of the Job Bank Scheme and the fitting-out of the World Trade Centre in Melbourne for occupancy by the Departments of Trade and Resources and of Industry and Commerce.

Government Purchasing
The salaries and allowances of staff of the Purchasing Division of the Department of Administrative Services account for $4m of the estimated expenditure of $4.2m in 1982-83. Salaries and administrative expenses relating to defence purchasing activities, which were previously recorded under this heading, now appear under the function 'Defence'.

Rent

This item provides for rental costs for office and other non-residential accommo-

II

dation leased for civil departments. The increase of $18.lm (or 23% on 1981-82) re-

'" i1

flects the full year cost of new leases taken up in 1982-83 ($5m), increased rentals on

existing leases ($lO.5m) and proposed expenditure on new leases in 1982-83 ($2.6m).

The last item includes provision for major leases of office space for the Departments of Trade and Resources and of Industry and Commerce in the World Trade Centre in Melbourne, and for staff of the Departments of Transport and Construction, Aviation, and Employment and Industrial Relations to be transferred from Melbourne to Canberra. Provision is also included for leases of space for additional staff and computer facilities approved for the Department of Social Security.

Publicity Services The 1982-83 estimate for these outlays includes provlslon for the publicity
programs undertaken by the Australian Information Service ($6.3m) and support for Film Australia ($4.8m).
Storage and Transport Services This item provides for the operation of the Department of Administrative Services'
vehicle fleet, removal and storage costs associated with the transfer of civilian employees, and bulk storage facilities for civilian departments.

290 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The estimate for 1982-83 provides $12m for vehicle purchases (mainly replacement vehicles) and includes provision for the self-drive vehicle fleet previously managed by the Department of the Capital Territory, the responsibility for which was transferred from that Department with effect from 1 July 1982. The cost of this fleet before 1982-83 is shown under the heading 'Public Transport Equipment in the ACT' in the function 'Transport and Communication'.
Other
Included here are payments to Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd for food and beverage services ($3.9m, including $O.5m for (losts associated with the transfer of non-departmental food services to the private sector); expenditure for the construction and purchase of staff housing for Commonwealth public servants in remote localities and the Northern Territory, and for the purchase of houses from officers compulsorily transferred from Melbourne to Canberra ($3.6m); and the costs of printing Australian Government Gazettes ($1.8m).

NET SUPERANNUATION PAYMENTS, NEe
This item covers the cost of superannuation benefits payable under the Superannuation Act 1922 and the Superannuation Act 1976 to or in respect of former employees of the Commonwealth (excluding Defence Force personnel and employees covered by arrangements with the Australian Postal and Telecommunications Commissions). In addition, it reflects the cost of benefits paid under the South Australian and Tasmanian superannuation schemes to or in respect of former employees of the South Australian and Tasmanian Railways.
The figures shown are net of estimated receipts from Commonwealth authorities as employer contributions towards the accruing cost of superannuation benefits for existing employees or as reimbursement of the employer share of benefits paid to former employees or their dependants.
The estimated increase of $55.1m in net superannuation payments for 1982-83 is due mainly to the cost, under the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme, of pension increases payable from July 1982 to existing pensioners and an expected net increase in the number of pensioners. Payments for former railway workers for South Australia and Tasmania are estimated to increase by $2.2m in 1982-83.
Arising from the Government's decision to take over the Australian National Airlines Commission's unfunded superannuation liabilities for groundstaff and flight engineers belonging to the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme, the Commission, once it becomes a public company, will cease reimbursing the Commonwealth in full for the employer share of superannuation benefits paid to its former employees or their dependants. Instead the Commission will, for staff who remain contributors to the Commonwealth scheme, pay employer superannuation contributions to the Commonwealth at the same rate at which it contributes to its own industry-related superannuation schemes. This change is expected to result in a reduction of $5.5m in superannuation contributions from the Commission in 1982-83.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 291

RECOVERIES, NEC
Recoveries shown under this heading include administrative charges for work undertaken by the Department of Transport and Construction, rent from Commonwealth property, charges for the hire of computers, audit fees, customs fees, payroll charges and commission, legal costs and fines recovered as a result of court action by the Australian Taxation Office and other miscellaneous receipts.
Computer hire receipts by the Department of Administrative Services are expected to increase by $2m in 1982-83. This mainly reflects the commencement of rental payments for the computer on hire to the Defence Research Centre, Salisbury, and an increase in the expected level of usage of the Australian Federal Police computer by client departments and authorities.
Recoveries by the Department of Transport and Construction, which are based on costs incurred, are estimated to increase by $1.8m following the wage and salary increases awarded in 1981-82.

10. NOT ALLOCATED TO FUNCTION
Outlays not allocated to specific functions comprise those payments to the States, the Northern Territory and local government authorities which are not elsewhere classified, natural disaster relief, public debt interest payments, and a bulk allowance for prospective increases in wages and salaries of Commonwealth Government employees, other than Defence Service personnel and employees paid from votes included in the Defence function.

A. PAYMENTS TO OR FOR THE STATES, THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES, NEC

Outlays under this heading comprise general revenue funds for the States, State

Government Loan Council programs (including amounts which may subsequently be

allocated for welfare housing by the States), assistance related to State debt, assistance

for local government and outlays for natural disaster relief. Similar forms of assistance

in respect of the Northern Territory are also included. These payments, which mainly

constitute general purpose Commonwealth financial assistance, amount to 67.9% of

li

total Budget funds to be made available to the States in 1982-83 and 80.2% of those to

III

be made available to the Northern Territory. Most specific purpose payments to the States and the Northern Territory are not included under this heading, being classified elsewhere in this statement under the relevant functional headings. Details of total pay-

iIlii)I!:~'

ments to the States and the Northern Territory are provided at the end of this section.

292 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Payments to or for the States necGeneral Revenue AssistanceTax Sharing Grants Grants in lieu of Health Payments Special Grants
Total
State Government Loan Council ProgramsCapital Grants Advances Sinking Fund Receipts
Total
Assistance Related to State Debt Assistance to Local Government-
Tax Sharing Grants
Total Payments to or for the States nec
Payments to NT necGeneral Revenue AssistanceTax Sharing Grant . . . Grant in lieu of Health Payments Additional Assistance Grant in lieu of Uranium Royalties Payments for Furlough and Recreation Leave General Capital AssistanceGrant Advance Repayments
Total General Purpose Assistance
Debt Charges Assistance Assistance to Local Government-
Tax Sharing Grants
Total Payments to NT nec
Natural Disaster ReliefPayments for Natural Disaster Relief Repayments
Total Payments for Natural Disaster Relief
TOTAL PAYMENTS TO THE STATES, THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES NEC

1980-81 Actual
$m

1981-82 Actual
$m

1982-83 Estimate
$m

Change $m

6011.3 6.7
6018.0

6689.7 I 137.2
58.5
7885.4

7772.5

+1082.8

987.4

149.8

19.6Cr

78.2

8740.2

+ 854.8

435.8 871.5 203.4Cr
1 103.8
55.1
300.8
7477.7

435.8 871.5 213.6Cr
1093.7
57.0
350.9
9387.0

457.7

+ 21.9

915.3

+ 43.8

223.8Cr

10.3

1 149.2

+ 55.5

59.0

+ 1.9

424.5

+ 73.6

10 372.9

+ 985.9

274.2 20.0 0.9
38.3 76.6 0.9Cr 409.1 12.4
1.4 422.9
80.3 IO.4Cr 69.9

315.1 26.1 20.0 1.2 1.5
38.3 76.6
1.8Cr
476.9
21.8
1.7
500.4
29.8 9.0Cr
20.8

386.0 23.5 15.0 3.4 0.6

+ 70.9 2.6 5.0
+ 2.3 0.9

40.2

+ 1.9

80.4

+ 3.9

2.7Cr

0.9

546.5

+ 69.6

37.9

+ 16.1

2.0

+ 0.4

586.4

+ 86.0

8.5

21.3

14.7Cr

5.7

6.2Cr

27.0

7970.6

9908.2

10953.0

+1044.9

STATES' GENERAL REVENUE FUNDS
The Commonwealth provides general revenue funds (comprising tax sharing grants, grants in lieu of health payments and special grants) to the States for purposes determined by them. A total of $8740.2m, representing an increase of $854.8m or 10.8% compared with 1981-82, is expected to be provided in this form to the States in 1982-83.
Tax Sharing Grants Tax sharing grants make up the bulk of general revenue assistance to the States.
From 1959-60 financial assistance grants were determined under a formula which took

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 293

into account increases in the States' population and average wages in the economy as a whole, and a further 'betterment' factor.
.In 1976-77, these arrangements were replaced by a Commonwealth undertaking to provide the States with a fixed percentage of personal income tax collections. Under the new arrangement, the States became entitled to receive: in 1976-77, 33.6% of Commonwealth net personal income tax collections (excluding the revenue effects of any special surcharges or rebates applied by the Commonwealth) in that year; in 1977-78, a fixed amount of$4336.lm; and, in each subsequent year, 39.87% of personal income tax collections in the preceding year.
These 'Stage l' arrangements included a 'guarantee' provision to ensure that each State's entitlement in any year would not be less in absolute terms than in the previous year. There was also a supplementary undertaking (the 'formula guarantee') which ensured that, in the four years 1976-77 to 1979-80, the States' entitlements would not be less than the amount which would have been yielded by the financial assistance grants formula in force before 1976-77.
In anticipation of the expiry of the 'formula guarantee' on 30 June 1980, the Premiers' Conference in December 1979 adopted interim arrangements for the determination of the States' tax sharing entitlements for 1980-81, pending the outcome of a comprehensive review of the tax sharing agreement. It was agreed that the tax sharing arrangements would be supplemented by a 'real terms' guarantee. That is, in 1980-81 the States were to receive 39.87% of net personal income tax collected in 1979-80, distributed according to existing tax sharing relativities, with the guarantee by the Commonwealth that each State would receive no less in real terms than in 1979-80. This guarantee was invoked for three States-Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania.
At the Premiers' Conference in May 1981 new tax sharing arrangements were announced based on total tax collections rather than personal income tax collections. The move to a total tax base involved a transitional year in 1981-82 in which a new starting point was established for determining the percentage of total tax collections to be provided to the States in 1982-83 and later years. These changes were embodied in the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981. Further changes, resulting from consideration of the Commonwealth Grants Commission's 1981 Report on State Tax Sharing Entitlements, were determined at the June 1981 Premiers' Conference.
States' tax sharing grants in 1981-82-including additional grants determined at the June 1981 Premiers' Conference-totalled $6689.7m, or 11.3% more than in 1980-81. The total included a special Commonwealth Contribution of $60m to assist States to move towards new relativities which, following a further review and report by the Grants Commission, were expected to' be adjusted in favour of the three most populous States.
From 1982-83, total States' tax sharing grants are to be fixed at 20.72% of the previous year's total tax collections (as defined in the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981). This figure is calculated by taking total tax sharing grants in 1981-82 as a proportion of total tax collections in 1980-81. Estimated tax sharing grants to the States in 1982-83 on this basis will be $7772.5m, or 16.2% higher than 1981-82.
The June 1982 Premiers' Conference agreed to new tax sharing relativities, based on the Commonwealth Grants Commission's 1982 Report on State Tax Sharing Grants

294 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

which recommended an increase in the shares for the more populous States and a reduction for the less populous States compared with their existing shares. The Commission's assessed relativities were adjusted, for the duration of the present arrangements, to allow for an increase in South Australia's and Tasmania's relativities so that the benefits those States obtain under continuing hospital cost sharing are preserved. In addition, it was decided that:
- the Commission's assessed relativities, modified as above, will be phased-in evenly over the three years ending 1984-85;
- the tax sharing payments that would have been made to South Australia and Tasmania (about $79m in 1982-83) under existing relativities in consideration of the 1975 transfer of their railways to the Commonwealth should not automatically be redistributed among the States on an equalisation basis, but should be deducted from the tax sharing grants pool and be made available to assist in phasing-in the new relativities;
- an amount corresponding to the contribution the Commonwealth made available in 1981-82 towards assisting the adjustment to new relativities (which has now escalated to about $70m) should be deducted from the tax sharing grants pool and be made available to assist in phasing-in the new relativities;
- the total funds set aside from the pool in 1982-83 will be used in the first place to fund a guarantee that each State's tax sharing grant will increase by no less than 2% in real terms in 1982-83, and 1% in real terms in each of 1983-84 and 1984-85 (the tax sharing legislation expires at the end of 1984-85); and
- any portion of these funds which is not required to fund this guarantee will be distributed between all the States on the basis of the phased relativities effective each year.
A condition of the new arrangements is that no special grants will be paid during the phasing-in period.
Grants in Lieu ofHealth Payments
Effective from 1 July 1981, New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory have been receiving, under the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981, general purpose financial assistance identified for health in lieu of specific purpose assistance previously provided on a cost-shared basis for hospital operating costs, community health and school dental services. South Australia and Tasmania have continued to receive specific purpose assistance for hospital operating costs under the Hospital Cost Sharing Agreements (see the function 'Health' above) and a separate special health grant under the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 in lieu of the assistance previously provided to both States for community health and school dental services. Both South Australia and Tasmania have been given the option to abrogate their Hospital Cost Sharing Agreements at any time before their expiry on 30 June 1985 and accept general purpose assistance on the same basis as the other States and the Northern Territory. As set out in the following paragraphs, $972.7m is payable to the four non-cost-sharing States, $23.5m to the Northern Territory, and $14.7m payable to South Australia and Tasmania to replace previous specific purpose provisions for the community health program and the school dental scheme in those two States.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 295

Entitlementsfor Health Grants
The entitlement of the States (other than South Australia and Tasmania) and the Northern Territory for health grants in 1982-83 is calculated by increasing the amount of similar assistance for 1980-81 by the increase in the All Groups Consumer Price Index (Six State Capitals Weighted Average) from the March Quarter 1980 to the March Quarter 1982 (to approximate the same real level) and then deducting from that sum an amount equal to 100% of the Commonwealth's assessment of the capacity of the States and the Northern Territory to raise additional revenue in 1982-83 from prescribed charges.
The four relevant States have a total entitlement for health grants in 1982-83 estimated at $972.7m; the Northern Territory is similarly entitled to an estimated $23.5m. (The amounts of similar assistance in respect of 1980-81 on which these figures are based have been finalised for Victoria, Western Australia and the Northern Territory. Final agreement has not been reached with New South Wales and Queensland in respect of payments for hospital cost sharing in 1980-81.)
The Commonwealth has reviewed its initial assessment of each relevant State's and the Northern Territory's capacity to raise additional revenue in 1981-82 (commencing 1 September 1981) and in a full year from certain prescribed charges for patients other than eligible pensioners, the disadvantaged as defined, and their dependants. The charges were:
- $80 per day for shared ward accommodation, $110 per day for private room accommodation;
- $15 for each outpatient occasion of service; and
- average actual bed-day costs in the previous year for compensatable inpatients.
This review resulted in reduced 1981-82 revenue assessments for Victoria ($3.8m), Western Australia ($4.6m) and the Northern Territory ($4.8m), and reduced full year revenue assessments (to be applied in 1982-83) for Queensland ($0.8m) and the Northern Territory ($6.6m).
South Australia and Tasmania, in addition to their entitlements to cost-sharing payments under Section 30 of the Health Insurance Act 1973, have entitlements for general purpose financial assistance to replace the specific purpose assistance previously provided for the community health program and school dental services in both those States. The entitlements of these States for 1982-83, estimated at $14.7m, have been calculated by increasing the amount of similar assistance for 1980-81 by the increase in the All Groups Consumer Price Index (Six State Capitals Weighted Average) from the March Quarter 1980 to the Marth Quarter 1982.

Distribution ofHealth Grantsfor 1982-83
Distribution of the 1981-82 grants reflected the State allocations in effect at 30 June 1981, in respect of the specific purpose health assistance that the general grants replaced. The Government, after considering the Commonwealth Grants Commission's Report on State Tax Sharing and Health Grants 1982, decided that the distribution of the 1982-83 health payments will be on the same basis as the 1981-82 payments.

296 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Health Grants/or 1983-84 and 1984-85
The aggregate entitlement of the four States and the Northern Territory to grants for 1983-84 and 1984-85 respectively will be increased in proportion to the ratio of the total amount of taxes (as defined in the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981) collected by the Commonwealth in the previous year to the total amount of taxes collected by the Commonwealth in the year preceding that.
Special Health Grants to South Australia and Tasmania/or 1983-84 and 1984-85
The amount of special health grants to South Australia and Tasmania (not including payments for hospital operating costs under Section 30 of the Health Insurance Act 1973) will be separately adjusted for 1983-84 and 1984-85 on the same basis as the aggregate entitlements for the other four States and the Northern Territory. Each of the States' entitlements are, however, separately determined under the legislation until 1984-85 and so are not subject to further determinations on relativities among the other States and the Northern Territory for the health grants.
Conditions attaching to Health Grants to the States (other than South Australia and Tasmania) and the Northern Territory
The health funding arrangements described above reflect the Commonwealth Government's objectives that:
- the States, having the constitutional responsibility for the provision of health services, should be able to determine their own priorities for funding the different elements of their health systems;
- individuals who can afford to pay for their health services should be required to contribute accordingly, either through health insurance or by personal payment; and
- government assistance should be directed primarily to those in the community who are in genuine need.
Commonwealth health funding from 1 July 1981 (other than for hospitals in South Australia and Tasmania) has been as additional general purpose financial assistance subject to minimum conditions. At least for the first few years, the additional financial assistance will be identified for health (although there is no requirement that it be allocated by the States for health purposes), but ultimately the assistance may be absorbed into the tax sharing payments to the States and the Northern Territory.
Relevant conditions applying to the grants are that States (other than South Australia and Tasmania) and the Northern Territory will continue to provide hospital accommodation and services without charge to certain categories of eligible persons including:
- pensioners and sickness beneficiaries with Pensioner Health Benefits and Health Benefits cards, and their dependants; and
- persons who qualify for Health Care cards, viz:
- migrants and refugees who have been authorised by means of an entry permit in their travel documents to remain indefinitely in Australia, and their dependants, during the first six months of residence;
- persons receiving unemployment or special benefits who meet the Pensioner Health Benefits income test, and their dependants; and
- persons on specified low incomes and their dependants.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 297

The States and the Northern Territory are free to determine the level and incidence of hospital charges to apply to persons other than those in the prescribed categories above.
Special Grants Under the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973, the States are entitled to
apply for special grants which are paid by the Commonwealth on the recommendation of the Commonwealth Grants Commission. In 1981-82, on the basis of the Commission's recommendation, Queensland received special grants totalling $58.5m, consisting of an advance (or interim) grant of $25m in respect of 1980-81, and a completion grant of $33.5m in respect of 1979-80.
The Grants Commission has now completed its final assessment of the special grant for Queensland for the year 1980-81. It has recommended a negative completion grant of $19.6m. The Commonwealth Government has accepted the recommendation.
As announced by the Treasurer, it was agreed at the June 1982 Premier's Conference that there will be no applications by the States for special grants in the years 1982-83 to 1984-85.

STATE GOVERNMENT BORROWING PROGRAMS
Set out in the following table are details of approved 1982-83 Budget and off-Budget borrowings under Loan Council control, comprising the State Government Program and the borrowing program for State semi-government larger authorities, including the infrastructure program but excluding electricity authorities (which have been freed from Loan Council borrowing control in the domestic market). Also shown are those borrowings expected to be undertaken in 1982-83 by State smaller authorities, which borrow outside Loan Council programs.

Loan CouncilState Government Program
Borrowing Programs for State Semi-GovernmentLarger Authorities (non-electricity), including infrastructure Smaller Authorities
Total

1981-82 Actual
$m
1307.2

1982-83 Estimate
$m
1438.0

919.5 501.4
2728.1

I 046.4 560.3
3044.7

Change

$m

%

+130.8

+10.0

+126.9 + 58.9
+316.6

+13.8 + 11.7
+ 11.6

State Government Loan Council Program
The Commonwealth underwrites the State Government Loan Council Program by raising loans on its own account and paying the proceeds to the States from its Budget.
At its June 1982 meeting, Loan Council approved, as part of a total 'Works and Housing Program', a State Government Loan Council Program of $1438m (10% more than the 1981-82 figure of $1307.2m). Of the $130.7m increase in the 1982-83 program, $65m is to take the form of a grant which is earmarked for expenditure on welfare housing. This grant, which will be subject to the normal terms and conditions applying to welfare housing grants made under the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement, is shown in the function 'Housing'. Of the remaining $1373m, the States will be free to

298 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

nominate additional amounts from their State Government Programs for the purpose of welfare housing, subject to the continued provision from their own resources of the same level of welfare housing funding as in 1981-82. Such nominated additional .amounts will be subject to the normal terms and conditions of the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement.
In line with recent practice, $915.3m (or two-thirds) of the unearmarked Program of $1373m will be interest-bearing advances and $457.7m (or one-third) will be by way of interest-free capital grants from the Commonwealth.

Electricity Authorities At its June 1982 meeting, Loan Council agreed to the major electricity authorities
being permitted to borrow outside Loan Council constraints for a trial period of three years. Under the arrangements:
- the level of borrowings by major electricity authorities as presently constituted, and the interest rates and terms and conditions of these borrowings, will be determined by the respective Governments (individually, or collectively if desired);
- borrowing programs of local and semi-government authorities, other than borrowings by electricity authorities, will continue to be determined annually in the usual way by Loan Council;
- terms and conditions for borrowings by non-electricity authorities will continue to be subject to Loan Council control; and
- the amounts and terms and conditions of overseas borrowings by all authorities, including electricity authorities, will continue to be subject to approval by Loan Council.
Loan Council also agreed that the freeing of electricity authorities would be subject to the following conditions:
- the respective Governments would refrain from adding to the existing functions of their electricity authorities;
- there would be no diminution in the use of internal funding to finance investment by electricity authorities;
- each Government agrees to provide to Loan Council full, regular and timely information on borrowings by all authorities including electricity authorities;
- the electricity authorities are to publish - financial statements in line with normal commercial practice, including sources of funds to finance capital outlays;
- details of future tariffs (subject to preserving the confidentiality of certain commercial agreements, from time to time, where necessary);
- details of capital outlays and projections of investment programs;
- the electricity authorities are to be subject to published audit; and
- Governments that impose controls or restrictions on investments by their institutions in securities issued by authorities of other States agree to remove such controls or restrictions.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 299

States' Larger Authorities Program (including Infrastructure)
At its June 1982 meeting, Loan Council approved a borrowing program for the State larger semi-government authorities, excluding the major electricity authorities, of $1046.4m for 1982-83. This total (which is not reflected in the Budget) includes an amount of $833m for the basic element of the States' larger semi-government authorities program, $45.2m for temporary special additions, and $168.2m for previously approved (non-electricity) infrastructure projects.
The infrastructure program was introduced in 1978-79 to facilitate borrowings for economically viable projects that have a special significance for national development and are. for the provision of services of kinds normally provided by government or public utility enterprises which cannot reasonably be accommodated within the resources made available under 'normal' Loan Council programs, and which require outlays relatively quickly.
No borrowings were approved in respect of new infrastructure project proposals but individual States are free to determine the allocation for infrastructure among approved projects.
The distribution of the 1982-83 States' larger (non-electricity) authorities program is set out in the following table:

1981-82 Larger (Non-electricity) Authorities

1982-83 Larger (Non-electricity) Authorities

InfraBasic structure Special Program Program Additions

InfraBasic structure Special Total Program Program Additions

Total

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania
Total

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

294.3

62.9

20.0 377.2

323.7

66.4

390.1

241.9

30.9

20.0 292.8

266.1

23.7

20.0 309.8

163.3

163.3

179.6

60.0

7.0 246.6

25.8

25.8

28.4

4.5 32.9

30.2

1.6

26.6 58.4

33.2

8.0

13.7 54.9

1.8

2.0

3.8

2.0

IO.I

12.1

757.3

97.4

66.6 921.3

833.0

168.2

45.2 1046.4

States' Smaller Authorities Program
Loan Council agreed to increase from $1.2m to $1.5m the annual limit to which smaller authorities can borrow individually without requiring a Loan Council approved program. In addition, it approved working arrangements that will allow States to establish central borrowing authorities to raise funds on behalf of, inter alia, smaller authorities.

ASSISTANCE RELATED TO STATE DEBT
Under the Financial Agreement the Commonwealth is to pay $15.2m to the States each year until 1985 as a contribution towards interest payable on their debt. The Commonwealth also makes sinking fund contributions under the Agreement in respect of State debt; these payments are estimated at $43.8m in 1982-83.

300 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

ASSISTANCE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Under the tax sharing arrangements introduced in 1976-77, the Commonwealth provides funds to the States for general purpose assistance to local government authorities. The assistance is provided as a proportion of Commonwealth net personal income tax collections in the preceding year. The proportion applying from 1976-77 to 1978-79 was 1.52%. This proportion was increased to 1.75% in 1979-80, and to 2% from 1980-81. These grants are estimated to increase by $73.6m, or 21 %, to $424.5m in 1982-83.

PAYMENTS TO THE NORTHERN TERRITORY NEC
Under the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978, the Legislative Assembly of the Northern Territory has power, with the assent of the Administrator or the Governor-General, to make laws for the peace, order and good government of the Territory. Ministers of the Territory have executive authority in respect of specified functions of a State-type nature. An outline of the financial arrangements applying to the Northern Territory is provided in Chapter V of Budget Paper No.7, Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities, 1982-83. Under the Memorandum of Understanding agreed to by both Governments, Commonwealth financial assistance to the Northern Territory has been on a State-type basis since 1979-80.
The main payments to be made to the Territory in 1982-83 which are not included under other functional headings are described below.
Tax Sharing Grant
The bulk of general purpose revenue assistance is provided as a tax sharing grant. The Territory's grant changes each year in proportion to changes in the population of the Territory, and to changes in total Commonwealth tax collections (as defined in the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981) lagged by one year.
The Northern Territory's grant for 1982-83 is $386m, an increase of $70.9m or 22.5% on the 1981-82 amount.
Grants in Lieu ofHealth Payments
Under the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 the Northern Territory (along with New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia) receives a general purpose grant that replaces separate specific purpose assistance previously provided on a cost-shared basis for hospital operating costs, community health and school dental services. Details are provided under the heading 'States General Revenue Funds' within this function.
Additional Assistance
For the six years from 1979-80 the Northern Territory receives either a special grant after consideration of the recommendation of the Commonwealth Grants Commission, or an additional assistance grant, whichever is the greater. The additional assistance grant is determined by a formula contained in the Memorandum of Understanding and is $15m for 1982-83.
As the special grant recommended by the Commonwealth Grants Commission for 1982-83 was $11.8m, the additional assistance grant of$15m will apply.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 301

Grant in Lieu a/Uranium Royalties
The Commonwealth makes a grant to the Northern Territory Government of an amount in lieu of uranium royalties. The payment in 1982-83 is estimated at $3.4m, compared with $1.2m in 1981-82.
Payments in Respect 0/Recreation Leave and Furlough Entitlements
Commonwealth payments to the Territory in lieu of the accrued recreation leave and furlough entitlements of its officers who transferred to the Northern Territory Public Service are estimated at $0.6m for 1982-83. These payments are made on an emerging cost basis and the 1982-83 provision relates to entitlements of officers who retired or resigned in 1980-81.

General Capital Assistance
The Commonwealth provides general purpose capital funds to the Northern Territory on the same terms and conditions as apply to the State Government Loan Council programs. The level of general purpose capital assistance to the Territory changes each year in proportion to changes in State Government Loan Council programs, excluding any special additions. The level of assistance may, by agreement, be supplemented by temporary or permanent additions to the Territory program.
As a result of the 10% increase approved for State Government Loan Council programs, the Territory's capital program will increase to $126.3m in 1982-83. Of the $11.5m increase, $5.7m is to take the form of a grant earmarked for expenditure on welfare housing (under the normal terms and conditions of the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement). This amount is included under the function 'Housing'. In line with the arrangements for the States, one-third ($40.2m) of the remaining funds available to the Territory will be provided as grants and two-thirds ($80.4m) as advances from the Commonwealth at rates of interest and on similar terms to those applying to the States under the Financial Agreement. As is the case for the States, subject to certain maintenance of effort criteria, the Northern Territory will be able to nominate additional amounts from its 1982-83 capital program for expenditure on welfare housing. Such nominated additional amounts will be advanced on the same loan terms and conditions as apply to advances made under the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement.
Debt Charges Assistance
The Northern Territory pays debt charges to the Commonwealth on its general purpose capital advances. These charges are rising rapidly in the early years of self government and the Commonwealth is currently fully funding them by way of annual specific purpose payments to the Territory. The Budget provision of $37.9m is equal to the debt charges estimated to be incurred by the Territory in 1982-83 and is an increase of $16.1 m on the 1981-82 payment.
Assistance/or Local Government
A specific purpose payment of $2m will be provided to the Northern Territory for distribution as general purpose assistance among local government authorities in the Territory in 1982-83. This payment in 1982-83 represents an increase of $O.4m on

302 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

1981-82 and is in line with the agreement that annual payments are to vary in proportion to changes in net personal income tax collections (lagged by one year) and changes in the percentage of personal income tax payable to local authorities in the States.

NATURAL DISASTER RELIEF
Under arrangements introduced in 1978-79, the Commonwealth provides assistance on a $3 Commonwealth to $1 State basis for expenditures by each State (and the Northern Territory) on approved relief and restoration measures in cases of major disasters where such expenditures exceed the annual base amount established for each State in terms of its assessed financial capacity. In addition, the Commonwealth meets half of the cost of assistance provided by the States on approved measures for the immediate relief of personal hardship and distress.
A provision of $8.5m is made for natural disaster relief payments to the States and the Northern Territory in 1982-83. This provision relates to outstanding commitments and continuing assistance in respect of disasters occurring in previous years mainly in Queensland and the Northern Territory, and also makes some allowance for likely payments in respect of possible new disasters of which some, on the basis of past experience, can be expected to qualify for Commonwealth assistance in 1982-83.
Repayments
Repayments by the States of advances made for natural disaster relief are estimated at $14.7m in 1982-83. Commonwealth assistance is provided to the States as interestfree advances in respect of eligible expenditure by the States on those relief measures which take the form of concessional loans to individuals and business enterprises affected by natural disasters. These advances are normally repayable in eight equal annual instalments, with the first instalment due for repayment two years after the end of the financial year in which the advances were made.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 303

SUMMARY OF COMMONWEALTH PAYMENTS TO THE STATES, THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES
The payments described above are largely of a 'general purpose', as distinct from 'specific purpose', kind. Detailed information on both categories of payments is provided in Budget Paper No.7, Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities, 1982-83. Estimated total Commonwealth payments to the States and the Northern Territory in 1982-83 are summarised below.

Payments to or for the States and Local Authorities-
General Purpose Revenue Funds General Purpose Capital Funds
Total General Purpose
Specific Purpose AssistanceAssistance related to State Debt Education Commissions Housing-Advances Grants for Housing Roads Local Government Tax-sharing Hospital Cost-sharing Other
Total Specific Purpose
Total Payments to or for the States
Payments direct to Local Authorities
Gross Payments from the Budget to the States
Repayments
Net Payments to the States and Local Authorities
Payments to the Northern TerritoryGeneral Purpose Revenue Funds General Purpose Capital Funds Specific Purpose Funds
Gross Payments from the Budget to the Northern Territory
Repayments
Net Payments from the Budget to the Northern Territory
TOTAL NET PAYMENTS TO THE STATES. THE NORTHERN TERRITORY AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES

1980-81 Actual
$m

1981-82 Actual
$m

1982-83 Estimate
$m

Change

$m

%

6018.0 I 307.2
7325.3

7885.4 1307.2
9192.7

8 740.2 I 373.0
10 113.2

+ 854.8 + 65.8
+ 920.6

+ 10.8 + 5.0 + 10.0

55.1 2288.5
166.5 121.7 606.9 300.8 1273.3 522.0

57.0 2639.3
138.5 116.7 662.0 350.9 171.7 393.5

59.0 2917.3
138.7 179.5 859.3 424.5 186.5 634.3

+ 1.9
+ 278.0 + 0.2
+ 62.8 + 197.3 + 73.6 + 14.8 + 240.8

5334.9

4529.6

5399.1 + 869.5

12660.2 13722.3 15512.3 +1790.1

21.7

27.2

74.5 + 47.4

12681.9 13749.4 15586.9 + 1 837.4
314.5Cr 326.0Cr 319.2Cr + 6.7

+ 3.4
+ 10.5 + 0.1
+ 53.8 + 29.8 + 21.0
+ 8.6
+ 61.2
+ 19.2
+ 13.0
+174.2
+ 13.4
+ 2.1

12367.4 13423.5 15267.6 + 1844.2

295.1 114.9 144.7

363.8 114.9 145.0

428.6 120.6 187.3

+ 64.7 + 5.8
+ 42.2

+ 13.7
+ 17.8 + 5.0
+ 29.1

554.7 2.9Cr

623.7 4.1 Cr

736.5 + 112.7

5.2Cr

1.1

+ 18.1 27.6

551.7

619.7

731.3 + 111.6 + 18.0

12919.1

14043.1 15998.9 +1955.8

+ 13.9

304 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

B. PUBLIC DEBT INTEREST
Interest payments from the Budget sector to other sectors are recorded under this heading. Offset against gross interest payments on Commonwealth securities is interest on Commonwealth securities held by the various Commonwealth Government Trust Funds. Public debt interest in 1982-83 is estimated at $3243m, an increase of 12.6% on the outcome in 1981-82. As a proportion of total outlays, public debt interest in 1982-83 is estimated at 6.9% compared with 7.0% in 1981-82.

Gross Interest Paid on Commonwealth Securities Other Interest Payments
Gross Interest Payments . . . . . . . .
Interest Received on Government Securities and Cash Balances held by the Commonwealth Government on its own behalfLoan Consolidation and Investment Reserve Other . . . . . . . . . . . .
TOTAL PUBLIC DEBT INTEREST .

1980-81 Actual
$m 2714.1
7.8
2721.9

1981-82 Actual
$m 3010.4
3.8
3014.3

1982-83 Estimate
$m 3350.3
2.8
3353.1

Change
$m +339.9 - 1.0
+ 338.9

I 32.0Cr 28.6Cr
2561.3

118.6Cr 14.8Cr
2881.0

JOO.3Cr 9.8Cr
3243.0

+ 18.3
+ 4.9
+362.0

Gross Interest Paid on Commonwealth Securities
Recorded under this heading is interest paid on all Commonwealth securities including Treasury Bonds, Australian Savings Bonds, Treasury Notes, Treasury Bills and Income Equalisation Deposits.
The Commonwealth securities include those issued on behalf of the States and certain Commonwealth authorities. Reimbursement of interest paid on these Commonwealth securities by the States and the relevant authorities is recorded as receipts under the heading 'Interest, Rent and Dividends' (see Statement No.4).
The estimated increase in gross interest payments on Commonwealth securities in 1982-83 amounts to $339.9m (11.3%) compared with an increase of $296.3m (10.9%) recorded in 1981-82.
The effect on interest payments in a particular year of securities issued in that year depends in part on the type of security issued and the timing of borrowing within the year. For example, the rise in public debt interest payments in 1981-82 was due largely to the high proportion of financing raised through the sale of Treasury Notes and the increased interest rates applying to these securities. Treasury Notes are short-term securities issued at a discount and repayable at par, so that the interest cost falls within the financial year of issue. The increase estimated for 1982-83, however, reflects the full year impact of the higher rates of interest applying to other new raisings in 1981-82 and the interest liability on estimated raisings in the first half of 1982-83.

Other Interest Payments
The main items under this heading for 1982-83 are interest paid by the Commonwealth on trustee moneys lodged with it at call ($1.5m) and interest payments on borrowings from private lenders by the ACT Commissioner for Housing ($0.3m).

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 305

Loan Consolidation and Investment Reserve (LCIR)
Interest is received by the LCIR on investments in Commonwealth securities which were issued mainly in Special Loans to assist with the financing of State Loan Council programs. These amounts, which represent the receipt of interest by the Commonwealth from itself (through one of its Trust Accounts), are offset against gross interest payments, in order to record only public debt interest payments to other sectors. The fall in estimated interest receipts in 1982-83 reflects a reduction in the LCIR portfolio holding of securities.
Other
This item comprises interest received by other Commonwealth Trust Funds on their investments in Commonwealth securities. These amounts also are deducted in arriving at public debt interest payments. The estimated decrease in these receipts for 1982-83 mainly reflects a change in the type of investments held by the Wheat Finance Fund from Commonwealth securities to fixed deposits.

C. ALLOWANCES FOR PROSPECTIVE WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES (NON-DEFENCE)
The individual appropriations for wages and salaries are calculated using the latest available wage and salary rates at the time the Budget is prepared, ie wage and salary rates ruling at the beginning of the financial year 1982-83. The expected costs of prospective increases in wage and salary rates during 1982-83 are taken into account by inclusion in the Budget estimates of a bulk allowance. Thus, a portion of the year on year increase in average wage and salary rates between 1981-82 and 1982-83 is included in the appropriations; the bulk allowance provides for the remainder.
The provision of $21 Om included under this heading relates to all wage and salary appropriations other than those recorded in the Defence function. A separate allowance is included in the Defence function.
These allowances are not appropriated at Budget time, but are included in the Budget estimates in order to produce a more accurate picture of prospective calls on the Budget. Additional requirements arising from wage and salary rate increases will be considered by the Government during the year and reflected as appropriate in additional appropriations later in the year. The bulk allowances are necessarily approximate; estimation of the size of future wage and salary increases is always very difficult and, in the present circumstances, that of their timing even more so.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 305

Loan Consolidation and Investment Reserve (LCIR)
Interest is received by the LCIR on investments in Commonwealth securities which were issued mainly in Special Loans to assist with the financing of State Loan Council programs. These amounts, which represent the receipt of interest by the Commonwealth from itself (through one of its Trust Accounts), are offset against gross interest payments, in order to record only public debt interest payments to other sectors. The fall in estimated interest receipts in 1982-83 reflects a reduction in the LCIR portfolio holding of securities.
Other
This item comprises interest received by other Commonwealth Trust Funds on their investments in Commonwealth securities. These amounts also are deducted in arriving at public debt interest payments. The estimated decrease in these receipts for 1982-83 mainly reflects a change in the type of investments held by the Wheat Finance Fund from Commonwealth securities to fixed deposits.

C. ALLOWANCES FOR PROSPECTIVE WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES (NON-DEFENCE)
The individual appropriations for wages and salaries are calculated using the latest available wage and salary rates at the time the Budget is prepared, ie wage and salary rates ruling at the beginning of the financial year 1982-83. The expected costs of prospective increases in wage and salary rates during 1982-83 are taken into account by inclusion in the Budget estimates of a bulk allowance. Thus, a portion of the year on year increase in average wage and salary rates between 1981-82 and 1982-83 is included in the appropriations; the bulk allowance provides for the remainder.
The provision of $21 Om included under this heading relates to all wage and salary appropriations other than those recorded in the Defence function. A separate allowance is included in the Defence function.
These allowances are not appropriated at Budget time, but are included in the Budget estimates in order to produce a more accurate picture of prospective calls on the Budget. Additional requirements arising from wage and salary rate increases will be considered by the Government during the year and reflected as appropriate in additional appropriations later in the year. The bulk allowances are necessarily approximate; estimation of the size of future wage and salary increases is always very difficult and, in the present circumstances, that of their timing even more so.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 307

STATEMENT No.4-ESTIMATES OF RECEIPTS 1982-83

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

Measures-

Summary Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

308

(1) Measures Announced in 1981-82 . . . . . . .

309

(2) Measures Announced Immediately Prior to the Budget

310

(3) Budget Measures . . . . . . . . . . . .

314

Receipts Estimates-

Summary Table

319

Customs Duty

320

Excise Duty

320

Sales Tax

322

Income Tax

322

Individuals

322

Companies

323

Special Tax to Recover Evaded Company and Division 7 Tax

323

Tax on Certain Bank Transactions

323

Departure Tax . . . .

324

Estate and Gift Duties

324

Other Taxes, Fees and Fines

324

Interest, Rent and Dividends

325

Net Receipts from Government Enterprise Transactions

328

Sales of Existing Assets . . . . . . . . . .

328

Appendices-

I Taxation Expenditures

330

II Treasury Submission on Taxation Expenditures to

the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure

337

308 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

STATEMENT No.4-ESTIMATES OF RECEIPTS 1982-83
Total receipts in 1982-83 are estimated at $45 393m, an increase of 11.3 per cent over actual receipts in 1981-82. In the absence of the measures announced in and immediately prior to the Budget (identified in the table below), revenues would have increased by 10.8 per cent to $45 188m.

TAXAnON MEASURES
The table below shows the estimated revenue effects in 1982-83, and in a full year, of taxation measures announced immediately prior to and in the Budget. The table also identifies some measures announced in 1981-82 whose major revenue effects begin in 1982-83; notably, the home loan interest rebate scheme announced in March 1982. The dates of announcement of individual pre-Budget measures are shown in footnotes.

Estimated change in receipts

Measure

1982-83 Full-year(a)

(I) Announced in 1981-82

Personal Income Tax-

Rebate on home loan interest payments(b)

Exemption of war-time persecution pensions(c)

Deduction of gifts to various organisations and causes(d)

Business Income-

Leveraged leasing and similar arrangements(e)

(2) Announced Immediately Prior to the Budget

Business Income-

Exemption of tax on discounted securities(/)

New depreciation arrangements(g)

Additional taxation assistance to the shipping industry(h)

Measures to counter tax avoidance and evasion-

Company tax in 'bottom of the harbour' cases

Higher penalty for late payment of tax

Tax deductions from payments for labour and services

Other-

Coal Export Duty-removal of$I.OO/tonne rate

Removal of 2% revenue duty on imports of ships

Payroll tax (ACT)

........

(3) Announced in the Budget

Personal Income Tax-

Rate scale change

............

Increase in dependant rebates where there is a dependent child

Pensioner rebate . . . . . . . . . .

Withdrawal of zero rate step for non-residents

Rebate on home loan interest paymentsU)

Rebate on up to $1000 of dividend income

Exemption of benefits under approved employee share acquisition schemes

$m
-100
n.a.
n.a.
-5 -5
225 615
-25 -3 -4
-1468 -102 -7 I -55 -36

$m
-230
n.a.
n.a.
(g) n.a.
(i) (i) 500
-28 -3 -2
-2357 -210 -36 15 -185 -75 -5

n.a. not available. .. less than $0.5m. (a) Full-year estimates are the ultimate change in receipts that would have occurred if the measure had applied in
respect of the whole of 1982-83 to the estimated level of the relevant tax base in that year. (b) Announced on 18 March 1982. See also Budget measures. (c) Announced on 3 March 1982. (d) Announced at various times; see text hereunder. (e) Announced on 18 December 1981 and 24 June 1982. (/) Announced on 23 July 1982. (g) Announced on 19 July 1982. See illustrative cost table in explanatory notes below. (h) Announced on 29 July 1982. (i) Further, though lesser, amounts are expected to be recovered in subsequent years, further reducing the amount
of outstanding tax.
U) Additional cost of extended arrangements announced in the Budget, over the cost of the measure announced on
18 March 1982.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 309

Estimated change in receipts

Measure
Increase in the retention allowance for private companies Business Income-
Assessment as groups for certain companies . Measures to counter tax avoidance and evasion-
Division 7 tax in 'bottom of the harbour' cases Sales Tax-
Increase existing rates by 2t per cent Taxation at 7t per cent of certain goods now exempt Customs and Excise DutyRemove excise exemption on off-road distillate(k) Introduce excise rebate for off-road distillate for certain end uses(k)(/) Increase excise rates on-
Motor spirit and distillate(m) Tobacco products(n) Beer . . . . . . . . Other TaxesTax on certain bank transactions Stamp duties (ACT)

1982-83 Full-year(a)

$m

$m

-2

-30

n.a.

n.a.

30

(i)

370

490

44

105

253

304

-92

-128

180

214

98

125

113

135

80

200

n.a. not available. .. less than $0.5m. (k) Estimated effect of measures based on excise rate prevailing up to the Budget of 5.1 55cpl. (I) Includes one-off $13m gain to revenue in 1982-83 from timing effect of switch to rebate system. (m) Net of rebates for certain off-road end uses of distillate. (n) Includes $2.2m in 1982-83 and $3m in a full year for revenue from corresponding increases in customs duties on
imported products.

(1) MEASURES ANNOUNCED IN 1981-82

PERSONAL INCOME TAX

Home Loan Interest Rebates
On 18 March 1982 the Treasurer announced that a rebate at the standard rate of tax would apply to home loan interest payments after 1 July 1982, on the following basis:
- the interest payments must relate to a loan to purchase or construct a sole or principal residence situated in Australia;
- the interest must be attributable to the first five years of ownership of eligible residences;
- the scheme applies to a resident home owner who first occupied a home between 1 July 1977 and 30 June 1985;
- there are upper limits to the amount of rebate in each of the five years. The limit is $500 in the first year of occupancy where there is no dependent child or dependent student, reducing by $100 per year over the succeeding four years. Where there is a dependent child or dependent student, the per year limit is $200 higher;
- the rebate can be allowed for in PAYE instalments.
(See also comments on further measure announced in the Budget.)

WarTime Persecution Pensions
The Treasurer announced on 3 March 1982 that certain pension payments, derived on or after that date, related to war-time persecution or disablement, received by Australian residents from the Federal Republic of Germany and from the Netherlands are to be exempt from income tax.

31 0 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Gifts
The categories of gifts attracting income tax deductions which have been or are to be included in the income tax gift provisions since the last Budget are:
- gifts made on or after 5 February 1982 to a State or Territory Branch of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, including the Royal Queensland Society for the Prevention of Cruelty and the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals in the Northern Territory;
- gifts made on or after 1June 1982 to the Connellan Airways Trust;
- gifts made on or after 1 July 1982 to the Queensland Cultural Centre Trust;
- gifts made during the 1981-82 financial year to all public funds in Australia established and maintained for the relief of persons in Poland or Tonga; and
- gifts made during the 1981-82 and 1982-83 financial years to all public funds established and maintained in Australia exclusively for the relief of Falkland Islanders and the families of British servicemen affected by the Falkland Islands war.

BUSINESS INCOME
Leveraged Leasing and Similar Arrangements
The Treasurer announced on 18 December 1981 the Government's decision to withhold, with effect after that date, the investment allowance under arrangements having similar effects to leveraged leases where the real end user of the plant is a taxexempt body. On 24 June 1982 the Treasurer announced that, with effect from that date, equity participants in leveraged leasing and similar arrangements would be denied all the deductions attributable to the ownership of the associated plant (including depreciation and interest, and the investment allowance where applicable) in cases involving the use of:
- overseas plant by non-residents;
- plant already in use with the lessee or real end user at the time of effecting the lease, unless:
- the plant was put into use within the 6 months preceding the lease; and
- there was an arrangement at the time of first use to make it subject to a leveraged lease.
- Plant leased or in real end use in tax-exempt activities, including by tax-exempt public authorities.

(2) MEASURES ANNOUNCED IMMEDIATELY PRIOR TO THE BUDGET
BUSINESS INCOME
Discounted Securities On 23 July 1982 the Treasurer announced that legislation is to be introduced to
exempt from income tax profits made on redemption or sale of securities purchased at a

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 311

discount on or before 30 June 1982, other than profits made by traders or dealers and profits to which sections 26AAA, 26c or 26 (a) of the Income Tax Assessment Act apply. Profits on redemption or sale of securities purchased after 30 June 1982 will be regarded as assessable income.
New Depreciation Package
On 19 July 1982 the Prime Minister announced a new package of depreciation allowances and deductions in respect of expenditure on eligible plant, income-producing buildings and mine development.
(a) Plant Depreciation
New and second-hand plant (excluding structural improvements and motor vehicles of a kind previously excluded from the 18 per cent loading) acquired under a contract entered into, or the construction of which by the taxpayer commenced, after 19 July 1982 is to be depreciated on a prime cost basis at a rate of either 20 per cent or 33t per cent (referred to elsewhere as '5/3 depreciation'). The 20 per cent rate applies to eligible plant of a kind that under the previous system qualified for depreciation at a prime cost rate (including the 18 per cent loading) of 20 per cent or less, and the 33t per cent applies where the previous prime cost rate was greater than 20 per cent. The usual proportionate deduction applies where the plant is used in the production of assessable income for only part of an income year.
Where applicable, the investment allowance continues to be available and, in cases where the previous depreciation arrangements confer greater benefits than would be the case under the new scheme, a taxpayer is entitled to retain the previous arrangements.
(b) New Primary Production Plant
New primary production plant of a kind that previously qualified for the special 20 per cent prime cost depreciation rate is eligible for a 33t prime cost rate if acquired under a contract entered into, or where construction by the taxpayer commenced, after 19 July 1982. A full year deduction (at the 33t per cent rate) continues to be available in the year of first installation or use of the plant.
(c) Depreciation Allowancesfor New Non-Residential Income-Producing Buildings
Depreciation allowances in respect of new non-residential income-producing buildings are to be available at the rate of 2t per cent per annum on the same general basis as applies under the traveller accommodation buildings scheme. The allowances are available in respect of the construction cost of eligible buildings where construction of the buildings commenced after 19 July 1982. Building extensions and alterations commenced after that date qualify on a similar basis.
Residential buildings do not qualify under the new scheme and the existing restrictions on eligibility under the traveller accommodation scheme, including the minimum 10 guest room requirement, remain.
(d) Capital Expenditure on the Development of a Mine or Oil Field
Allowable capital expenditure incurred under a contract entered into after 19 July 1982 for the development of a mine or oil field is now eligible for deduction on a straight line basis by reference to the lesser of 10 years or the estimated life of the mine or oil

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 313

TAX AVOIDANCE AND EVASION
Company Tax in 'Bottom of the Harbour' Cases
On 25 July 1982 the Treasurer announced that legislation is to be introduced to recover from vendor shareholders the tax that was evaded in 'bottom of the harbour' strips of untaxed company profits, carried out before the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980 made such conduct a specific criminal offence under Commonwealth law.
Higher Penalty for Late Payment of Tax
On 10 August 1982 the Treasurer announced that the penalty for late payment of tax is to be increased from 10 to 20 per cent per annum. The new arrangement will apply to all amounts of tax outstanding two months after the enactment of the necessary legislative amendments and to all subsequent overdue amounts. For tax that is outstanding at the date of amendment the higher penalty rate of 20 per cent will apply only in respect of subsequent periods. This measure is expected to encourage payment of substantial amounts of outstanding tax.
Tax Deductions from Payments for Labour and Services
A tax deduction at source system is to be applied as from 1 July 1983 to payments for labour and services not subject to PAYE deductions in industries where evasion of tax on such payments is known to be significant. A White Paper on the proposal provides further details.

OTHER MEASURES
Coal Export Duty
The Minister for Trade and Resources announced on 29 July 1982 the removal of the $1.00 per tonne rate of export duty on coal whose loading into ships commenced after midnight 28 July 1982. The $1.00 rate previously applied to steaming coals and certain lower quality coking coals from underground mines, from open-cut mines at depths greater than 60 metres and from open-cut mines that commenced production after 30 June 1980.
2 Per Cent Revenue Duty on Ships
Since 1 July 1979, there has been a 2 per cent revenue duty on most imports not bearing protective duties. As part of the package of Commonwealth measures in response to the report by Sir John Crawford into the Revitalisation of Australian Shipping, the Minister for Transport announced on 29 July 1982 that from that date the duty would not be applied to ships imported into Australia.
Australian Capital Territory Payroll Tax
The Treasurer and the Minister for the Capital Territory announced on 2 August 1982 that the maximum exemption from payroll tax in the ACT is to be raised from $80 400 per annum to $120 000 per annum (the level currently applying in NSW), with effect from 1 September 1981, thus providing exemption for ACT employers with payrolls below $120 000 in 1982-83.
The exemption allowable is reduced at the rate of $2 for every $3 by which wages exceed this maximum level. Partial exemption from payroll tax will thus apply to employers with payrolls between $120 000 and $300 000 in 1982-83.

314 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

(3) BUDGET MEASURES
PERSONAL INCOME TAX
Rate Scale The following changes are to be made to the personal income tax rate scale with
effect from 1 November 1982: (a) the tax-free threshold is to be increased from $4195 to $4595; (b) the top of the standard rate step of the rate scale is to be increased from $17 894 to $19 500; and (c) the standard rate itself is to be reduced from 32 per cent to 30 per cent. The higher rates of tax will remain at 46 per cent and 60 per cent, and there will be
no change to the present level, $35 788, above which the maximum marginal rate applies.
The changes are to be fully reflected in PAYE instalments from 1 November 1982. For assessment purposes the rate scale for 1982-83 will be an average of the 1981-82 rate scale and the scale to apply from 1 November 1982 made up of 4/12 of the 1981-82 rate scale and 8/12 of the scale to apply from 1 November 1982. This average scale will be:

Total Taxable Income

Not less Not more

than

than

$ I 4462 17894 19500 35788

$ 4462 17894 19500 35788 and over

Tax at General Rates on Total Taxable Income Nil
Nil + 30.67cforeach $1 in excess of $4462 $4 119.5944 + 35.33c for each $ I in excess of $17 894 $4686.9942 + 46cfor each $ I in excess of $19 500 $12 179.4742 + 60cfor each $1 in excess of $35788

To take account of expected growth in incomes, provisional taxpayers' incomes for the previous year have, in recent years, been increased by a standard percentage to obtain notional current year incomes on which the calculation of provisional tax payments is based. The standard percentage applied last year was 10 per cent and a factor of 10 per cent will apply again in 1982-83. The 1982-83 average rate scale will be applied to incomes calculated in that way, and where available information allows dependant rebates and the proposed pensioner and dividend rebates will be allowed at 1982-83 values in deriving the provisional payment.
Provisional taxpayers retain the option of self-assessing-i.e. of providing an estimate of their income for the current year which is then used in calculating their provisional tax payment. The provisional payment of those who self-assess will be derived by applying the 1982-83 average scale and rebates to their estimate of 1982-83 income.
The rate of tax used in calculating the health insurance rebate, the concessional expenditure rebate, housing loan rebates, and the new dividend rebate, and which is the rate of tax for certain lump sum payments on retirement or termination of employment, for accrued annual and/or long service leave, will be 30.67 per cent for the 1982-83 income year and 30 per cent in subsequent years. The rate of withholding tax

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 315

on payments made by mining companies to Aboriginal councils from 1 November 1982 will be reduced to 6 per cent, reflecting the reduction in the standard rate to 30 per cent from that date.
Rebatesfor Dependent Spouse/Sole Parent/Housekeeper/Daughter-Housekeeper
Where there is a dependent child under 16 or student child under 25 in respect of whom rebates would have been allowable but for their having been replaced by family allowances, the rebate for a spouse, housekeeper or daughter-housekeeper will be increased from $830 to $1030. These rebates will remain at their present levels where there are no dependent children or student children. The sole parent rebate will also be increased by $200 from $580 to $780.
The increase in dependant rebates is to be effective from 1 November 1982 and fully reflected in PAYE taxation deduction schedules from that date. For purposes of assessments in respect of the 1982-83 income year the appropriate rebate will be increased by $133 reflecting the increase for only part of the year.
Zone rebates include a component based on dependant rebates. Any increase in dependant rebates will flow on to zone rebates.
Pensioner Rebate
A rebate is to be introduced for taxpayers in receipt of an Australian social security or repatriation pension on which Australian income tax is payable. The maximum rebate is $167 in 1982-83 and $250 in subsequent years. The rebate will be reduced by 12.5 cents for each $1 of taxable income in excess of $5007 in 1982-83 and $5429 in subsequent years; it will thus fully shade-out at taxable incomes of $6343 in 1982-83 and $7429 in subsequent years.
Withdrawal ofZero Rate Step for Non-Residents
The tax-free threshold is to be withdrawn from non-resident taxpayers, including trustees taxed on their behalf, other than those in receipt of social security and repatriation pensions subject to tax in Australia. The threshold is to be withdrawn from Budget night, except in relation to non-residents who came to Australia on or before 17 August 1982 for a short working visit or who had made firm arrangements for such a visit by that date, and a proportionate threshold of $585 will apply for the 1982-83 income year. Consistent with this, the existing minimum taxable income levels will be withdrawn in the case of the income of non-resident trust estates taxed under section 99 of the Income Tax Assessment Act and the income of non-resident minor children to which Division 6AA applies, with proportionate minimum taxable income limits applying for 1982-83.
At the same time, arrangements for collection of tax payable by non-residents on Australian-source income are to be strengthened.
Home Loan Interest Rebates
A new rebate at the rate of tax of 30.67 per cent in 1982-83 and 30 per cent in subsequent years will apply to home loan interest paid on or after 1 July 1982 in connection with the purchase or construction by a resident of a sole or principal residence situated in Australia. The rebate will apply to interest attributable to such part of the interest rate as exceeds 10 per cent per annum calculated on a reducing balance basis, in respect. of the first $60 000 of a loan. The rebate will not be restricted to interest attributable to

316 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

first home ownership/occupation or to the first five years of home ownership. The new rebate will be able to be allowed for in PAYE instalments from 1 November 1982. The rebate scheme announced on 18 March 1982 will remain in place, and can be used by a taxpayer where it would offer a larger rebate than the new scheme.
Dividend Rebate
Individuals who are Australian resident taxpayers will be entitled to a rebate at the rate of 30.67 per cent in 1982-83 and 30 per cent in subsequent years on up to $1000 of dividends (from resident public or private companies, not being co-operative companies) included in their taxable incomes. The maximum rebate will accordingly be $306.70 in 1982-83 and $300 in subsequent years. The rebate will not be available in respect of dividends taxed at special higher rates-under sections 94 and 99A or under Division 6AA-or to amounts deemed to be dividends under sections 108 and 109 of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Exemption ofBenefits Under Approved Employee Share-Acquisition Schemes
Under present taxation provisions, an employee who acquires shares through an employee share-acquisition scheme must include in assessable income, in the year of 'acquisition' (which is the year in which any restrictions on the employee's right to dispose of the share cease to apply), the amount by which their value at the date of acquisition exceeds any payment for them.
Beginning on 18 August 1982, these benefits to employees under approved employee share-acquisition schemes are to be made exempt from income tax. Details as to what c:onstitutes an approved scheme will be announced separately.
Retention Allowance ofPrivate Companies
Under Division 7 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, a private company becomes liable to additional tax if it retains more than a prescribed proportion of after-tax income.
The retention allowance in respect of trading profits is to be increased from 70 to 80 per cent in respect of dividends paid out of 1981-82 incomes. The allowance in respect of property income other than dividends from other private companies will remain at 10 per cent and the allowance for private company dividends will remain at zero.

BUSINESS INCOME
Taxation ofCompany Groups
For losses incurred in or after the 1982-83 income year, company groups will be permitted to offset a loss suffered by one company in the group against the taxable income of another company in the group, provided there is 100 per cent common ownership of the companies.

T AX AVOIDANCE AND EVASION
Division 7 Tax in 'Bottom of the Harbour' Cases The legislation to be introduced to recover from vendor shareholders the tax evaded
in 'bottom of the harbour' strips of untaxed profits will also provide for recovery of unpaid Division 7 tax from vendor shareholders in the same cases.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 317

SALES TAX
Each of the three existing rates of sales tax will be increased by 2+percentage points
in relation to goods passing the taxing point (generally the last point of wholesale sale) after 17 August 1982. The 5 per cent rate will become 7+per cent; the 17+per cent rate, 20 per cent; and the 30 per cent rate, 32+ per cent.
Certain other categories of goods that are now exempt will also be subjected to tax at a rate of 7+ per cent if they pass the taxing point on or after 1 January 1983. The major categories affected are:
- maps; - imported overseas travel literature; - hand tools; - exhibition copies of motion picture films; - servicing, repairing and construction equipment; and - drapery, soft furnishings, manchester and cleaning cloths.

OTHER TAXES

Tax on Certain Bank Transactions

It is proposed to introduce a tax on certain bank transactions to operate from 1 January 1983. The tax will apply to all debits to accounts with banks that are subject to operation by cheque or like payment instrument (other than by credit card).

Debit entries covered by the tax will include those resulting from cheques written, or from direct debits for interest, transfers out to other accounts (e.g. to repay loans), bank charges, cash withdrawals, etc. The following rates are to apply:

Amount ofDebit

Rate of Tax

Less than $100 $100 to $499 $500 to $4999 $5000 or more

10 cents 25 cents 50 cents $1.00

Stamp Duties in the Australian Capital Territory
A number of technical changes to the provisions of the ACT stamp duty law are proposed to remove unintended effects of the existing law, to remove anomalies or inconsistencies and to improve administration.

CUSTOMS AND EXCISE DUTIES
The excise duty on beer is being increased by $0.08 per litre to $0.60 per litre.
The excise duties on tobacco products are being increased by approximately 20 per cent, taking the rates on cigarettes, manufactured tobacco and cigars to $29.70, $15.10 and $25.34 per kilogram respectively.
The exemption from excise duty of diesel fuel for all off-road use will be abolished. However, a rebate of excise will be allowed in respect of off-road usage by the agricultural, mining, fishing and forestry industries, nursing homes, hospitals and aged persons homes. Off-road domestic use will also be subject to the rebate. There will be retrospective provisions in the legislation to be introduced so as to give effect to the rebate

318 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

arrangements from 17 August 1982. There will be a minimum rebate claim limit of $100 per claim for all but domestic off-road users, for whom there will be no limit.
The rates of excise on motor spirit and diesel fuel will be increased by 1 cent to 6.155 cents per litre. The proceeds from the increase, net of rebates, will be allocated to a trust fund to finance the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program.
A full listing of the new excise rates and all other excise rates is shown in the following section of this Statement.
For each of the excise increases, a commensurate increase in the relevant rates of customs duties is also being made. All changes have effect from 8 p.m. 17 August 1982.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 319

RECEIPTS ESTIMATES

The following table compares estimated receipts in 1982-83 with actual receipts in 1981-82. Comparisons between the Budget outcome for 1981-82, the outcome for the previous year and the 1981-82 Budget estimates are provided in Statement No.5. Figures for the years since 1972-73 are shown in Table 7 of Statement No.6.

1981-82

1982-83

Actual

Change on 1980-81

Estimate

Change on 1981-82(a)

Taxation RevenueCustoms DutyImports Coal Exports Excise DutyCrude Oil and LPG All Other Sales Tax Income TaxIndividualsGross PAVE Refunds

$m

percent

2060

14.5

97

14.0

3163

1.8

2830

3.8

2854

35.8

18836

23.2

1418Dr

21.2

$m
2167 77
3287 3434 3629
21073 2100Dr

$m

percent

107

5.2

-20

-20.4

124

3.9

604

21.3

775

27.1

2237

11.9

682Dr

48.1

Net PAVE Other

17417

23.3

18973

1556

8.9

3807

11.2

4373(b)

566

14.9

Total Individuals Companies Withholding Tax Special Tax to Recover Evaded Company and Division 7 Tax Tax on Certain Bank Transactions Payroll Tax Departure Tax Estate and Gift Duties Stamp Duty (ACT) Other Taxes. Fees and Fines Remissions

21224 5053
205
19 36 4 13 227 2Dr

21.0 7.6 27.4
13.6 92.8 -74.1 50.0 20.9 20.7

23346(b) 5000(c)
231
255 80 17 40 I 14
256 \Dr

2122 -53
26
255 80
-2
4 -3
I 29
1

10.0 -1.0 12.6
n.a. n.a. -11.9 10.8 -75.0 11.1 12.8 58.8

Total Taxation Revenue

37784

16.4

41834

4050

10.7

Interest, Rent and Dividends Net Receipts from Government
Enterprise Transactions Sales of Existing Assets

2585
385 36

13.4
60.8 -81.6

2939
475 146

354

13.7

89

23.2

110

307.0

TOTAL RECEIPTS

40790

15.9

45393

4603

11.3

(a) Changes on 1981-82 have been calculated from unrounded data and may not agree with preceding columns. (b) Includes allowance for additional receipts of$425m as a result of increased penalty rate for late payment. (c) Includes allowance for additional receipts of $190m as a result of increased penalty rate for late payment.

TAXATION REVENUE
After taking account of Budget and other measures, total taxation revenue in 1982-83 is estimated to increase by 10.7 per cent, to $41 834m. Brief comments on the main components follow.

320 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

CUSTOMS DUTY
Imports
Collections of customs duty on imports are estimated to increase by $107m or 5.2 per cent in 1982-83 compared with 14.5 per cent in 1981-82. The slower growth rate reflects a forecast lower rate of growth in imports.
Coal Exports
Receipts from duties on exports of coal are estimated at $77m in 1982-83. The fall from the level of 1981-82 collections is mainly attributable to revenue forgone ($25m) from the abolition of the $1 per tonne duty rate announced on 29 July 1982 but also to some extent to lower world economic activity in 1982-83 causing subdued growth in demand for Australian coking coal dutiable at the $3.50 per tonne rate.

EXCISE DUTY

Total collections of excise duty are estimated at $6 721m in 1982-83, an increase of 12.1 per cent compared with a 2.7 per cent rise in 1981-82. The main components are as follows:

1981-82 Change on

Actual

1980-81

1982-83 Estimate

Change on 1981-82

Crude oil LPG Beer Potable spirits Tobacco products Petroleum products Other (inc. credits)

$m
3104 60
1011 121 732 970 -4

percent
2.8 -33.0
2.0 8.4 3.9 5.0 -31.0

$m 3237
50 I 129
131 838 I 331
6

$m

percent

133

4.3

-10

-16.7

118

11.7

10

8.5

106

14.4

361

37.2

10

n.a.

TOTAL

5993

2.7

6721

728

12.1

Crude Oil and LPG Duties
Total receipts from these sources are estimated to increase by $124m or 3.9 per cent in 1982-83 compared with an increase of $55m or 1.8 per cent in 1981-82.
The estimate for the crude oil levy assumes the maintenance throughout 1982-83 of the import parity prices applicable since 1 July 1982, namely $35.46 per barrel for Bass Strait oil, $35.89 per barrel for Barrow Island oil, $33.48 per barrel for Dongara oil and $36.75 per barrel for Moonie oil. The increase in import parity prices to these levels from the prices applicable from 1 January 1982 to 30 June 1982 ($32.25, $32.70, $30.39 and $33.72 respectively) is mainly attributable to the decrease in the value of the Australian dollar relative to the US dollar in the six months to 1 June 1982. The weighted average of the 1 July 1982 prices is 12 per cent higher than the 1981-82 average, which in turn was 7 per cent higher than the 1980-81 average.
The effect on oil revenue of higher prices in 1982-83 is partly offset by a forecast fall in production of about 5 per cent and changes in the production mix from large, medium and small fields. The crude oil levy is estimated to represent 68.8 per cent of the average price paid by refiners in 1982-83, compared with 70.5 per cent in 1981-82.
Receipts from the duty on naturally occurring LPG are estimated to fall by $1 Om or 16.7 per cent. The levy rate applying from 1 July 1982 was set at the equivalent of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 321

$48.11 per tonne, which is about 10 per cent below the average levy rate of $53.61 per tonne applying in 1981-82. The reduction reflects the recent decline in world LPG prices. It is assumed that the lower levy rate will prevail throughout 1982-83 and that exciseable production will be about 7 per cent lower than in 1981-82.
Appendix I to Statement No.4 of the 1981-82 Budget Paper No. 1 detailed the development of crude oil and LPG pricing and excise arrangements in Australia. As there have been no new policy developments since the last Budget, no such appendix is provided this year.

Other Duties
As outlined earlier in this Statement, the duties on beer, tobacco products, motor spirit and distillate have been increased. The excise exemption for distillate used off-road has been removed and it is estimated that only about two-fifths of previously exempt distillate consumption will benefit from the new excise rebate arrangements. In estimating revenue from those items on which the duty has been increased, allowance has been made for the estimated effects of the resulting price increases on consumption.
The estimate for excise revenues, other than on crude oil and LPG, is $3 434m, 21.3 per cent higher than in 1981-82. In the absence of any changes to the rates of duty or expansion of the taxable base, collections would have risen by an estimated 1.9 per cent in 1982-83.
Rates of duty for the main items subject to excise are shown in the following table:

Rates of Excise Duty: 17 August 1982

Beer (per litre) . . . . . . . Potable spirits (per litre of alcohol)-
Brandy(a) . . . . . . . General rate for other spirits(b) Spirits nei and liqueurs nei(b)
Tobacco products (per kilogram)Cigarettes . . . . . . Cigars . . . . . . . . Manufactured tobacco
Petroleum products (per litre)Motor spirit . . . . Diesel fuel . . . . . Aviation gasoline(c) Aviation turbine fuel(c)
Crude oil (per kilolitre)(d)Fields producing less than 2m barrels per year Barrow Island-parity-related oil: 2-15m barrels per year Barrow Island-controlled-price oil Bass Strait-parity-related oil: 2-15m barrels per year 15m barrels per year or more Bass Strait-controlled-price oil
Liquefied petroleum gas (per kilolitre)(e)

$ 0.60
16.00 18.75 19.25
29.70 25.34 15.10
0.06155 0.06155 0.04555 0.0419
18.90
123.39 205.30
121.76 139.26 205.99 25.93

(a) Rate has applied since 9 November 1979. (b) Rate has applied since 15 August 1978.
nei = not elsewhere included. (c) Rate has applied since 16 August 1977. (d) For oil discovered prior to 14 September 1975; new rates applicable from I July 1982, except that applying to
fields producing less than 2m barrels per year, which has been $18.90 since 16 August 1977. (e) For fields on stream before 17 August 1977; new rates applicablefrom I July 1982.

322 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

SALES TAX

Revenue from sales tax in 1982-83 is estimated at $3629m, an increase of 27.1 per cent, compared with growth of 35.8 per cent in 1981-82. Private consumption expenditure is forecast to increase by about 12 per cent in 1982-83 and, in the absence of the measures announced in the Budget Speech, it is estimated that collections would have risen by 12.6 per cent. Estimated sales tax collections in respect of goods within the specified rate classes and percentage increases by rate class for 1981-82 and 1982-83 are set out in the following table:

1981-82 Change on

Estimate

1980-81

1982-83 Change on

Estimate

1981-82

7+ per cent (a) (b) 20 percent (b) 32+ per cent (b)

$m 156 2219 479

per cent 100.0 35.6 23.5

$m 300 2764 565

percent 92.3 24.6 18.0

TOTAL

2854

35.8

3629

27.1

(a) Includes effect in 1982-83 of previously exempt goods which will become taxable at 7+ per cent if they pass the taxing point after I January 1983.
(b) Collections in 1981-82 were at a rate 2+ percentage points lower than shown.

INCOME TAX-INDIVIDUALS
It is estimated that collections of income tax from individuals will increase by 10.0 per cent in 1982-83. In addition to gross PAYE collections this total comprises components which are based mainly on taxable incomes in 1981-82 (PAYE refunds and collections from other individuals). An estimate for revenue collected following the increase in the penalty rate for late payments of taxes due in earlier years is also included in the total.
PAYE Instalment Deductions
Gross PAYE receipts are estimated to increase by 11.9 per cent in 1982-83, compared with 23.2 per cent in 1981-82.
The 1982-83 estimate is based on an assumed increase of 12 per cent in average weekly earnings and no growth in wage and salary earner employment. It has been assumed that 50 per cent of taxpayers eligible for home loan interest assistance arrangements announced prior to and in the Budget will elect to take the concessions as lower PAYE deductions at a cost of $155m to 1982-83 revenue; concessions to the remaining eligible taxpayers are assumed to be reflected in PAYE refunds and tax paid by 'other individuals' in the 1983-84 income year. In the absence of the measures announced in the Budget Speech it is estimated that collections would have increased by 19.3 per cent in 1982-83.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 323

PAYE Refunds
Refunds in 1982-83, which are in respect of tax assessed in 1982-83 on 1981-82 incomes, are estimated to increase by 48.1 per cent compared with an increase of 21.2 per cent in 1981-82. This large increase mainly reflects the estimated effect of the personal income tax rebate for basic hospital and/or medical insurance.

Other Individuals

Receipts from other individuals are estimated to increase by 14.9 per cent in 1982-83, compared with an increase of 11.2 per cent in 1981-82. The provisional tax component of the estimate was calculated by applying the 1982-83 rate scale to the estimated income of provisional tax payers in 1981-82, increased by a loading of 10 per cent, with allowance for the effects of self-assessment.

Reflecting the effect of anti-avoidance measures, tax avoidance of a blatant,

artificial or contrived kind is not expected to have a significant negative effect on collec-

'I

tions of revenue in respect of the 1981-82 income year and, for the first time in five

I

years, no specific allowance for such avoidance has been made in the estimate. How-

"I

ever, an allowance of $425m has been included for revenue expected to be collected

following the increase in penalty rates for late payments of taxes due in earlier years.

In the absence of measures announced in the Budget Speech and previously announced anti-avoidance measures, it is estimated that collections would have increased by 11.0 per cent.

INCOME TAX-COMPANIES

Company assessable income in 1981-82 (the base for tax collections in 1982-83) is estimated to have declined sharply. Company tax collections are estimated to decline by 1.0 per cent in 1982-83, compared with an increase of 7.6 per cent in 1981-82. Tax avoidance is not expected to have a significant negative effect in respect of the 1981-82 income year, and accordingly no allowance has been made for revenue shortfalls attributable to avoidance. However, an amount of $190m has been included as the gain from previous income years as a result of increased penalty rates for late payment outlined earlier in this Statement.

In the absence of measures announced in the Budget Speech and previously an-

nounced anti-avoidance measures (including the special tax to recover evaded

company tax, referred to below), it is estimated that collections would have declined by

4.8 per cent.

:1
I

,

:,'1"'"

SPECIAL TAX TO RECOVER EVADED COMPANY AND DIVISION 7 TAX i,l
An estimate of $255m has been included for recoveries from vendor shareholders of

tax evaded in 'bottom of the harbour' strips of untaxed company profits and unpaid

1

Division 7 tax, as outlined earlier in this Statement.

:1

II

TAX ON CERTAIN BANK TRANSACTIONS

I

As announced in the Budget Speech and outlined earlier in this Statement, a new

tax on certain bank transactions is to be introduced. Revenue in 1982-83 is estimated to

be$80m.

324 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

DEPARTURE TAX
Collections from the departure tax are estimated at $40m, $3.9m (10.8 per cent) more than in 1981-82. The increase results from the full year effect of the decision to increase the rate of tax from $10 to $20 and to lower the taxable age from 18 to 12 years, which came into effect on 1 October 1981.

ESTATE AND GIFT DUTIES
Small residual amounts have been included in the estimates reflecting lagged payments following the phased abolition of estate and gift duties, with partial effect from 21 November 1977 and total abolition from 1 July 1979.

OTHER TAXES, FEES AND FINES
Estimates for the major items of other taxes, fees and fines are shown in the following table:

Broadcasting and TV Station Licence Fees Radio-communications Licence Fees Unfunded Employees Retirement Contributions Stevedoring Industry Collections ACT -.- Taxes and Charges Passport Fees Quarantine Charges Other
TOTAL OTHER TAXES, FEES AND FINES

1980-81 Actual
$m 21.5 11.3 72.9 19.5 35.3 11.7
3.9 11.9
188.0

1981-82 Actual
$m 30.9 15.8 86.4 18.2 40.4 16.6 5.1 13.8
227.3

1982-83 Estimate
$m 37.7 15.8 97.3 21.0 48.5 17.1 6.4 12.5
256.3

Change
$m + 6.8
+10.9 + 2.8 + 8.2 + 0.5 + 1.2 - 1.3
+29.0

Under the formula introduced in 1981-82 for calculating radio and television station licence fees, total revenues from this source are expected to increase by $6.8m to $37.7m in 1982-83. This increase reflects the higher gross earnings of most radio and TV stations in 1981-82, on which fees payable in 1982-83 are based.
Radio-communications licence fees, which are currently prescribed in the Wireless Telegraphy Regulations, are expected to yield $15.8m in 1982-83, the same as in 1981-82. New scales of fees will be introduced under the Radio-Communications Licence Fees Act 1982 once the Act is proclaimed.
Included in the 1982-83 estimate of unfunded employees retirement contributions are contributions to be paid during the year by Parliamentarians ($0.9m) and Service personnel ($80m) to their superannuation schemes. The remainder of this item comprises net amounts retained by the Commonwealth in respect of retiring Commonwealth employees who opt for a contributor-financed pension in lieu of a refund of their accumulated contributions to the Superannuation Fund.
Stevedoring industry collections, from levies on employers of waterside workers, are expected to increase by $2.8m to $21m in 1982-83. A matching outlay is made (under the functional heading 'Labour and Employment' in Statement No.3) to the Stevedoring Industry Finance Committee, which is responsible for making certain payments in respect of waterside workers (mainly for retirement benefits).
Included in estimated 1982-83 revenues from taxes and charges in the Australian Capital Territory are general rates ($24.9m), motor vehicle registration and drivers' licences ($9.6m), imposts on gambling ($5m), liquor licences ($3.6m), and fines for

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 325

parking infringements ($I.4m). The estimated increase in 1982-83 of $8.2m mainly reflects increases in the level of ACT general rates and in the amounts paid to the Commonwealth under an agreement with the States to share revenues from State gambling imposts in respect of revenues obtained from ACT residents.
Passport fees are estimated to yield $17.1m in 1982-83 compared with $16.6m in 1981-82, reflecting the full year effect of the increase in passport fees from $25 to $30 per person which came into effect on 27 August 1981.
Quarantine charges are levied mainly in respect of animal and plant imports, and for the disposal of waste from aircraft and ships. The Government has decided to increase these charges progressively to achieve full recovery of direct operating costs by 1 September 1983. Charges will then be adjusted annually in line with movements in direct operating costs.
The 1982-83 estimate for the category 'Other' includes revenues from bankruptcy charges ($4m), the Australian Capital Territory Corporate Affairs Office ($2.2m, relating to fees associated with the lodgement of documents under the Companies and Securities Industry legislation), bond store licence fees ($2.lm) and the oil pollution levy ($I.2m).

OTHER RECEIPTS
INTEREST, RENT AND DIVIDENDS
Included under this heading are interest received by the Commonwealth Government from sources outside the Budget sector, land rents collected in the ACT, dividends received from Government-owned companies other than financial enterprises, and amounts payable from offshore petroleum royalties (net) and from Northern Territory uranium royalties. Details are set out below:

1980-81 Actual

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimate

Change

Interest receivedFrom the StatesOn Advances for State Loan Council Programs On Specific Purpose and Special AdvancesHousing Agreements Other

$m
1258.3 182.4 104.8

$m
I 421.0 188.1 97.4

$m
1619.0 193.1 106.1

$m
+198.0 + 5.0 + 8.7

Total
Other interest receiptsFrom the TerritoriesHousing Other Defence Service Homes Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority Pipeline Authority . . . . Australian Shipping Commission Postal Commission Telecommunications Commission Qantas Airways Ltd Australian National Airlines Commission Australian Industry Development Corporation Australian National Railways Commission Other

1545.5
30.6 19.0 82.5 49.5 29.0 16.0 2.1 328.5 5.1 1.3 3.1 4.2 33.8

1706.4
31.2 27.4 93.4 55.3 30.5 17.4
3.1 394.3
3.3 0.8 3.2 4.2 69.6

1918.2
33.5 43.2 111.0 57.8 33.0 17.2
4.2 480.0
2.8 0.7 3.4 4.2 73.2

+211.8

+ 2.3

+ 15.7

+ 17.6

+ 2.5

+ 2.5

0.2

+ 1.1

+ 85.7

0.5

0.1

+

0.2
..

+ 3.6

Total

604.7

733.7

864.1

+130.4

Total Interest Receipts

2150.2

2440.1

2782.3

+342.2

326 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Rent, dividends, etc.Offshore Petroleum Royalties (net) Royal Australian Mint Overseas Telecommunications Commission Australian National Airlines Commission Land Leases-ACT . . . . . . . Uranium Royalties-Northern Territory Other ..
Total
TOT AL INTEREST, RENT AND DIVIDENDS . . .

1980-81 Actual
$m
54.6 34.6 25.0 2.2 5.6 2.8 5.3
130.1
2280.3

1981-82 Actual
$m
52.3 53.0 20.0 2.2 2.2 4.3 10.7
144.8
2584.9

1982-83 Estimate
$m
55.6 54.8 24.0 2.2 4.2 14.0
1.7
156.6
2938.9

Change
$m
+ 3.3 + 1.8 + 4.0
+ 2.0 + 9.7
9.0
+ 11.8
+354.0

The estimated increase in 1982-83 in interest received on advances for State Loan Council Programs reflects the continuing growth in outstanding advances and the rise in the level of interest rates applying to new raisings and to the roll-over of maturing debt. The expected increase of $13.7m in interest received on specific purpose and special advances mainly reflects growth in the level of advances outstanding.
Other interest receipts are expected to increase substantially-by $130.4m to $864.1m-in 1982-83; the main contributing factors are as follows:
- The Northern Territory Government has received general purpose capital advances from the Commonwealth since 1979-80. The expected rise of $18m in interest receipts from the Territories is mainly due to the continuing growth in the level of outstanding general purpose advances to the Northern Territory. (Arrangements in respect of these debt charges are summarised in Statement No.3, under 'Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec'.)

- The estimated increase of $17.6m in 1982-83 in interest receipts from the Defence Service Homes Corporation is attributable to interest charges on new capital advances the Corporation is expected to receive in 1982-83 and the continuation of the progressive conversion of the Corporation's existing debt to reflect more closely current rates of interest.

- Estimated interest payments to the Commonwealth in 1982-83 by the Australian Postal Commission ($4.2m) and the Australian Telecommunications Commission ($480m) are $l.lm and $85.7m respectively above the 1981-82 payments. These increases are attributable to the full year effects of the Government's decision to increase to 10 per cent, as from 1 January 1982, the average rates of interest payable by the two Commissions on the outstanding value of initial capital advances to these authorities from the Commonwealth in 1975 and to convert on 1 July each year one-tenth of these outstanding advances at the public semi-government rate of interest applying on 1 January prior to such conversions (15.7 per cent per annum in January 1982) .

- Included in the estimate of 'Other' for 1982-83 are expected interest receipts of $21.5m from a United States Federal Reserve trust account which holds Australian funds required to meet payments to contractors for the supply of military

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 327

equipment under United States Government Foreign Military Sales arrangements. This is $9.2m less than in 1981-82, reflecting a run-down of the balance held in this trust account. Also included in 'Other' are estimated interest receipts in respect of: - investments (other than in Commonwealth securities) of funds from a number
of primary industry trust accounts ($23.3m);
- deposits lodged by the Commonwealth with the Primary Industry Bank ($7.2m);
- investments of the former Defence Forces Retirement Benefits Fund now held by the Commonwealth ($6.3m); and
- other bank balances of the Commonwealth ($5.5m).
In total, receipts from rent, dividends etc. are expected to increase by $11.8m to $156.6m in 1982-83.
The estimated net increase of $3.3m in offshore petroleum royalties reflects the higher average returns producers are expected to receive in 1982-83 from domestic oil production. To date, offshore petroleum royalties and permit and licence fees have been collected by the States. In respect of Bass Strait production, a proportion of the relevant royalties (about one-third) collected each year by Victoria has been transferred to the Commonwealth. Following the High Court decision to uphold the Seas and Submerged Lands Act 1973, legislation governing the collection of these revenues has been amended. Under arrangements now expected to commence on 1 September 1982, all revenues relating to offshore petroleum royalties and permit and licence fees are to be collected by the Commonwealth and passed on to the States after deducting the Commonwealth's share of royalties relating to Bass Strait production. The figures are net of amounts to be paid to the States.
The receipts from the Royal Australian Mint relate to seigniorage and numismatic profits. Changes made this year to the classification of the Mint's transactions are described in the Appendix to the Budget Statements. The increase in 1982-83 of $1.8m to $54.8m is due mainly to an expected rise in numismatic sales associated with the production of a gold proof coin.
The total dividend expected to be paid to the Commonwealth by the Overseas Telecommunications Commission in 1982-83 is $24m, $4m greater than in 1981-82, largely reflecting an expected improvement in OTe's trading result for 1982-83.
Receipts from the collection by the Commonwealth of royalties and payments in the nature of royalties in respect of uranium mining in the Northern Territory are estimated to increase by $9.7m in 1982-83 to $14m due to increased mining activity. These receipts cover Commonwealth payments to the Aboriginals Benefit Trust Account in relation to mining on Aboriginal land (refer to 'Social Security and Welfare-Aboriginal Advancement Programs nec' in Statement No.3) and payments in lieu of uranium royalties to the Northern Territory Government under a Memorandum of Understanding with that Government (refer to the category 'Not Allocated to Function-Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities, nec' in Statement No.3).

328 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

NET RECEIPTS FROM GOVERNMENT ENTERPRISE TRANSACTIONS

This category includes receipts (other than taxation revenue) from public financial enterprises and net operating revenues from certain activities carried on as business enterprises within the Budget sector, as shown in the following table:

Reserve Bank Commonwealth Banking Corporation Canberra Bus Service- -Loss on Operations ACT -- Water Supply and Sewerage Other
TOTAL GOVERNMENT ENTERPRISE TRANSACTIONS

1980-81 Actual
$m 197.7 41.6
11.8Dr 6.2 6.0

1981-82 Actual
$m 344.9
39.1 12.5Dr 7.1 6.9

1982-83 Estimate
$m 437.9
33.5 13.3Dr 12.6 4.3

Change
$m +93.0 - 5.6 - 0.8 + 5.4 - 2.6

239.7

385.5

474.9

+89.4

The receipts by the Commonwealth from the Reserve Bank in 1981-82 comprised an interim payment of $220m from the Note Issue Department (NID) profits for that year and a payment of $124.9m from 1980-81 profits of Central Banking Business (CBB). Estimated receipts from the Reserve Bank in 1982-83 comprise a final payment from profits of NID and of CBB in 1981-82-a total of $217.9m-and an interim payment of $220m from 1982-83 NID profits.
The estimated receipts of $33.5m in 1982-83 from the Commonwealth Banking Corporation represent the Commonwealth's share of the net profits in 1981-82 of the Commonwealth Savings Bank and of the net profits (after tax) of the Commonwealth Trading Bank. The decrease of $5.6m reflects lower operating profits earned by the Commonwealth Trading Bank in 1981-82.
The loss on operations of the Canberra Bus Service for 1982-83 is estimated to increase by $0.8m to $13.3m. The increase reflects rises in labour and running costs, partly offset by the full year effect of fare increases introduced in January 1982.
Gross receipts from water and sewerage rates in the Australian Capital Territory are estimated to increase substantially from $18.4m in 1981-82 to $25.9m in 1982-83, reflecting increases in charges announced by the Minister for the Capital Territory on Budget night. Operational costs, estimated to be $13.3m in 1982-83 compared with $11.1 min 1981-82, are offset against these receipts.
The estimate of 'Other' in 1982-83 relates to the operations of the ACT Transport trust account, the Government Printer and Publications trust accounts and business undertakings of the Department of Transport and Construction.
SALES OF EXISTING ASSETS
Details of sales of existing assets are shown in the table below:

Sale of Ranger Uranium Joint Venture ACT --Sale of Leases Other
TOTAL

1980-81 Actual
$m 146.2 32.9
15.7
194.8

1981-82 Actual
$m
26.5 9.3
35.8

1982-83 Estimate
$m
19.6 126.0
145.7

. Change
$m - 6.8 +116.7
+109.9

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 329

During 1980-81 the Commonwealth completed the sale of its interest in the Ranger Uranium Joint Venture to Energy Resources of Australia Ltd (ERA).
The item 'ACT-Sale of Leases' records revenue from the sale of commercial and residential leases in the Australian Capital Territory. Revenue in 1982-83 is estimated to fall by $6.8m to $19.6m reflecting an expected continuation of depressed market conditions.
The estimate for 'Other' in 1981-82 of $9.3m represents proceeds from the sale of land and buildings deemed to be surplus to Commonwealth needs. Receipts from such sales are estimated at $29.9m for 1982-83. The estimate for 1982-83 also includes $93.1m reflecting expected proceeds from the sale of a number of assets, including some held by Commonwealth enterprises, following the Review of Commonwealth Functions.

330 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

APPENDIX I TO STATEMENT No.4
TAXATlON EXPENDITURES
Individuals and businesses derive financial benefits from taxation concessions of various kinds. In the year(s) when they have effect, the concessions reduce, or delay, collections of taxation revenue, and are as much a call on the Budget as are direct outlays. They are comparable in other ways also with direct outlays and are often referred to as 'taxation expenditures'.
This Appendix provides information on some major items of taxation expenditure.
The inclusion of an item in the Appendix does not necessarily indicate that it is considered a departure from an equitable tax distribution. Rather, it implies no more than that the item confers a benefit on recipients and could conceivably be regarded as an alternative to direct expenditure in the same way that family allowances confer a benefit comparable with that conferred by the dependent child rebates which they replaced in 1976. It would be possible to replace most of the tax provisions mentioned below with a direct expenditure program having an almost identical impact on both Budget and taxpayer.
In May 1982 the Treasury submitted a paper on Taxation Expenditures to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure. That paper is reproduced as Appendix II to Statement No.4.
Assistance to Individuals
Concessional income tax rebates, deductions and other reliefs provide assistance to particular groups of individuals.
Rebates
The principal rebates are those for maintenance of dependants, for sole parents and housekeepers, zone rebates allowed to taxpayers residing in remote areas, and rebates for certain types of allowable expenditures.
A concessional rebate is allowable where a taxpayer contributes to the maintenance of certain dependants and in certain other cases. The maximum rebates for the years 1975-76 and 1977-78 to 1982-83 are:

Maximum Rebate

Dependant etc

1978-79 and
1975-76 1977-78 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83

$

$

$

$

$

$

Spouse, housekeeper, daughter-

housekeeper

400

555

597

800

830 830(a)

Parent or parent-in-law

400

501

539

722

749

749

Invalid relative

200

251

270

362

376

376

Sole parent

200

388

417

559

580

713

Children(b)

Student

200

251

270

362

376

376

Non-student under 16~one such child

200

251

270

362

376

376

each other such child

150

189

203

272

282

282

(a) Where there is also a dependent child the rebate is $133 higher. (b) After 1975-76 rebates in respect of children have relevance only to the calculation of zone rebates.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 331

Zone rebates are allowed to taxpayers who live in remote areas. Eligible residents in Zone A receive a rebate equal to $216 plus 50 per cent of any entitlement to rebates in respect of dependants, sole parents and housekeepers (including notional rebates in respect of dependent children); eligible residents of Zone B receive a rebate of $36 plus 20 per cent of the rebates for dependants, etc. For residents of either Zone A or Zone B who reside more than 250 kilometres from a centre of population of 2500 or more, the basic rebate is $750 in lieu of the ordinary basic amount of$216 or $36.
A rebate at the standard tax rate is allowed on the excess of a taxpayer's aggregate expenditure on certain concessional items above a prescribed figure, currently $1590. Eligible expenditure includes certain expenditure in respect of the taxpayer and his dependants on medical and hospital services net of recoupments, funeral expenses up to $100, expenses of adoption of children, life insurance premiums and superannuation contributions up to a total of $1200, education services in respect of the taxpayer, his children or dependants, up to $250 per person, and rates and land taxes up to $300 in respect of the taxpayer's sole or principal residence. On the basis of income tax statistics for 1980-81, about 8 per cent of taxpayers had concessional expenditures in excess of $1590.
Contributions made after 30 June 1981 in respect of a period of cover after that date to a registered health fund for basic hospital and/or medical insurance are rebatable at the standard rate. This rebate is outside the $1590 rebate block and is allowed regardless of the level of a taxpayer's other rebatable expenditures. (Prior to 1 October 1976, contributions to a registered health insurance fund were rebatable within the rebate block)
Home loan interest rebates apply to interest payments after 30 June 1982 in connection with the purchase of a sole or principal residence situated in Australia. Two alternative forms of rebate are available, outside the $1590 rebate block.
A pensioner rebate is to be introduced for recipients of social security and repatriation pensions which are subject to tax.
A rebate of personal income tax at the standard rate of tax is to apply to dividends of up to $1000 received by Australian resident taxpayers from Australian companies.
Further details of the home loan interest rebates, the pensioner rebate and the dividends rebate are given in the Taxation Measures section of Statement No.4.

Deductions
Gifts to the value of $2 or more to organisations covered by sections 78 (1) (a) and 78 (1) (aa) of the Income Tax Assessment Act are deductible from assessable income. Between 1 July 1974 and 31 October 1978, interest paid on home loans was deductible, subject to an income test and certain other conditions.
Superannuation contributions made to a qualifying fund by self-employed persons and by employees not covered by employer-sponsored arrangements are deductible from assessable income up to a limit of $1200 per annum. Contributions in excess of $1200 are rebatable within the $1590 rebate block, up to the limit of $1200 for life insurance premiums and superannuation contributions subject to rebate.
There is also a deduction in respect of the cost of purchase and installation of material for the thermal insulation of a first home.

332 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Details of tax revenue forgone under most of the aforementioned taxation provisions in respect of income years 1975-76 and 1978-79 to 1980-81 are shown in the table below.

Estimated Revenue Cost for Income Years

Provision

1975-76 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$m $m $m $m $m $m $m $m

Dependant etc rebates:

Spouse, housekeeper, daughter-housekeeper

452

660

642

888

Sole parent

9

31

36

53

Dependent children

653

Other dependants Total
Zone rebates Other concessional rebates(a) Deductions:

25 1 139 26 117

7 698 34 68

4
682 38 78

6 947 42 93

Gift provisions

School building funds

9

12

14

16

Other gifts

16

19

24

33

Interest on home loans

83

8

Cost of insulating a first home

2

Superannuation contributions, self employed,

etc. Total

30

108

39

38

81

TOTAL

I 390

839

836

1163

(a) Excludes cost of general concessional rebate which was absorbed into zero rate step of rate schedule with introduction of standard rate system in 1977-78.

Miscellaneous
A wide variety of income is specifically exempted from personal income tax. In particular, amounts paid under the Social Services Act 1947 relating to the following are exempt from taxation: invalid pensions paid to persons under age pension age, supplementary assistance which is paid subject to a special income test to certain pensioners who pay rent or lodging charges, payments to pensioners that represent mother's or guardian's allowance or additional pension for children, family allowances, funeral benefits, sheltered employment allowance, double orphan's pensions, handicapped child's allowance and some training and living allowances under the Rehabilitation Service. Some repatriation pensions are also exempt income as are some wartime persecution pensions received from other countries. A number of lump sum income payments made to individuals are either tax free or are taxed on a concessional basis. For example, no more than 5 per cent of retirement benefits received as lump sums from a superannuation fund is treated as assessable income. Similarly, lump sum retiring allowances paid, not from a superannuation fund, but directly by an employer to an employee are assessable as to only 5 per cent of their amount.
The investment income earned by most superannuation funds is also either exempt from tax or taxed on a concessional basis.
Benefits associated with approved employee share acquisition schemes will also in future be exempt from personal income tax. Further details are given in the Taxation Measures section of Statement No.4.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 333

Industry Assistance
Industry also has received assistance over the years through various taxation concessions. The main concessions available in recent years have been investment allowances, accelerated depreciation and trading stock valuation adjustment, all of which affected a wide spectrum of industry, while special arrangements have benefited the primary production, mining, film and tourism industries.
Most of the relevant concessions in the income tax field may be grouped in three broad categories, namely: A -those allowing the deduction of amounts that are not authorised under the general
provisions of the law; B -those allowing certain taxpayers to alter the timing of tax allowances; and C -those exempting certain classes of income.
Details of estimated amounts of revenue forgone in respect of some of these provisions are quantified below. Other provisions are not quantified, in some cases because of lack of data on revenue forgone or questions about the extent to which they may properly be regarded as wholly 'Industry Assistance'. These provisions include the concession whereby primary producers are allowed to adopt artificially low values for natural increase in their livestock accounts for taxation purposes; deduction of the cost of converting stationary oilor LPG-fired plant to alternative energy sources; deduction of the cost of connecting business properties to electricity mains; measures related to the eradication of brucellosis and tuberculosis in cattle; income-spreading in the case of forced sales of livestock; the petroleum shareholder rebate; the accelerated depreciation of expenditure on employees' amenities; and certain sales tax exemptions. Some information on these items is contained in Appendix II to Statement No.4.
Category A
The present investment allowance applies to a wide range of plant and equipment, including leased plant. It provided originally for a deduction equal to 40 per cent of the cost of plant purchased under a contract made in the period 1 January 1976 to 30 June 1978 and first used by 30 June 1979 and a deduction of 20 per cent of the cost of plant ordered in the period 1 July 1978 to 30 June 1985 and first used by 30 June 1986. Following the Review of Commonwealth Functions the 20 per cent rate was reduced to 18 per cent for plant ordered on or after 1 May 1981. On 29 July 1982 it was announced that the allowance would apply to certain ships which were not previously eligible for it. The estimated revenue forgone in respect of the provision is $401 million in 1980-81 and $444 million in 1981-82.
The trading stock valuation adjustment was a special deduction equal to a prescribed percentage of most classes of trading stock, including livestock. The prescribed percentage was based on half the percentage increase in the goods component of the Consumer Price Index between the June quarter prior to the year of income and the June quarter of the year of income and was applied to the value of the trading stock at the commencement of the year. The adjustment was terminated with effect from the 1979-80 income year; the estimated revenue forgone in that year was $334 million and in 1980-81 reduced to $73 million.
An immediate deduction is allowable in the year of expenditure for the capital cost of a wide range of soil conservation measures and of conserving or conveying water in a business of primary production. The estimated revenue forgone in respect of the provisions is $3 million in 1980-81 and $38 million in 1981-82.

334 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Special deductions are allowable under section 75A of the Income Tax Assessment Act to taxpayers engaged in primary production in respect of certain classes of capital expenditure not subject to depreciation. The amount of the expenditure is allowed in equal annual deductions over 10 years. Ploughing and grassing the land for grazing purposes and the preparation of the land for agriculture are examples of the classes of allowable capital expenditure. Primary producers are also allowed to write off capital expenditure on telephone lines over 10 years. The estimated revenue forgone in respect of these provisions is $3 million in 1980-81 and $3 million in 1981-82.
The Income Equalisation Deposits scheme permits deposits by a primary producer, within specified limits, to be deducted against assessable income in the year the deposits are made, and withdrawals of deposits to be included in assessable income in the year they are withdrawn. (Deposits up to 31 August are deductible against assessable income of the preceding income year.) Interest is paid on deposits. The estimated net revenue forgone is $29 million in 1980-81 and $10 million in 1981-82.

Under the averaging provisions, primary producers effectively have their income from primary production taxed at rates corresponding to their average income (for the current and preceding 4 years) in a year when average income is less than taxable income. (Depending on the amount of their income not derived from primary production, some or all of that income may also be effectively taxed at the lower rate corresponding to average income.) In a year in which average income is greater than taxable income, primary producers are taxed at ordinary rates.
The purpose of the averaging provisions is to ensure that fluctuations in income in conjunction with progression in rates of tax do not lead to primary producer taxpayers with fluctuating incomes bearing higher tax rates than other taxpayers having incomes which, over a period of years, are comparable but non-fluctuating. The effects go beyond that when there is an upward (eg inflationary) trend in money incomes over a number of years since, even if fluctuations in income are superimposed on that trend, the averaging provisions result in the taxpayers covered by them bearing lower tax rates than other taxpayers whose incomes over an equal period of years are comparable. Furthermore, even in the absence of an upward trend in income, the provisions introduced in 1977-78 do more than remove the effect on tax of fluctuations in income, as averaging is applied only in years when to do so benefits the taxpayer, and tax is calculated at ordinary rates in other years.
To give effect to the averaging arrangements, in those years when the application of averaging would result in a primary producer paying less tax than would be the case under the normal income tax rate scale, the income tax law allows a special 'averaging rebate' to be subtracted from ordinary tax equal to the difference in tax payable under the two systems. The revenue forgone as a result of the rebate in 1981-82 was $188 million. However, only a proportion of that amount can be rightly viewed as 'concessional assistance'.
Considerable assistance is provided to the Australian film industry. There is a deduction of 150 per cent of capital invested in a qualifying Australian film and an exemption of net receipts from the film of up to 50 per cent of the taxpayer's capital investment in the film. The estimated revenue forgone is $13 million in 1981-82.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 335

CategoryB
Particular difficulty exists in providing estimates of the cost of tax deferral measures. Tax concessions of a deferral nature include accelerated depreciation allowances, and rapid write-off provisions for the mining industry and primary producers. Part of the difficulty with these items is that their costs are spread over a number of years whereas tax expenditure estimates relate to single years. Particularly in the case of a new concession such as an acceleration of depreciation deductions the cost may be small in the first one or two years, yet may grow substantially in later years (see, for example, the discussion in Statement No.4 of the depreciation measures announced on 19 July 1982 and the discussion in Attachment B to Appendix II to Statement No.4).
For an individual taxpayer, tax deferral is equivalent to an interest-free loan from the Government. For the Government it means revenue forgone. Even if aggregate investment subject to the relevant provisions remained constant, there could be a substantial cost over a lengthy transitional period and the revenue would never make up that loss unless the concession was repealed at a later date. When investment subject to the provisions is expanding, these concessions give rise to a continuing lower level of taxation than would otherwise be the case. These matters are discussed further in Appendix II to Statement No.4.
A wide range of accelerated depreciation arrangements apply to existing plant and equipment; recent changes have included:
- double depreciation was allowed in 1974-75 for new plant purchased by a limited range of industries;
- in 1975-76, double depreciation was extended to a wider range of industries;
- from 1976-77, double depreciation was not allowed on any new plant, but it continued to be applied to deductions in 1976-77 and later years relating to eligible plant purchased in 1974-75 and 1975-76;
- a 20 per cent loading in depreciation rates was introduced in 1980-81; it was reduced to 18 per cent for plant ordered after 30 April 1981 ;
- special rates of depreciation are available for plant used to produce basic iron and steel, first ordered under a contract entered into after 18 August 1981;
- the Prime Minister announced on 19 July 1982 that plant ordered after that date will, subject to certain exclusions, be eligible for accelerated depreciation over either 3 or 5 years and that new primary production plant ordered after that date will generally be depreciated over 3 years. He also announced the depreciation measures referred to elsewhere in this appendix in respect of buildings and new provisions relating to deductions for mining development expenditure; and
- on 29 July 1982 the provision was announced of 5 year depreciation for Australian ships less than 5 years old, subject to certain conditions detailed in StatementNo.4.
In order to arrive at a cost in 1982-83 of accelerated depreciation provisions, it would be necessary to compare the level of depreciation deductions actually claimed with those which could have been claimed on the basis of the Taxation Commissioner's standard lives of plant. That in turn, would require a break-up of the deductions for 1982-83 into those relating to plant being depreciated at each of the accelerated rates already mentioned, as well as those being depreciated at standard rates. That calculation would involve more than allowing for differences between the rates of depreciation applied in

336 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

1982-83 and the standard rates. Plant which has attracted accelerated depreciation rates in past years has been depreciated down to a smaller remaining balance than if it had been depreciated at standard rates. To allow for that would require data breaking up the depreciation claims by age of asset; such data are not available.
Provision also exists for fast write-off of capital expenditure on scientific research related to a business.
Depreciation allowances are provided for certain new income-producing buildings (or extensions to existing buildings) commenced after 21 August 1979 that are used to provide short-term accommodation for travellers. The allowance is 2+ per cent per annum of the construction cost of the building. New non-residential income-producing buildings, the construction of which commenced after 19 July 1982, will also be eligible for depreciation at a prime cost rate of 2+ per cent.
As regards capital development expenditure in the mining industry, allowable capital expenditure incurred in respect of the development of a mine property or an oil field that was incurred under a contract entered into by 30 April 1981 was deductible on a diminishing value basis by reference to the estimated life of the mine or field or 5 years, whichever was less. Following the Review of Commonwealth Functions, annual deductions in respect of allowable capital expenditures under a contract entered into on or after 1 May and before 19 August 1981 are calculated by reference to the lesser of the estimated life of the mine or field or 6 years, and the 1981-82 Budget changed the deduction to the lesser of the estimated life of mine or field or 10 years for expenditures under contracts entered into on or after 19 August 1981. The Prime Minister announced on 19 July 1982 that mining and petroleum companies will be able to deduct eligible capital expenditure incurred under a contract entered into after that date by reference to the lesser of the life of the mine or 10 years on a straight line basis. Expenditure on certain facilities for the transport of minerals is deductible in equal instalments over either 10 years or 20 years, at the taxpayer's option to be exercised with the first claim for the deduction. Certain incurred development and transport expenditure, however, is deductible under taxation provisions operative some years ago which continue to apply to expenditure made in those earlier years.
The income tax rebate provision for petroleum exploration and development allows a company engaged in petroleum exploration and development activities to entitle its corporate and non-corporate shareholders to a tax rebate of 27 per cent (30 per cent before 1 May 1981) for share capital subscribed that is spent on eligible outgoings if the company elects to forgo its own right to income tax deductions for the capital expenditure incurred.
Category C
Exemptions from income tax as a form of industry assistance include the exemption of income derived from the production of gold and the exemption of amounts paid to employers who take on young people under the Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training Scheme (CRAFT). The estimated revenue forgone in respect of exempting gold mining income is $75 million in 1980-81 and $65 million in 1981-82.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 337

APPENDIX II TO STATEMENT No. 4*
TREASURY SUBMISSION ON TAXATION EXPENDITURES TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXPENDITURE
Introduction
This paper is submitted in response to an invitation from the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure to make a Submission in relation to the Committee's investigation of taxation expenditures.
The paper examines the concept of taxation expenditures, considers an appropriate definition thereof, lists particular tax expenditures together with (where possible) an estimate of revenue forgone and provides some comments on the establishment of a taxation expenditure account.
The paper is only concerned with taxes for which the Treasurer has principal responsibility, namely, income tax, sales tax and, in the ACT, pay-roll tax and stamp duties. Estate and gift duties have not been included because of their abolition with effect from 1 July 1979. The paper does not cover customs or excise duties, the departure tax and other taxes, fees and fines which are the responsibility of other Ministers.
The Concept of Taxation Expenditure
The Australian taxation system contains a number of provisions under which preferential treatment is extended to certain individuals or companies in the form of tax exemptions, deductions, reduced rates or rebates. In some cases the intention of the provisions is to grant a subsidy or provide an incentive for those engaging in a specific activity or for those in particular circumstances by lowering or deferring their tax liability. In other cases that may be the effect, whatever the reason for enacting the provision. The concessions reduce or delay the receipt of taxation revenue and are as much a call on the Budget of a particular year as are direct outlays. Because their effects on the overall Budget results and on those who benefit are comparable in many respects with effects of direct outlays, they are often referred to as 'taxation expenditures'.
The description of an item as a taxation expenditure does not necessarily indicate that the item is considered a departure from an equitable tax distribution but, rather, it implies that the item confers a benefit on a recipient that could conceivably be regarded as an alternative to direct expenditure in the same way that dependent child rebates, which operated prior to 1976, conferred a benefit comparable to family allowances.
Taxation expenditures can be used to encourage certain types of economic activity, eg, the investment allowance, or as welfare assistance, eg, the exemption of certain pensions and benefits from personal income tax or the spouse rebate. As tax expenditures are designed to achieve various goals, measurement of them provides additional information on the quantity of community resources being channelled through Governments into the attainment of those goals. Consequently in order to obtain a comprehensive picture of what a Budget does, as well as examining direct outlays it is also necessary to evaluate both new and continuing taxation expenditures.
* This appendix reproduces a submission made by the Treasury in May 1982 to the House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Expenditure. It does not take into consideration some of the Government's more recent changes in the taxation system, eg certain accelerated depreciation arrangements and the home loan interest rebate schemes.

338 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Of course information on direct budget outlays and taxation expenditures, however comprehensive, would not indicate the full overall effect of Government policies on resource allocation. Governments may also influence resource allocation through, eg, tariffs and quotas, exchange rate management, purchasing policy, monetary policy, guarantees to individuals, companies and Government bodies and regulations and controls.
Most taxation expenditures are not accounting items which can be identified in accounting records and totalled down to the last cent. There is a problem in defining them, and a further problem in estimating their cost.
There is a need to distinguish between tax expenditures and other provisions which, while reducing revenue, are basic components of the taxation structure. The distinction in some cases is necessarily a matter of judgment. Some hard questions of this kind arise with tax expenditures in the welfare areas. For example, is a rebate for a dependant a tax expenditure? Assistance could be provided by direct expenditure, as are allowances for dependent children now. On the other hand it might be regarded as no more than a means of adjusting the tax base to measure 'capacity to pay'.
The USA presents a tax expenditure supplement to its Budget, and has now done so for a number of years. In that supplement, the US counterpart for the spouse rebate is not treated as a tax expenditure, but as a basic structural component of the tax system. In view of the Commonwealth Government's decision to increase the spouse rebate by 34 per cent in 1980-81 (ie, by substantially more than the rate of inflation) there could be a question about the right approach to adopt in Australia. If the $597 rebate in 1979-80 correctly defined the boundary line between capacity to pay and subsidy, the $800 rebate in 1980-81 could be said to have gone beyond that boundary in real terms and presumably included an element of tax expenditure. On the other hand, if $800 correctly defined that boundary in 1980-81, an amount of $597 did not do the job in 1979-80 and there would have been negative taxation expenditure. But it would be going too far to break the item into two components-one a tax expenditure and the other not. As indicated below, it is necessary to take a pragmatic approach to items such as this, as do the USA and Canada. In Attachment A the dependent spouse rebate is costed at whatever the level of the rebate in the particular year happens to be-ie, the entire rebate for that year is treated as a taxation expenditure.
Information on assistance to industry through the taxation system has been included regularly in attachments to the Budget Speech in recent years along with details on direct assistance to industry. For some years there was also some information on the cost to revenue of some of the personal income tax concession items which overlapped
the welfare area. In 1980-81 an Appendix to Statement No.4 of Budget Paper No. 1 entitled 'Tax-
ation Expenditures' discussed taxation expenditure generally and provided information on, and costs for, the major items of taxation expenditure in Australia. The intention was (and remains) to provide whatever information was possible in the Appendix on a continuing basis and to expand it as conceptual and data problems could be overcome. A number of improvements were made to the Appendix in the 1981-82 Budget paper.
Taxation expenditure figures as such do not attempt to evaluate government taxation policy nor do they question the desirability of particular taxation provisions or their effectiveness in achieving set goals. Their purpose is merely to provide information

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 339

about the assistance which is given under the taxation system. It follows that it is not normal practice for taxation expenditure accounts to indicate the objectives which each tax expenditure is intended to serve. The initially perceived objective is frequently stated in Second Reading Speeches introducing the legislation which authorises particular tax expenditures, but the nature or emphasis of that objective can change with time as circumstances change. Accordingly, the objectives shown against each item listed in Attachment A to this paper should be read very broadly.
Defining Taxation Expenditure
Not all provisions of the taxation legislation which give rise to a reduction in tax can be classed as taxation expenditures. For example, Section 51 of the Income Tax Assessment Act provides for deduction of expenses incurred in earning income, in order to arrive at a net income figure to which tax might be applied. Expenses incurred by either business or individuals in earning income are rightly and properly deductible. A benchmark or normal taxation structure therefore needs to be set up conceptually and deviations from the benchmark or norm can then be classed as taxation expenditures. The main definitional problem arises out of the need to distinguish between taxation expenditure and other provisions which, while reducing revenue, are basic components of the taxation structure.
What constitutes the benchmark or normal taxation structure will vary depending upon individual views of what the structure would be if there were no taxation expenditures. Difficulties in the welfare areas such as the spouse rebate have already been mentioned. Another example would be the income tax averaging rebate for primary producers. Some would view that rebate as part of the normal taxation structure taking account of income fluctuations, others would see it simply as a concessional arrangement which is available to only a limited number of taxpayers. It could even be argued that the rate structure itself, being progressive, departs from a 'normal' structure and provides some assistance to those on lower incomes (at the expense of those on higher incomes).
In order to eliminate individual differences with regard to the definition and create a workable system, overseas countries which have produced taxation expenditures accounts have had to be pragmatic and have specifically defined the benchmark structure. In Canada, for example, the benchmark structure is defined as one that provides no preferential treatment to taxpayers on the basis of demographic characteristics, sources or uses of income, geographic location, or any other special circumstances applicable only to a given taxpayer or to a particular group of taxpayers. In addition, the Canadians have suggested that the benchmark tax structure should not depart dramatically from the public perception of the current taxation system. The last criterion was dictated by the view that the purpose of the tax expenditure account should be to provide information and not to indulge in an academic exercise of defining an ideal tax system. The USA, similarly, has not been over-ambitious in defining taxation expenditures. It defines them as deviations from the 'generally accepted' structure.
The adoption of a similar definition in Australia would mean that some items which would be viewed by some as taxation expenditures e.g., the failure to tax capital gains or the imputed rent on owner occupied dwellings, would not be included in any taxation expenditure account. Nevertheless, in line with the view adopted in Canada and the USA, it is considered that the aim of identifying taxation expenditures should be to

340 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

include in the Budget-making process and documentation the cost of special taxation provisions which can, in most cases, be considered as alternatives to direct expenditure programs rather than to attempt to define some ideal taxation system and show deviations from it.
Again for pragmatic reasons, most broad based changes to the tax system are not viewed as tax expenditures. It follows that the introduction of the standard rate system in 1978, recent indexation adjustments to the rate scale and the sales tax rate changes announced in the last Budget, would all be ignored in any taxation expenditure account. Similarly the cost of exempting State and local governments and some government bodies from tax would not be regarded as taxation expenditures.
Attachment A to this paper lists taxation expenditures in Australia along the lines of the Canadian definition and also, where possible, provides an indication of their cost to revenue. As with the Canadian taxation expenditure account, the list is wide ranging and contains items which some would not regard in whole or in part as taxation expenditures.
Estimating Taxation Expenditures
Direct government expenditure for different items is relatively easy to determine for any particular year, provided the classification required is not finer than that in the Government's ledger. The same, however, cannot be said for taxation expenditures. Calculation of their cost to revenue usually requires some statistical estimation and projection.
It is of cours~ possible to ascertain the cost of some taxation expenditures by totalling the claims in taxation returns for a given year. This could be done, for example, for the spouse rebate. Using this method the latest available statistics are for the 1979-80 income ye.ar. Estimation is required for the calculation of costs in respect of more recent years.
In some cases details of taxation expenditure cannot be ascertained from taxation returns and it is necessary for broadly based calculations to be made. Items involving exempt income would fit into this category.
While information on many of the items of tax expenditure is readily available from statistics derived from the administrative processes of the Taxation Office, data on which to base costings of other items are more difficult to obtain and reliance has had to be placed on external sources where these can be used. In some cases it has not been possible to provide a costing, for reasons indicated in the comments in Attachment A on the items concerned.
There are limits to the range of items which can be separately tabulated in the taxation statistics. The basic data are derived by statistical staff and assessors who record the required figures when tax returns are assessed. The range of data tabulated usually only includes items needed for assessment purposes. Furthermore, a selection must be made from items contained on returns, because the need to complete speedily the task of assessing returns, collecting the revenue and accounting for it requires that only a limited time can be devoted to statistical work.
These constraints require the Taxation Office to concentrate on the major statistical items that apply to large numbers of taxpayers. Statistics of some of the more specialised items are not capable of being compiled without devoting a disproportionate amount of effort to this work.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 341

Particular difficulty exists not only in calculating taxation expenditures associated with tax deferrals but also in formulating a concept to convey the costs clearly. Tax concessions of a deferral nature include accelerated depreciation allowances and rapid write-off provisions for the mining industry and primary producers. Part of the difficulty with these items is that their costs are spread over a number of years whereas tax expenditure accounts relate to single years. Particularly in the case of a new concession such as an acceleration of depreciation deductions the cost in the first one or two years may be small, yet the cost may grow substantially in later years. Tax deferral is equivalent to an interest free loan from the Government to the taxpayer concerned. Even if investment in the relevant area remained constant, there could be a substantial cost over a lengthy transitional period and, contrary to views sometimes advanced, the revenue would never make up that loss unless the concession were repealed at a later date. If investment in a relevant area is expanding, these concessions give rise to a continuing lower level of taxation than would otherwise be the case. These matters are discussed further in Attachment B to this paper.
The lack of precise information on the amounts that would be deductible in the absence of the provisions and a satisfactory basis for determining the value of the interest free loan involved make it difficult to provide reliable estimates of taxation expenditures in respect of tax deferrals, particularly where the special provisions have been in place for a long time.
Estimation of individual taxation expenditures is done by comparing revenue under the present law with that expected if the relevant provision alone were eliminated and all other features of the taxation system remained the same. In most cases the estimate is made by reference to the taxpayer's marginal tax rate. As a consequence it is not possible to aggregate and produce a total for taxation expenditure from individual items. The following example may help to explain the point.
A concessional rebate is available in Australia to individuals where the aggregate expenditure on certain concessional items exceeds $1,590. The cost to revenue of the concessional rebate in 1979-80 is estimated to have been $77 million. Taxpayers who are eligible for the rebate normally claim up to around the limits of $1,200 for life insurance and superannuation and of $300 for rates and land tax in respect of the sole or principal place of residence as well as some additional concessional expenditure. The cost of the concession (or more accurately the gain that would have resulted from withdrawal of the concession) in respect of life insurance and superannuation is estimated to be $69 million while that for rates and land tax is estimated to be $32 million. Abolition of both items together, however, would not result in increasing the revenue by the sum of the two, $101 million, but by something approaching $77 million, the estimated total cost of the concessional rebate.
In the estimation of individual taxation expenditures it is also generally assumed that the removal or reduction of a concession would not alter behaviour with regard to the activity which attracts the concession. This may be a somewhat heroic assumption in some cases, and an alternative assumption is sometimes made, as it could be expected that elimination of any tax expenditure provision would cause taxpayers to rearrange their affairs in order to minimise the impact of the change, just as the introduction of a concession could spur them to make use of it. If it were practicable to allow in all cases for such response effects the revenue effect could be expected to differ to some extent

342 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

from the cost of a given concession as actually estimated. In estimating costs it is also usually assumed that there is no effect on the overall level of economic activity as a result of the elimination of a given tax expenditure.
Numerical estimates of taxation expenditures should accordingly be treated with some caution.
The estimates for taxation expenditures in the Attachment A are basically for the 1979-80 income year, although estimates for later years are shown where available. For reasons mentioned earlier, it has not been practicable to provide an estimate for each item listed. As later data become available, some of the figures may also need to be revised.
Conclusion
It is appropriate that where possible taxation concessions should be listed and an indication given of their individual costs. We should, however, guard against being over-ambitious with the presentation of any taxation expenditure account. It must be realised that there are difficult conceptual and data problems and that tax expenditure figures are only statistical estimates based upon assumptions. The inclusion of an item as a tax expenditure does not necessarily indicate that it is considered a departure from an equitable tax. distribution but rather that it can be considered as an alternative to direct expenditure.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 343

ESTIMATED COST TO REVENUE OF TAX EXPENDITURES, BY FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION
This attachment lists individual taxation expenditures, together with a statement of their broad objective and, where possible, an indication of their cost to revenue. The paper itself comments upon some of the difficulties in estimating taxation expenditures and Attachment B considers in detail the particular measurement problems which arise in the case of accelerated capital write-off provisions. It has not been possible to cost all the items listed below largely because of insufficient information available to the Taxation Office. This is particularly so in respect of some of the older income tax concessions which have been in existence, in some cases, for over 30 or 40 years. In particular cases it might have been possible to obtain information from other sources which would have enabled an estimate to be made but, because of time constraints and questions as to how adequately the data could be matched to income tax concepts, these avenues have not been pursued. Where an item is costed at 'under $1 million' no reliable estimate is available but the cost is unlikely to exceed $1 million in a full year.

ITEM
1. Defence
- Exemption of part time pay and allowances for members of the Reserve Defence Forces. General objective: To encourage people to join the Reserve Defence Forces. Cost: $11 million (1980-81 income year) .
- Deductions for gifts to the Commonwealth or a state when made for defence purposes. General objective: To encourage gifts for defence purposes. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Exemption of the re-engagement bonus payable to service personnel. General objective: To give added incentive for service personnel to re-engage. Cost: $1 million 1980-81 income year.
- Exemption from pay-roll tax of wages paid to a member of the Reserve Defence Forces who is engaged in Defence Reserve activities while on leave from employment. General objective: To assist employers whose staff are actively engaged in Defence Reserve activities. Cost: Under $1 million.
- The following item is exempt from sales tax: Goods purchased by a non-profit body for donation to or for use of members of the Defence Forces. General objective: To encourage donations of goods for defence purposes. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.

344 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

2. Education
- Exemption of income from certain educational scholarships. General objective: To provide additional assistance to scholarship holders. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Rebates for self education expenses and education expenses of dependants up to $250 per person.l General objective: To help alleviate some of the cost burden associated with education. Cost: 1979-80 income year $50 million.
- Deductions for gifts to prescribed institutions of advanced education for certified purposes. General objective: To encourage donations to such bodies. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Exemption from pay-roll tax of salaries paid by certain non-government schools. General objective: Place non-government schools on the same footing as government schools. Cost: Under $1 million.
- The following item is exempt from sales tax: Goods for use by universities and schools. General objective: Assist educational bodies with the purchase of goods. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
3. Health
- Rebates for contributions to a registered hospital and/or medical insurance scheme for basic cover. General objective: To encourage participation in health insurance schemes. Cost: $470 million in respect of contributions paid in 1981-82 (preliminary estimate).
- Rebates for health related expenses.l General objective: To alleviate some of the cost burden associated with health care. Cost: 1979-80 income year $46 million.
- Exemption from pay-roll tax of salaries paid by certain hospitals. General objective: To reduce outlays in organisations which are largely government financed. Cost: Under $1 million.
- The following items are exempt from sales tax:
(a) Goods for use and not for sale by infant welfare clinics.
(b) Goods for use by public and non-profit hospitals.
I. These items are subject to inclusion in the $1590 Concessional Expenditure rebate block, and indicate the gain to income tax revenue that would result from withdrawal of each of the classes of expenditure separately.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 345

(c) Surgical instruments and appliances of a kind used in private hospitals other than non-profit private hospitals, or by medical practitioners.
(d) Gases for use in hospitals or by medical practitioners or dentists.
(e) Aids and appliances for the blind and deaf and surgical appliances of the self-help kind such as wheelchairs and artificial limbs.
General objective: To reduce the cost of goods used in health care. Cost: In respect only of surgical instruments and appliances of the kind used in hospitals the annual cost would be about $25 million (at 17+ per cent).

4. Social Security and Welfare
- Exemption of certain pensions and benefits for ex-service personnel and their dependants. General objective: To provide additional assistance to ex-service personnel and their dependants Cost: 1980-81 income year $150 million.
- Exemption of income of certain charitable institutions. General objective: To encourage certain charitable institutions. Cost: Because such bodies are not required to submit taxation returns data are not available to enable the cost to be calculated.
- Exemption of family allowances. General objective: To provide family assistance unrelated to income. Cost: 1981-82 income year $125 million if taxed in the hands of recipient and if it continued to be excluded from the separate net income for spouse rebate purposes .
- Exemption of compensation for Nazi persecution. General objective: To provide additional assistance to those receiving such compensation. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Exemption of disability pensions. General objective: To provide additional assistance to the disabled. Cost: 1981-82 $10 million.
- Exemption of fixed sum workers compensation awards. General objective: To provide additional assistance to persons receiving fixed sum compensation payments. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Deductibility of gifts of $2 or more to specified funds, authorities and institutions. General objective: To encourage donations to certain charitable bodies. Cost: Income year 1979-80 $30 million (excludes cost in respect of donations by businesses) .

346 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

- Rebates for adoption expenses. l General objective: To help alleviate some of the cost burden associated with adoption. Cost: 1979-80 income year $0.1 million.
- Rebate for funeral expenses of dependants. l General objective: To help alleviate some of the cost burden associated with burial expenses. Cost: Under $1 million.
- Rebate for housekeeper caring for dependants.2 General objective: To provide some relief for certain persons requiring a housekeeper to care for dependants. Cost: 1979-80 income year $8 million.
- Rebate for sole parent.2 General objective: To provide assistance for sole parent families. Cost: 1979-80 income year $32 million.
- Rebate for dependent spouse.2 General objective: To provide some assistance to taxpayers maintaining a dependent spouse. Cost: 1979-80 income year $607 million.
- Rebate for parent and parent-in-law.2 General objective: To provide some assistance to taxpayers maintaining a parent or parent-in-law. Cost: 1979-80 income year $3.6 million.
- Rebate for invalid relative.2 General objective: To provide some assistance to taxpayers maintaining an invalid relative. Cost: 1979-80 income year $0.1 million.
- Concessional treatment of some subsidised employee housing. General objective: To assist the relevant employees whose housing is subsidised by their employer. Cost: Because of conceptual difficulties and a lack of data it has not been possible to cost this item.
- Concessional rate of tax for abnormal receipts by authors, artists and inventors. General objective: To provide some relief from tax in respect of, large irregular payments received by such people. Cost: Under $1 million.
- The following items are exempt from sales tax: (a) Motor vehicles for use by leg disabled persons in travelling to and from gainful employment.
(b) Motor vehicles for use by ex-servicemen who have lost a leg or both arms or are in receipt of a special pension.
I. These items are subject to inclusion in the $1590 Concessional Expenditure rebate block, and indicate the gain to income tax revenue that would result from withdrawal of each of the classes of expenditure separately.
2. Rebates for spouse and housekeeper increased from $597 in 1979-80 to $800 in 1980-81 and to $830 in 1981-82 and sole parent and other dependant rebates increased by the same proportion.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 347

General objective: To provide encouragement for such disabled to purchase a motor vehicle to travel to employment. Cost: 1980-81, $3 million.

5. Housing
- Deduction for the cost of insulating a first home. General objective: To encourage home insulation. Cost: Introduced in 1981-82 when the first full year cost was estimated to be $6 million.
- Rebate for rates and land tax in respect of a sole or principal place of residence. l General objective: Assist the home owner. Cost: In the 1979-80 income year $32 million.

6. Urban and Regional Development and the Environment
- Zone allowance rebates. General objective: To provide assistance to taxpayers living in isolated areas. Cost: For the 1979-80 income year $35 million. Increases in the rebates for dependents and other changes to the zone rebate arrangements for 1981-82 are expected to increase this amount to about $70 million in a full year.

7. Culture and Recreation
- Deductions for gifts to a National Trust, public museum or art gallery and other specified bodies. General objective: To encourage donations of gifts to such bodies. Cost: The deduction in respect of gifts of art or other property to the Australiana Fund, public library, museum or art gallery is estimated to be $1.3 million in 1979-80 income year.
- Exemption from income tax of a number of bodies including charities and sporting bodies and churches. General objective: To encourage the existence of such bodies. Cost: Because such bodies are not required to submit taxation returns data are not available to enable the cost to be calculated.
- The following items are exempt from sales tax:
(a) Goods purchased to promote sport among the students of universities or schools.
(b) Equipment and articles for use in Church services and religious devotion. (c) Articles for use in a museum or art gallery controlled by a public authority. General objective: To encourage cultural, religious and recreational activities. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
I. These items are subject to inclusion in the $1590 Concessional Expenditure rebate block, and indicate the gain to income tax revenue that would result from withdrawal of each of the classes of expenditure separately.

348 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

8. Economic Services
A. Transport and Communication
- Deductions for capital costs of telephone lines to primary producers. General objective: Assist primary producers to instal telephones. Cost: Under $1 million.
- Deduction for capital expenditure by primary producers on timber access roads. General objective: To provide some assistance for the construction of such roads. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.

B. Water Supply. Electricity and Gas
- Deduction provided to primary producers for the costs of conserving or conveying water. General objective: To encourage primary producers to introduce additional irrigation facilities. Cost: In the 1979-80 income year $3 million in respect of expenditure incurred in the period 14 April to 30 June 1980.
- Deduction for capital expenditure in connecting or upgrading mains electricity. General objective: To assist primary producers to instal mains electricity. Cost: Introduced in 1981-82 and the full year cost at the time of introduction was estimated to be $5 million.

C. Industry Assistance and Development
- Allowing primary producers to adopt artificially low values for natural increase in livestock. General objective: The provision recognises the difficulty in determining the actual cost of natural increase in livestock. Cost: Because of conceptual difficulties and a lack of data it has not been possible to cost this item.
- Income tax averaging for primary producers. General objective: To assist primary producers whose tax liability might otherwise be adversely affected by income fluctuations. Cost: The cost of the averaging rebate in 1979-80 and 1980-81 was estimated at $180 million and $215 million respectively.
- Deductions to primary producers under the Income Equalisation Deposits scheme. General objective: To enable primary producers to act themselves to even out the effects of fluctuating income on their tax liability over a period of years. Cost: Income tax revenue deferred in respect of deductions allowed for deposits net of withdrawals, is estimated to be $29 million in 1980-81.
- 20% depreciation allowance for storage improvements for grain, hay and fodder available to primary producers. General objective: To encourage primary producers to increase storage facilities. Cost: Introduced in 1979-80 and the revenue forgone in the first full year at the time of introduction was estimated to be $6 million.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 349

- Deductions for clearing and draining of land, eradication of pests (etc.) by primary producers. General objective: To provide an incentive to primary producers to increase output. Cost: For the 1978-79 income year $3 million.
- Deduction provided to primary producers for cost of fences for specific disease control. General objective: To assist in control or eradication of diseases in cattle. Cost: Introduced in 1980-81 and at the time of introduction the cost of this item and the cost of forced sale of cattle for disease control was estimated in a full year to be $4 million.
- Provision for 5 year spreading of assessment in (a) insurance recoveries for the loss of timber or livestock and (b) income from forced disposal of livestock. General objective: To assist with restocking of a property. Cost: Because of conceptual difficulties and a lack of data it has not been possible to cost this item.
- Deferment of assessment on income from double wool clip. General objective: To avoid hardship in cases where wool growers are forced to shear their sheep twice in a financial year because of drought, fire or flood. Cost: Because of conceptual difficulties and a lack of data it has not been possible to cost this item.
- Deduction provided to primary producers for expenditure on soil conservation. General objective: Encouragement of soil conservation. Cost: Introduced in 1981-82 and the full year cost at the time of introduction was estimated to be $2 million.
- Depreciation deduction for structural improvements by primary producers. General objective: Recognition of the fact that fences, dams and similar capital improvements on primary production land depreciate in value from year to year. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Deduction for the cost of timber mill buildings. General objective: The provision recognises that the value of such buildings is related to the period of use of the timber stand and diminishes as the stand nears exhaustion. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Deduction for reduced value of land due to timber depletion. General objective: The provision ensures that the cost of standing timber which is acquired as part of the cost of the land on which the timber stands is brought to account as a deductible cost of timber felling operations. Cost: Because of conceptual difficulties and a lack of data it has not been possible to cost this item.
- Unlimited carryforward of primary production losses. General objective: To assist primary producers during long periods of low or negative income that tend to occur in primary production. Cost: Because of a lack of data it has not been possible to cost this item.

350 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

- 20% prime cost depreciation allowance provided for most new plant and machinery for primary production. General objective: To provide an incentive for primary producers to introduce new plant and equipment and to assist the long term stability of rural industries. Cost: Introduced in 1981-82 and the revenue forgone in the first full year at the time of introduction was estimated to be $20 million. See also Attachment B.
- Film Industry Concessions
(a) Deduction of 150 per cent of capital invested in a qualifying Australian film.
(b) Exemption of net receipts up to 50 per cent of the taxpayer's capital investment in the film.
General objective: To provide an incentive to develop the Australian film industry. Cost: Final cost in respect of the 1980-81 income year $24 million.
- Deduction for the cost of purchasing the copyright of an Australian film. General objective: To encourage the film industry. Cost: In 1979-80 the period over which deductions under Division lOB of the Income Tax Assessment Act may be allowed for capital costs in acquiring rights under a copyright for an Australian film were reduced from 25 to 2 years. The first full year cost of the change at that time was estimated to be less than $1 million.
- Deduction for capital expenditure in the development or purchase of an Australian patent, design, copyright or licence. General objective: To encourage innovation. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Deductions for expenditure on exploration by general and petroleum miners. General objective: Encouragement of mineral and petroleum exploration. Cost: Included in cost estimates for the next two items.
- Deductions for capital expenditure incurred in developing a general mining operation. General objective: To allow over a period of years deduction of the cost of capital expenditure incurred. Cost: The statistics necessary to enable reliable estimates to be made of the cost to revenue of deductions in respect of allowable capital expenditure, as defined in section 122A of the Income Tax Assessment Act, are not available. However, the cost to income tax revenue of deductions allowed under the provisions of Division 10-General Mining-for items of expenditure not otherwise depreciable under the ordinary provisions of the Act was estimated to be $43 million in 1979-80 and $59 million in 1980-81. There is an additional cost to revenue through deductions allowed under the provisions of Division 10 for expenditure on plant depreciable under the ordinary provisions of the Act.
- Deduction for capital expenditure incurred in developing a petroleum field. General objective: To allow over a period of years deduction of the cost of capital expenditure incurred. Cost: The statistics necessary to enable reliable estimates to be made of the cost to revenue of deductions allowed in respect of allowable capital expenditure under section 124AA of the Income Tax Assessment Act are not available. However, the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 351

cost to income tax revenue of deductions allowed under Division lOAAProspecting and Mining for Petroleum-for items of expenditure not otherwise depreciable under the ordinary provisions of the Act was estimated to be $18 million in 1979-80 and $25 million in 1980-81. There is an additional cost to revenue through deductions allowed under the provisions of Division lOAA for expenditure on plant depreciable under ordinary provisions of the Act.
- Deduction for purchase of mining or prospecting rights by general and petroleum miners. General objective: To allow over a period of years deduction of the cost of capital expenditure incurred. Cost: Because of a lack of data it has not been possible to cost this item.
- Deductions for certain transportation expenses associated with minerals and petroleum mining. General objective: To provide deductions for the unusual cost of providing transport facilities to often remote mines and to encourage general and petroleum mining. Cost: The statistics necessary to enable reliable estimates to be made of the cost to revenue of deductions in respect of allowable capital expenditure, as defined in Section 123A of the Income Tax Assessment Act, are not available. However, the cost to income tax revenue of deductions allowed under the provisions of Division lOAAA-Transport of Certain Minerals-for items of expenditure not otherwise depreciable under the ordinary provisions of the Act was estimated to be:
1979-80 $3 million 1980-81 $1 million
There is an additional cost to revenue through deductions allowed under the provisions of Division 10AAA for expenditure on plant depreciable under the ordinary provisions of the Act.
- Exemption from tax of income from gold mining. General objective: To encourage exploration for and the mining of gold. Cost: The cost of this exemption obviously varies greatly with variability in the profitability of gold mining, which has recently undergone a sharp decline. In 1979-80 the cost was $40 million and in 1980-81 $75 million.
- Exemption of income from sale, transfer or assignment of rights to mine gold or prescribed metals.
General objective: Provide lm incentive to search for minerals.
Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Rebate for capital subscribed to companies engaged in petroleum exploration and development. General objective: To encourage petroleum exploration and mining. Cost: Revenue deferred in 1980-81 $28 million.
- Investment allowance. General objective: To assist in the introduction of new plant and equipment. Cost: In 1979-80 $499 million and in 1980-81 $411 million.

352 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

- Accelerated depreciation allowances by means of loading on normal depreciation rates.
General objective: To assist in the introduction of new plant and equipment. Cost: See Attachment B.

- Conversion allowance for the cost of replacing oil-fired plant with non-oil-fired plant. General objective: Conservation of fossil fuels. Cost: Introduced in 1979-80 and at that time the first full year cost, together with that for conversion of such plant, was estimated to be $15 million.
- Deduction for the cost of converting oil-fired/LPG plant to non-oil-fired plant. General objective: Conservation of fossil fuels. Cost: See note on the preceding item.
- Immediate deduction for capital cost of storage facilities for petroleum based fuels. General objective: To encourage the growth of fuel storage faclities. Cost: Introduced in 1981-82 when the revenue forgone in the first full year was estimated to be $12 million.
- Deductions for capital expenditure on traveller accommodation. General objective: To encourage the construction of traveller accommodation. Cost: Introduced in 1979-80 and at the time of introduction the cost in 1981-82 was estimated at $0.6 million.
- Exemption of amounts paid to employers who take on young people under the CRAFT scheme. General objective: To provide additional incentive for employers to take on apprentices. Cost: $15 million in the 1981-82 income year.
- Deductions for capital expenditure on scientific research, employee housing, butter and cheese etc. factories. General objective: To encourage capital expenditure in these areas. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Deduction for conversion of plant for use in connection with the metric system. General objective: To provide assistance in the metric conversion of plant. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Deductions to co-operative companies for amounts distributed to members as bonuses, interest or dividends. General objective: To apply the principle of mutuality. Cost: Because of conceptual difficulties and a lack of data it has not been possible to cost this item.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 353

- The treatment of friendly society dispensaries*
(a) Exemption from tax of 90% of the amounts received from the Commonwealth and from proceeds of the sale of medicines.
(b) Exemption from tax of certain other income. General objective: The arrangements announced in the 1981-82 Budget put friendly society dispensaries on the same basis as other non-profit companies. Cost: The full year cost of the change announced in the 1981-82 Budget was estimated to be $0.6 million.
- Exemption of personal income from approved overseas projects. General objective: To encourage Australians to work overseas on certain projects. Cost in respect of the 1980-81 income year $0.05 million.
- Trading stock valuation adjustment (now abolished). General objective: To provide some relief for the cost of stock held during inflationary periods. Cost: In respect of 1979-80 $334 million and in respect of 1980-81 $64 million.
- Exemption from tax of interest received by credit unions. General objective: To apply the principle of mutuality. Cost: In 1979-80 income year $8.0 million, on the basis that tax would have been assessed at 46% on the excess of their total income over their total expenses.

- The following items are exempt from sales tax:
(a) Machinery, implements and apparatus for use in agricultural industry. General objective: To encourage primary producers to introduce new machinery, etc. Cost: Agricultural, etc., machinery and equipment other than tractors $70 million (at 17t per cent).
(b) Tractors for use in agricultural industry or timber getting industry. General objective: To assist primary producers in the purchase of tractors. Cost: In respect of all tractors including those used in other industries $75 million (at 17t per cent).
(c) Agricultural equipment and materials (for use in agricultural industry). General objective: To encourage primary producers to introduce new equipment, etc. Cost: See (a) above.
(d) Ethylene gas for use in vegetable growing industry. General objective: To relieve some of the cost burden associated with the use of the gas. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made. Some information may be available from other sources which would enable an estimate of the cost to be made but because oftime constraints these avenues have not been pursued.
- Changes were announced in the 1981-82 Budget to the effect that Friendly Society Dispensaries are to be taxed on net profit attributable to all amounts received from the Commonwealth for the supply of pharmaceutical benefits, from investment income, and from the sale of pharmaceutical products to those who are not members of the Friendly Society.

354 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

(e) Dairying machinery and equipment. General objective: To encourage the introduction of new machinery in the dairy industry. Cost: See (a) above.
(f) Equipment for use in fruit growing industry. General objective: To encourage the introduction of new equipment in fruit growing. Cost: See (a) above.
(g) Equipment and materials for use in dried fruit industry. General objective: To encourage the introduction of new equipment and materials in the dried fruit industry. Cost: See (a) above.
(h) Equipment and materials for the handling or treatment of fruit. General objective: To reduce some of the cost associated with the introduction of such material. Cost: See (a) above.
(i) Poultry farmers' equipment. General objective: To encourage the introduction of new equipment by poultry farmers. Cost: See (a) above.
(j) Bee keepers' equipment. General objective: To encourage the introduction of new equipment by bee keepers. Cost: See (a) above.
(k) Machinery for use in mining industry. General objective: To provide some relief from the cost of the introduction of such machinery. Cost: Mining and drilling machinery (other than bulldozers and tractors) $95 million (at 17t per cent).
(1) Brattice cloth and tacks for use in mining industry. General objective: To assist the mining industry. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made. Some information may be available from other sources which would enable an estimate of the cost to be made but because of time constraints these avenues have not been pursued.
(m) Pumping and other machinery implements and apparatus for use in agricultural industry. General objective: To encourage irrigation. Cost: See (a) above.
(n) Equipment and materials in fishing industry. General objective: To provide some relief from the cost of purchasing such equipment and materials. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made. Some information may be available from other sources which would enable an estimate of the cost to be made but because of time constraints these avenues have not been pursued.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 355

(0) Printed matter and award ribbons used by societies established for the advancement of agriculture. General objective: To encourage the spread of new ideas in agriculture. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made. Some information may be available from other sources which would enable an estimate of the cost to be made but because of time constraints these avenues have not been pursued.
(p) Certain motor vehicles for use in the prescribed area for the transport of livestock. General objective: To provide some relief from the cost of transporting livestock in isolated areas of Australia. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made. Some information may be available from other sources which would enable an estimate of the cost to be made but because of time constraints these avenues have not been pursued.
(q) Lubricants for industrial purposes for machinery implements or apparatus other than road vehicles. General objective: To assist with maintenance of the relevant equipment. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made. Some information may be available from other sources which would enable an estimate of the cost to be made but because of time constraints these avenues have not been pursued.
(r) Articles for use in the destruction of pests for business or industrial purposes. General objective: Incentive to pest control. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made. Some information may be available from other sources which would enable an estimate of the cost to be made but because oftime constraints these avenues have not been pursued.
(s) Cranes and winches for use in the timber getting industry. General objective: To provide some relief from the cost of introducing cranes and winches in the timber getting industry. Cost: See (a) above.
(t) Piano rolls and antiques. General objective: To provide assistance to the relevant activities. Cost: Concession introduced in 1979-80 and the first full year cost at the time of introduction was estimated to be $1 million.
(u) Domestic heaters and solar equipment. General objective: Conservation of fossil fuels. Cost: Concession introduced in 1979-80 and the full year cost at the time of introduction was estimated to be $3 million.
(v) Equipment used in conversion of internal combustion engines to LPG or natural gas. General objective: Encouraging use of LPG and natural gas. Cost: Concession introduced in 1979-80 and the full year cost at the time of introduction was estimated to be $0.5 million.

356 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9. General Public Services
Foreign Affairs, Overseas Aid and External Territories
- Exemption from payroll tax of the salaries of representatives in Australia of foreign governments. General objective: Adherence to international convention. Cost: Under $1 million.
- Exemption from tax of official income earned in Australia by foreign government representatives and other visitors. General objective: Adherence to international convention. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- The exemption from sales tax of motor vehicles for use by members of the Defence Forces of various countries serving in Australia. General objective: Adherence to international conventions, in some cases. Cost: $50 000 in 1980-81.

General and Scientific Research
- Deduction for expenditure on scientific research. General objective: An incentive to scientific research. Cost: In 1979-80 $1 million and in 1980-81 $1 million.

10. Not Allocated a Function
- A rebate of interest on certain Government or semi-Government securities issued before 1 November 1968. General objective: To encourage investment in such securities. Cost: 1980-81 income year $10 million.
- Rebate for superannuation contributions and life insurancel - General objective: To encourage taxpayers to participate in superannuation and life insurance schemes. Cost: 1979-80 income year $69 million.
- Deduction for superannuation contributions by unsupported employees or the self employed. General objective: To provide additional incentive for the self employed, etc., to join superannuation schemes. Cost: Introduced in 1980-81. The estimated full year cost at the time of introduction was estimated at $100 million.
- Deduction for employer contribution to superannuation funds. General objective: To encourage taxpayers to participate in superannuation schemes. Cost: In respect of companies the cost was $430 million for the 1978-79 income year.

I. These items are subject to inclusion in the $1590 Concessional Expenditure rebate block, and indicate the gain to income tax revenue that would result from withdrawal of each of the classes of expenditure separately.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 357

- Concessional treatment of investment income earned by approved superannuation funds. General objective: To encourage taxpayers to participate in superannuation schemes. Cost: Insufficient information held in the Taxation Office to allow a reliable estimate to be made.
- Exemption from tax of 95% of lump sum benefit received upon retirement from or termination of employment. General objective: To encourage participation in superannuation schemes. Cost: $370 million in respect of the 1979-80 income year.
- Treatment oflife insurance.
(a) exemption for life assurance companies of investment income from superannuation business provided the 30/20 rule is observed.
(b) deduction for life assurance companies of 1% of the value of future calculated liabilities.
(c) availability to life offices of a rebate in respect of intercorporate dividends. General objective: To encourage investment in life assurance and superannuation schemes. Cost: Cost in respect of each element is as follows: (a) The available statistics of income tax deductions allowed under Section
112A of the Income Tax Assessment Act to life insurance companies for the 1978-79 income year indicated that the removal of exemption of investment income of life companies' superannuation funds would result in increased tax payable of about $180 million. This does not represent the cost of exempting this income because if the exemption had not applied, it would have been necessary to allow certain other deductions associated with superannuation business that are not at present allowable.
(b) The estimated cost of allowing deductions under Section 115 of the Income Tax Assessment Act was $34 million in 1978-79.
(c) $43 million in the 1978-79 income year.

358 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Attachment B
COST TO REVENUE OF ACCELERATED WRITE-OFF OF CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
Income tax provisions which allow accelerated depreciation of the cost of plant or accelerated deductions for other capital expenditure have effects on the revenue over a number of years~depending on the circumstances, the effects might continue indefinitely. Furthermore the size of the revenue effects can differ markedly from year to year, particularly during a transitional period following the introduction of an accelerated write-off provision.
It is therefore not possible for the revenue implications of such a provision to be adequately summarized by 'first year' and 'full year' costs to the revenue. The following comments illustrate the position by reference to the cost to revenue of the loading on depreciation rates introduced in 1980-81. That measure increased the rates of depreciation by 20 per cent (since then cut back to 18 per cent in the Review of Commonwealth Functions) in respect of eligible plant ordered after 19 August 1980.
The following comments illustrate the cost to the revenue at the initial rate of 20 per cent for the loading on depreciation rates. The costings are prepared on the basis that:
- the company tax rate of 46 per cent applies to all businesses;
- all eligible plant is depreciated by the diminishing balance method on the basis of an effective life of9 years (this was somewhere near average experience). The depreciation rate was 16.67 per cent without the loading, and 20 per cent with the loading;
- eligible expenditure was $7500 million in 1980-81. Two cases are illustrated below, for expenditure in subsequent years remaining at the 1980-81 level and increasing by 10 per cent per annum respectively.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 359

To derive the overall cost of the measure in any year, it is first necessary to derive its cost as applied to the 1980-81 expenditure in each year of effective life of that plant. That cost is derived in Table 1, assuming that purchases are spread evenly throughout the year, and therefore that deductions allowed in respect of 1980-81 average half a year's depreciation.
Table I

Without Loading

With Loading

Year

(I)

(2)

Opening

Bal. Depn(a)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Tax Opening

Saving

Bal. Depn(b)

(6) Tax Saving

(7) Cost (6-3)

I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10(c)

$m 7500 6875 5729 4774 3979 3315 2763 2302 1919 1598

$m 625 1146 955 796 663 553 460 384 320 1598

$m

$m

$m

288 7500

750

527 6750 I 350

439 5400 1080

366 4320

864

305 3456

691

254 2765

553

212 2212

442

177 1769

354

147 1416

283

735 I 132 I 132

$m

$m

345

57

621

94

497

58

397

31

318

13

254

203

9

163

14

130

17

522 -213

7500 3450

7500 3450

(a) At 16.67 per cent
(b) At 20 per cent (c) Includes balancing adjustment.
The cost of the measure in succeeding years would comprise cost not only in respect of 1980-81 expenditure, but that cost plus costs in respect of subsequent years' expenditure.

Case I-Constant Expenditure

If it is assumed that a constant $7500 million will be spent on eligible plant each year from the introduction of the measure, its cost in respect of successive years can be derived as follows from the preceding Table 1:

Year 1 Year 2
Year 3

Cost is 57 Cost is 57 in respect of year 2 purchases
plus 94 in respect of year 1 purchases giving a cost of 151. Cost is 57 in respect of year 3 purchases plus 94 in respect of year 2 purchases plus 58 in respect of year 1 purchases giving a cost of 209

and so on, giving:

Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7 Year 8

Cost is 240 Cost is 253 Cost is 253 Cost is 244 Cost is 230

360 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Year 9 Year 10 Year 11 Year 12 Year 13

Cost is 213 Cost is nil Cost is nil Cost is nil Cost is nil

Case 2-Increasing Expenditure

If eligible expenditure is not assumed to be constant, but to increase by, say, 10 per cent each year from its 1980-81 level of $7500 million, the cost in respect of successive years would be derived as follows:

Year 1 Year 2
Year 3

Cost is 57 Cost is 57 x 1.1 = 62.7 in respect of year 2 purchases
plus 94 in respect of year 1 purchases giving a cost of 157. Cost is 57 X 1.12 = 69 in respect of year 3 purchases plus 94 x 1.1 = 103.4 in respect of year 2 purchases plus 58 in respect of year 1 purchases giving a cost of 230

and so on, giving:

Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 Year 7 Year 8 Year 9 Year 10 Year 11 Year 12 Year 13

Cost is 284 Cost is 326 Cost is 358 Cost is 385 Cost is 410 Cost is 434 Cost is 262 Cost is 288 (a 10% increase) Cost is 317 (a 10% increase) Cost is 349 (a 10% increase)

Implications
(1) Even if there were no increase in the annual expenditure subject to the measure, there would be substantial costs to revenue over a lengthy transitional period. The costs in several of the middle years of the transitional period would be well above the costs in the earliest years.
(2) It is not the case, as is often supposed, that what the revenue loses in one year it will gain in another year. That common belief could only be based on the effect which the measure would have on a taxpayer who invested in some eligible plant in one year but then did not invest any more during the life of that plant-he would pay less tax in the early years and more in the later years of the life of the plant. However, the overall revenue effect faced by the Government derives from investment expenditures in each and every year-by the time one investor ceased deferring tax and started to pay more, there would be another investor just entering the deferral stage. Consequently, although there would be no revenue loss in Case 1 above in the years after the end of the transition period, nor would there ever be any gain to balance the losses of the transition years. An offsetting gain would not arise unless the measure were repealed at some time.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 361

(3) As Case 2 above shows, if eligible expenditure increased each year, cost to revenue in years beyond the transitional period would not fall to nil. The revenue costs
would continue indefinitely. *

* An additional point, not contained in the Treasury submission to the House of Representatives Standing Com-

mittee on Expenditure, is noted here. If the constant increase in eligible expenditure were due entirely to a con-

stant rate of inflation with the real level of expenditure remaining fixed, the revenue costs in real or constant price

terms in years beyond the transition period would remain at a constant positive level. This can be derived by

assuming in Case 2 above that the 10 per cent increase in eligible expenditure is due to 10 per cent inflation each

year from 1980-81. Deflating the figures in Case 2 by 10 per cent per annum gives costs in real terms (at year I

prices) of $223 million in year 5, which is the year of peak budgetary costs in real terms, with a constant ultimate

cost in real terms of $111 million in year 10 and later years.

The constant price revenue costs are:

Year 1

57

Year 2

143

Year 3

190

Year 4

213

Year 5

223

Year 6

222

Year 7

217

Year 8

210

Year 9

202

Year 10 III

Year II III

Year 12 111

Year 13 III

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 361

(3) As Case 2 above shows, if eligible expenditure increased each year, cost to revenue in years beyond the transitional period would not fall to nil. The revenue costs
would continue indefinitely. *

* An additional point, not contained in the Treasury submission to the House of Representatives Standing Com-

mittee on Expenditure, is noted here. If the constant increase in eligible expenditure were due entirely to a con-

stant rate of inflation with the real level of expenditure remaining fixed, the revenue costs in real or constant price

terms in years beyond the transition period would remain at a constant positive level. This can be derived by

assuming in Case 2 above that the 10 per cent increase in eligible expenditure is due to 10 per cent inflation each

year from 1980-81. Deflating the figures in Case 2 by 10 per cent per annum gives costs in real terms (at year I

prices) of $223 million in year 5, which is the year of peak budgetary costs in real terms, with a constant ultimate

cost in real terms of $111 million in year 10 and later years.

The constant price revenue costs are:

Year 1

57

Year 2

143

Year 3

190

Year 4

213

Year 5

223

Year 6

222

Year 7

217

Year 8

210

Year 9

202

Year 10 III

Year II III

Year 12 111

Year 13 III

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 363

STATEMENT NO.5-BUDGET OUTCOME, 1981-82

This Statement sets out the 1981-82 Budget outcome and discusses the major variations from the Budget estimates as well as, in the case of receipts, from the 1980-81 outcome. It also presents details on how the 1981-82 Budget deficit was financed.
The Budget outcome is summarised in the following table:

1981-82

1980-81

Budget

Actual Estimate (a)

1981-82 Actual (b)

Difference from
Estimate

Outlays Receipts

$m 36291 35181

$m 40877 40780

$m 41339 40790

$m +463 + 10

% + 1.1

Deficit

1110

96

549

+453

(a) The Budget estimates and 1980-81 actual results differ from those shown in the 1981-82 Budget Speech because the figures have been adjusted for classification changes introduced in the 1982-83 Budget. In particular, a revised treatment has been adopted for the Royal Australian Mint and the Coinage Trust Accounts which, inter alia, classifies seigniorage and other profits from the Mint as revenue items rather than financing transactions and offsets to outlays respectively (see Appendix for further details).
(b) The revised outcome, compared with the Commonwealth Government's Statement of Financial Transactions for 1981-82 issued on 8 July 1982, reflects classification changes introduced in the 1982-83 Budget and adjustments provided by departments following detailed checking of accounting records.

The main features of the 1981-82 Budget outcome were as follows: - an overrun of $463m or 1.1 %on outlays;
- contributing to this overrun were greater than expected increases in expenditures from wage and salary appropriations which, reflecting increased award rates, exceeded the Budget provisions (including allowances for increases of $160m) by some $226m; payments of unemployment benefits and public debt interest exceeded the Budget estimates by $134m and $73m respectively;
- total receipts in 1981-82 were $40 790m, 15.9% higher than 1980-81 collections and virtually identical to the Budget estimates;
- the composition of receipts differed from Budget estimates in several important respects: company tax was down by $117m and crude oil and LPG levy collections by $277m, the latter primarily because of higher levels of industrial disputations than allowed for. Net PAYE and other individuals' income tax collections were higher than predicted by $162m and $202m respectively, the latter reflecting greater success in combating tax avoidance; and
- as a consequence, the deficit at $549m exceeded the Budget estimate by $453m and a domestic surplus of $918m was achieved.

364 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

OUTLAYS

The following table compares the actual outcome in 1981-82 with the Budget estimates for each function, and is followed by comments on differences between the two.

Budget Estimate (a) Actual (a)

Difference

Defence Education Health Social Security and Welfare Housing Urban and Regional Development nec and the
Environment Culture and Recreation Economic Services-
Transport and Communication Water Supply, Electricity and Gas Industry Assistance and Development Labour and Employment Other Economic Services
Total Economic Services
General Public ServicesLegislative Services Law, Order and Public Safety Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid General and Scientific Research nec Administrative Services
Total General Public Services
Not Allocated to FunctionPayments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec Public Debt Interest Allowances for Wage and Salary Increases (NonDefence)

$m 4128 3255 2872 II 357
399
79 461
1100 53
957 459 136 2706
129 253 877 381 1211 2851
9902 2808
60

$m 4135 3341 2912 11498
458
77 483
I 180 67
917 460 134 2757
132 258 860 394 1243 2887
9908 2881

$m +8 + 85 + 40 +141 + 59
I + 23
+ 80 + 14
40 +I -2 + 52
+4 +5
16 + 13 + 32 + 36
+6 + 73
60

%
+ 0.2 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 1.2 +14.9
1.5 + 4.9
+ 7.2 +26.5 - 4.2 + 0.1 - 1.8 + 1.9
+ 2.8 + 1.8 - 1.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 +1.3
+ 0.1 + 2.6
n.a.

TOTAL OUTLAYS

40877

41339

+463

+ 1.1

(a) Adjusted to reflect classification changes introduced in the 1982-83 Budget (see Appendix for details).

Defence-up $8m
Although there was only a minor overrun on the Budget estimate for total outlays on this function, there were significant variations in a number of items within the function. After taking account of the allowance included in the Budget for prospective defence wage and salary increases, direct appropriations for wages and salaries (including the wage and salary component of Defence Science and Technology establishments) exceeded the Budget estimate by $170m. This resulted primarily from pay increases for Service and civilian personnel (the former following the Coldham Report). Expenditure on naval construction was $65m below the Budget estimate mainly due to reduced requirements for payments to the US Government under Foreign Military Sales arrangements in respect of frigates. As the decision to pay a first instalment during 1981-82 for the purchase of the aircraft carrier HMS Invincible was made post-Budget, no provision was included in the original estimates for this purpose. The subsequent non-payment of this instalment, following the British Government's reassessment of the sale of the ship, did not therefore affect the outcome compared with the Budget estimate. Expenditure on aircraft and associated initial equipment was $39m less than estimated. This was caused mainly by reduced requirements for payments to the United

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 365

States Government under the Foreign Military Sales arrangements for the new tactical fighter, offset to some extent by an initial payment for new P3C Orion aircraft. A further under-expenditure of $89m on other types of equipment and stores was also mainly attributable to reduced payments under the Foreign Military Sales arrangements. Outlays associated with government factories exceeded the Budget estimate by $23m, including $17m for the maintenance of defence industrial capacity, mainly because of wage and salary increases and a reduction in production hours which increased unrecovered fixed costs, and $6m because of the need to provide additional working capital for the government aircraft factories following a downturn in Nomad aircraft sales.
Education-up $85m Outlays on tertiary education were $75m more than provided for in the Budget. The main factor affecting increased recurrent outlays of $66m was cost supplementation of grants for tertiary institutions. In accordance with the retrospective supplementation arrangements operating in respect of the academic years up to the end of 1981, the Government agreed to provide funds mainly to meet greater than expected salary increases awarded to academic staff late in 1981 and backdated to November 1980. In addition, capital payments for tertiary education exceeded those budgeted for by $8m, reflecting the allocation of calendar year grants between the financial years. Outlays on schools in the States and Northern Territory were up by a total of $8m, reflecting greater than anticipated salary increases for teachers ($6m), and an increase in average government school standard costs for 1981 (to which the 1982 calendar year per capita assistance for non-government schools is linked), which added $2m to budgeted outlays for the financial year.
Health-up $40m The health function recorded a number of significant variations. Expenditure on pharmaceutical benefits exceeded the Budget estimate by $50m, reflecting greater than expected usage and increases in chemists' remuneration. A $29m increase in expenditure on nursing home benefits and assistance 'resulted largely from higher benefit payments to cover the greater than assumed fee increases for nursing home patients and greater than expected payments to homes whose operating deficits are financed by the Commonwealth. Other overruns occurred in respect of expenditure on the treatment of veterans, up $8m, attributable to increased medical and transport costs and higher than anticipated demand for services; nursing care for veterans, up $4m, resulting from a greater than expected number of patients in hospitals classified as nursing home patients; and health services in the ACT, up $5m, because of wage and salary and other cost increases that could not be absorbed. Partially offsetting these increases was a $47m expenditure shortfall on Commonwealth medical benefits, due mainly to lower than expected demand by eligible persons for medical services and a $16m shortfall in expenditure on private hospital bed-day subsidies resulting from lower than expected demand for private hospital beds.
Social Security and Welfare-up $141m The major variations within this function resulted largely from differences between actual and estimated numbers of pensioners and beneficiaries. Overruns occurred in expenditures on unemployment benefits, up $134m, repatriation disability pensions, up $13m, and sickness benefits, up $lOm primarily because of greater than expected

366 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

numbers of recipients. Offsetting these were shortfalls in age pensions, down $28m, repatriation service pensions, down $16m, and invalid pensions, down $13m. In addition, the post-Budget decision not to abolish the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS), but to continue it under new and tighter guidelines, resulted in expenditures $lOm greater than the Budget estimate for this item. Other significant variations included greater than expected expenditure on general administration, up $19m, mainly due to wage and salary increases and increased staff ceilings, and the handicapped persons' program, up $4m, reflecting a post-Budget decision to move to a system of paying salary subsidies quarterly in advance.
Housing-up $59m
The most significant variation in this function occurred in Home Savings Grant payments which were up $4lm because of a post-Budget decision to discharge existing commitments under the scheme and remove the nine months' waiting period for grants. Net outlays under Defence Service Homes arrangements were $15m more than estimated. Of this, an additional $8m capital contribution to the Corporation was required during the year for it to meet its lending program, largely because early discharges of loans (which are available for re-lending) were lower than estimated. In addition, revenue received from the Corporation was $6m less than estimated mainly because of lower than estimated proceeds from land sales.
Culture and Recreation-up $23m
Greater than expected net outlays on the National Broadcasting and Television Service, up $16m largely because of increased wage and salary costs of the Australian Broadcasting Commission, was the main reason for the overrun on this function. Expenditure on wildlife and national parks was $6m greater, due mainly to the acquisition of the Mudginberri and Munmarlary pastoral leases in the Northern Territory for incorporation in the Kakadu National Park. The Budget estimates did not provide for these purchases.
Transport and Communication-up $80m
Post-Budget decisions not to require capital repayments scheduled for 1981-82 were the main reasons for the overrun in this function. These included the deferment until 1982-83 of an early repayment of Budget advances ($30m) by the Australian Shipping Commission; and the cancellation of a proposed capital repayment of $12m by the Australian Postal Commission, because of a change in the financial circumstances of that Commission due to unforeseen wage and salary increases during the year and the delay in adjusting charges to compensate for them. Additional expenditure resulted from advances to Qantas, up $25m, following the post-Budget decision to make a capital subscription to the airline; and administrative and operational expenditure for civil aviation and land transport activities, up $13m, mainly because of wage and salary increases. There was also an increase in the operating loss subsidy of $14m for the Australian National Railways Commission as a result of cost increases (mainly wages) not fully offset by fare and freight rate increases; and a $6m initial equity subscription to AUSSAT Pty Ltd, the wholly Comm0nwealth-owned company which has been established to own and operate the proposed National Communications Satellite System. Partially offsetting these expenditure increases were shortfalls in many items. The largest of these included expenditure on airport buildings and works, down $8m mainly

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 367

as a result of a slower than expected rate of construction on works associated with the introduction of wide body aircraft throughout Australia; payments to the Pipeline Authority, down $8m principally because of higher than estimated revenue resulting from a revision of haulage tariffs; expenditure on roads in the ACT, down $4m because of delays in completing projects under construction; and expenditure on the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme, down $3m because of a lower than expected level of freight movement across Bass Strait. Air navigation charges were down $14m, largely because of arrears in collections and, to a lesser extent, lower than estimated levels of air traffic.

Water Supply, Electricity and Gas-up $14m
The largest overrun in this function related to liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) subsidy payments, which exceeded the Budget estimate by $llm. This was the result of an under-estimation of the effect of the extension of the subsidy to certain industrial and commercial users, delayed payments made in respect of 1980-81 claims, and delays in the completion of the Sydney-Newcastle natural gas pipeline (the completion of which will reduce usage of LPG in the Newcastle region). Expenditure on urban water supply exceeded the Budget estimate by $5m. This reflects the post-Budget distribution, partly to this function, of that portion of the National Water Resources Program which remained unallocated at the time of the Budget and was originally classified to the function 'Industry Assistance and Development'.
Industry Assistance and Development-down $40m
There was a number of sizeable variations from the Budget estimates within this function. Substantial shortfalls on Budget estimates were recorded in respect of textile industries bounties, down $26m largely as a result of delays in processing claims under the newly introduced scheme; industrial research and development grants, down $25m mainly reflecting lower than expected applications by firms for advance project grant payments and delays by firms in progressing projects; and expenditure from the Energy Research Trust Account, down $8m primarily because of slower than expected progress on a number of the projects financed through this Trust Account. Expenditure under the irrigation and other pastoral water projects heading was $11 m less than the Budget estimate, partly because of the post-Budget allocation of funds for projects funded under the National Water Resources Program to other functional categories ($9m) and partly because of under-expenditure on projects by State Governments ($2m). Other shortfalls included a reduction of $6m in budgeted expenditure on fertilizer bounties because drought conditions have resulted in a lower than expected consumption of phosphatic fertilizers, and lower than expected assistance for shipbuilding ($5m) because of delays in ship construction. Partially offsetting these shortfalls was expenditure on the Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy Scheme which exceeded the Budget estimate by $19m because of a greater than expected increase in the consumption of subsidised products and higher freight costs, and greater than budgeted payments to international commodity organisations ($llm) resulting from unexpected call-ups of buffer stock contributions under the international tin and rubber agreements. In addition, Energy Resources of Australia Ltd returned uranium concentrates worth $12m to the Commonwealth stockpile earlier than expected.

368 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid-down $16m
The main reason for the shortfall recorded under this function was the slower than expected rate of disbursement of expenditure on bilateral projects and regional aid programs ($20m). Also, administrative expenditure was $5m less than originally budgeted, largely reflecting underspending on overseas property services. Offsetting these shortfalls was an additional $8m spent on bilateral food aid and a $3m increase in payments to international organisations largely to cover exchange rate movements.
General and Scientific Research nec-up $13m
The outcome for this function reflects increased expenditure by CSIRO, largely the result of salary increases ($5m), and increased expenditure on construction ($6m) mainly associated with an acceleration in the rate of construction of the Australian National Animal Health Laboratory at Geelong.
Administrative Services-up $32m
This function covers the administrative votes of several departments. The bulk of the expenditure overrun is attributable to wage and salary increases.
Payments to orfor the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities, nec-up $6m
The Budget estimate for health grants reflected the Commonwealth's assessment of the States' capacity to raise additional hospital revenue in 1981-82 from prescribed charges. In the event, some States' revenue raising capacity proved lower than initially assumed, which resulted in an increase of $13m in health grant payments. This increase was partially offset by shortfalls on the Budget estimates in respect of natural disaster relief ($4m) and assistance to the Northern Territory for debt charges ($3m).
Public Debt Interest-up $73m
The increase in public debt interest is attributable mainly to higher than estimated subscriptions to, and yields on, Treasury Notes which, unlike alternative securities, have an immediate impact on interest payments, together with increases in interest rates offered on Commonwealth domestic securities.
Allowancefor Wage and Salary Increases (Non-Defencej-$60m
The bulk allowance for prospective wage and salary increases was not apportioned by function at the time the estimates were prepared but was effectively apportioned during the year as actual increases occurred. Expenditures from direct wage and salary appropriations for non-defence personnel exceeded the original estimates (including the allowance) by some $56m.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 369

RECEIPTS The following table sets out 1980-81 and 1981-82 Budget receipts.

Taxation RevenueCustoms DutyImports Coal Exports Excise DutyCrude Oil and LPG All Other . Sales Tax Income TaxIndividualsGrossPAYE Refunds
NetPAYE Other
Total Individuals Companies Withholding Tax Payroll Tax . . . Departure Tax . . Estate Duty Gift Duty Stamp Duty (ACT) Other Taxes, Fees and Fines Remissions . . . . . .
Total Taxation Revenue
Interest, Rent and Dividends . . . Net Receipts from Government
Enterprise Transactions . Sale of Existing Assets
TOTAL RECEIPTS

1981-82

1980-81 Actual
$m
1800 85
3108 2725 2102

Budget Estimate
$m
1995 115
3440 2810 2913

Actual
$m
2060 97
3163 2830 2854

Increase in 1981-82 Actual

Over 1980-81

Over 1981-82 Budget Estimate

%

%

+ 14.5 + 14.0
+ 1.8 + 3.8 + 35.8

+ 3.2
-15.9
8.0
+ 0.7
2.0

15291 I170Dr
14121 3423
17 543 4695
161 17 19 17
8 188
IDr
32467
2280
240 195
35181

18640 1385Dr
17255 3605
20860 5170
175 17 34 8 I 15
216 2Dr
37768
2661
301 51
40780

18836 1418Dr
17417 3807
21224 5053
205 19 36 4
13 227
2Dr
37784
2585
385 36
40790

+ 23.2 +21.2
+ 23.3 + 11.2
+ 21.0 + 7.6 + 27.4 + 13.6 + 92.8 - 75.7 +173.2 + 50.0 + 20.9 + 20.7
+ 16.4
+ 13.4
+ 60.8 81.6
+ 15.9

+ 1.0 + 2.4
+ 0.9 + 5.6
+1.7 - 2.3 +17.2 +13.6
+ 6.1
-47.9 -82.8 -13.3
+ 5.0
+11.8
2.9
+28.1 -29.8

Customs Duty Collecti~ns of customs duties on imports were $2060m in 1981-82, 14.5% higher
than in 1980-81, reflecting strong growth in imports. Stronger than expected import growth was the main reason for collections exceeding Budget estimates by $65m.
Receipts from the coal export duty, at $97m, were 14.0% higher than in 1980-81. Collections reflected exports of approximately 20.6m tonnes of coal at the $3.50 per tonne duty rate and 24.6m tonnes at the $1.00 per tonne rate. Tonnages, and thus duty collections, were below those expected at the time of the Budget because of industrial disputes and associated port congestion in New South Wales and Queensland.
Excise Duty
The following table compares 1981-82 outcomes for excisable commodity groups with the 1980-81 outcome and 1981-82 Budget estimates.

370 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

1981-82

Increase in 1981-82 Actual

1980-81 Actual

Budget Estimate

Actual

Over 1980-81

Over 1981-82
Budget Estimate

Crude oil LPG Beer Potable Spirits Tobacco Products Petroleum Products Other (including credits)

$m 3019
89 990 III 705 925 -6
5833

$m 3357
83 1015
125 719 956 -5
6250

$m 3104
60 1011
121 732 970 -4
5993

%
+ 2.8
-33.0
+ 2.0 + 8.4 + 3.9 + 5.0
-31.0
+ 2.7

% - 7.5 -28.1 - 0.4 - 3.6
+ 1.9 +1.5
-20.0
- 4.1

Receipts from the crude oil levy were 2.8% higher than in 1980-81 but 7.5% ($253m) below the Budget estimate. This shortfall was the net effect of a revenue increase flowing from the 1 January 1982 increase in import parity prices-for which no forecast was made at Budget time-and a more substantial revenue loss resulting mainly from higher than expected production losses from industrial disputes. The 1 January 1982 import parity price rise led to additional receipts of about $87m at the actual level of production thereafter.
Revenue from naturally occurring LPG (which is a co-product with crude oil and natural gas) was $29m or 33.0% below the 1980-81 level and $23m or 28.1 % below the Budget estimate. The shortfall occurred partly because of the greater than anticipated industrial disruption referred to earlier but mainly because of a decline in prices received for LPG exports. Under the Government's LPG pricing and taxation policies (discussed in 'Appendix l' to Statement No.4 in the 1981-82 Budget papers), this led to a fall in the administered Australian price and an even greater fall in the rate of excise (which is set after taking account of export as well as domestic prices).
Receipts from other excise duties in 1981-82 were $2830m, 3.8% higher than in 1980-81 and 0.7% higher than the Budget estimate. A small shortfall in receipts from beer and potable spirits was more than offset by higher revenue from cigarettes and petroleum products. Preliminary data for 1981-82 indicate that beer clearances increased by about 2% and, for the second year in succession, there was very strong growth in total clearances of potable spirits notwithstanding a decline in Australian brandy clearances of about 4% below 1980-81, apparently due largely to increasing market penetration by imported brandies. Clearances of cigarettes were almost 4% higher in 1981-82 compared with a Budget estimate of around 2%.

Sales Tax
Sales tax collections in 1981-82 were $2854m, 35.8% higher than in 1980-81, mainly reflecting measures announced in the 1981-82 Budget to increase all existing rates by 2t percentage points and to correct a number of anomalies and inconsistencies in the rate scale. Rejection by the Senate of measures proposed in the Budget to tax certain exempt goods at a rate of 2t% resulted in a shortfall of about $132m on the Budget estimate on that account; in the event, stronger growth than anticipated in some categories of taxable expenditure in 1981-82 helped partially offset this loss and total collections fell short of the Budget estimate by only $59m or about 2%.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 371

Income Tax-Pay-As-You-Earn
Net PAYE collections in 1981-82 totalled $17417m, 23.3% higher than in 1980-81. Average weekly earnings are estimated to have increased by around 14% in 1981-82 and employment by 1.2% for the year as a whole; the difference between the growth in income subject to tax instalments implied by those movements and the increase in gross PAYE collections of 23.2% is due largely to the progression in the income tax scale.
PAYE refunds also increased rapidly, by 21.2%, in 1981-82, following substantial increases in the spouse and other rebate allowances in respect of 1980-81 taxable income, which some taxpayers chose to receive by way of refund in 1981-82 rather than via reduced instalment deductions during 1980-81.
The net PAYE outcome for 1981-82 was $162m higher than estimated at the time of the Budget; the increase in average weekly earnings was rather larger than expected, partially offset by the effects of weaker than forecast employment growth.

Income Tax-Other Individuals
Revenue in 1981-82 was 11.2% higher than in 1980-81, compared with the Budget estimate of 5.3% growth. Primary producer income and other business income was estimated at the time of the 1981-82 Budget to have increased more slowly in 1980-81 (the income year on which 1981-82 collections were largely based) than in 1979-80. The outcome suggests that income growth was somewhat higher than assumed.
The 1981-82 outturn also suggests that the Government's anti-avoidance measures, particularly in Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Act, effective from 29 May 1981, are biting. Of the $202m overrun in 1981-82 collections compared with the Budget estimates, some $40m was attributable to reductions (compared with the Budget allowance) in avoidance-inspired shortfalls and a further $45m to higher than predicted collections of tax that had been outstanding at the beginning of the year due to avoidance claims. It is worth noting that 1980-81 and 1981-82 are the only two years in the past six years that provisional tax collections have exceeded Budget expectations.

Company Tax
Company tax collections in 1981-82 were $5053m, 7.6% higher than in 1980-81. At the time of the 1981-82 Budget it was estimated that company income subject to tax in 1980-81 had increased by 10%; latest estimates suggest that the increase was only about 9%.
Avoidance-inspired shortfalls were some $42m lower than allowed for in the Budget estimate but there was a shortfall, at present unquantifiable, in company tax collections due to 'bottom of the harbour' tax evasion schemes carried out in 1980-81, before the Crime (Taxation Offences) Act 1980 (which had effect from 4 December 1980) came into operation. Also, tax outstanding in respect of assessments issued during 1981-82, other than those involving avoidance or company stripping, was higher than had been anticipated.
The net effect of the foregoing was that company tax collections in 1981-82 were $117m, or 2.3%, below the Budget estimate.

372 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Departure Tax
The very high rate of increase in the yield from the departure tax in 1981-8292.8%-reflected measures announced in the 1981-82 Budget Speech to double the tax to $20 and to lower the taxable age to 12 years with effect from 1 October 1981.
Interest, Rent and Dividends
The increase of 13.4% over 1980-81 primarily reflected the higher interest payments made by the States and the Territories arising from continued growth in advances and higher interest charges applying to new raisings for State works. In addition, the Government decision to increase to 10% as from 1 January 1982 the average rates of interest payable by the Australian Telecommunications Commission (Telecom) and the Australian Postal Commission (Australia Post) on outstanding capital advances made to those authorities by the Commonwealth resulted in an additional $67m in interest receipts in 1981-82.
Net Receiptsfrom Government Enterprise Transactions
Receipts from the Reserve Bank in 1981-82 were $345m, $147m higher than in 1980-81 and $90m above the Budget estimate. This primarily resulted from a higher interim dividend from 1981-82 net earnings of the Note Issue Department, which were greater than expected.
Sale ofExisting Assets
The fall of more than 80% in 1981-82 in receipts from the sale of existing assets mainly reflects the unusually high level of receipts from this item in 1980-81 resulting from the sale of the former Commonwealth interest in the Ranger Uranium joint venture in that year. The shortfall of $15m in receipts from the Budget estimate reflects lower than expected sales of land and buildings deemed to be surplus to Commonwealth needs and reduced proceeds from the sale ofleases in the ACT.

FINANCING TRANSACTIONS
The manner in which the 1981-82 Budget deficit was financed is summarised in the tables below; comparable data for 1980-81 are also provided.

Sources ofFinance
The economic impact of the financing of a Budget deficit will depend on the relative contributions of different sectors to that financing. In this regard a distinction may be made between borrowings from the Reserve Bank or from the overseas sector on the one hand and borrowings from the domestic non-official sector on the other (the official sector comprises the Reserve Bank and authorities within the Commonwealth and State Government Budget sectors).
To the extent that a Budget deficit is financed in the first instance by running down the Commonwealth's account with the Reserve Bank or other forms of borrowing from the Bank, it initially adds to the cash base of the economy, that is to the non-official sector's holdings of notes and coin. To the extent that this borrowing from the Reserve Bank is not replaced by borrowing from the non-official sector, there is a lasting addition to the cash base of the economy. Borrowing by the Commonwealth Government from the overseas sector simply adds to the Government's cash balances at the Reserve

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 373

Bank and hence does not add directly to the cash base. (The choice between borrowing from the Reserve Bank and borrowing from overseas is determined primarily by external economic policy considerations since borrowing from the overseas sector adds to our official reserves and can assist external management.) In contrast, the financing of the Budget deficit through borrowing from the domestic non-official sector adds to the private sector's holdings of Commonwealth Government Securities and reduces the initial increase in its holdings of notes and coin.
There is a further important distinction to be made-that between borrowing from the banking sector and borrowing from the non-bank sector. To the extent that the Budget deficit is financed by sales of Government Securities to the banking sector (rather than to the non-bank sector), the initial increase in the liquidity of the banking sector, i.e. its holdings of cash and Commonwealth Government Securities, arising from the deficit has not been offset. It follows that the increased ability of the banking system to lend and create deposits remains unchanged. As the deposit liabilities of the banking system are the major component of the money supply as conventionally measured, M3, there is a clear link between that part of the Budget deficit not financed by sales of Commonwealth Government Securities to the non-bank sector and the rate of growth of the money supply.
The following table sets out the total financing transactions in 1980-81 and 1981-82 and the distribution of these transactions between the various sectors.

Government Financing Transactions 1980-81 and 1981-82

1980-81 1981-82(P)

Budget Deficit

Met by:

Overseas Financing (net)

Domestic Financing (net)

From;

Reserve Bank(a)

.

Commercial Banking Sector

Trading Banks

Savings Banks

Other Banking Institutions

Non-Bank Sector

..

Authorised Short-Term Money Market

Life Insurance Offices . .

Other Non-Bank Groups . . . . .

Government Sector(b) . . . . . .

$m J llO
-98 J 208
-680 1484 (784) (699)
(I) 535 (22) (214) (299) -131

$m 549
368 182
264 223 (273) (-50)
( .. )
-121 (-469)
(445) (-97) -184

(a) Includes net take-up of Treasury Bills, Treasury Notes and other CGS, as well as the Commonwealth's use of cash balances. (These are an asset of the Commonwealth so that their use increases the net indebtedness of the Budget sector.)
(b) Includes net take-up of Commonwealth Government Securities by authorities within the Commonwealth and State Government Budget sectors (excluding Commonwealth Government trust accounts).
(P) Preliminary.

As a result of the sizeable reduction in the Budget deficit in 1981-82 the net financing requirement was well below that in 1980-81. Reflecting external policy considerations, overseas financing turned from negative in 1980-81 to positive in 1981-82.

374 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Overseas Financing
The Commonwealth undertook a Euroyen public issue in the United Kingdom in July 1981 for the equivalent of $56m. In December 1981 a package of Swiss Franc borrowings-comprising a SF300m private placement, a SFlOOm bank loan and a SFI00m public issue-was completed in Switzerland. The amounts borrowed were the equivalent of $145m, $49m and $48m respectively. Also in December 1981 the Commonwealth raised $116m through a DM300m public issue in West Germany. The second tranche of this DM borrowing operation was completed in February 1982 when $78m was raised by way of a DM200m public issue. A total of $348m was raised in March 1982 in Switzerland by way of a SF400m private placement, a SF200m bank loan and a SFI00m public issue. In May 1982 the Commonwealth completed a Y20 billion public issue in Japan to raise the equivalent of $79m.
Repayments abroad during the year of previous drawings on behalf of Qantas, TAA and the Australian Shipping Commission amounted to $lOm, $3m and $2m respectively. A repayment of $lm was also made to Eximbank. Other securities to the value of $530m were redeemed in the USA, the UK, West Germany, the Netherlands and Japan. In addition, repayments of $5m were made on borrowings from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
In summary, gross overseas borrowings amounted to $919m in 1981-82 and total repayments amounted to $551m, giving net overseas financing of $368m.
Domestic Financing
Domestic financing encompasses the increase in the indebtedness of the Commonwealth to the private sector and the public sector-excluding Commonwealth Government trust accounts but including the Reserve Bank-arising from either the issue of Commonwealth Government Securities to the domestic non-Budget sector or from the Commonwealth running down its cash balances held at the Reserve Bank.
Domestic financing amounted to $182m in 1981-82, compared with $1208m in 1980-81. Apart from a sharp drop in the total, the other significant development in 1981-82 domestic financing was the much reduced contribution from the non-bank sector and from the commercial banking sector. This meant that, notwithstanding the lower Budget deficit, there were positive net borrowings from the Reserve Bank during 1981-82. In addition, the absolute fall in the non-bank sector's holdings of Commonwealth Government Securities meant that the banks were able to maintain a satisfactory liquidity position, despite the strong growth in their lending.
Financing Instruments
As noted earlier, the economic impact of the financing of a Budget deficit depends in part on the mix of financing transactions which are undertaken with the domestic sector and particularly with the domestic non-official sector. While a distinction has been made above between borrowings from the Reserve Bank on the one hand, and borrowings from the domestic non-official sector on the other, on the basis that the former adds directly to the cash base of the system while the latter reduces it, the distinction is not as clear cut as it may first appear. So far as their effects on private sector behaviour are concerned, borrowings from the Reserve Bank and from the non-official sector may be fairly similar if the borrowings from the non-official sector are through securities which can be easily converted into cash. It is therefore important to consider

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 375

the liquidity characteristics of the various types of instruments which are used in the financing transactions with the domestic non-official sector.
In terms of the Government's domestic financing instruments, the most obvious contrast in this regard is between Treasury Notes and Treasury Bonds. Treasury Notes are issued only for relatively short periods, 91 days and 182 days, and the Reserve Bank operates a rediscount facility for Treasury Notes out to 91 days. Hence Treasury Notes are highly liquid. Treasury Bonds are a less liquid financing instrument; they cannot be redeemed for their face value until a specified maturity date and there is no guarantee that the Reserve Bank will be willing to purchase the bonds (at least not at a price acceptable to most holders) before their maturity date (unless they are very near maturity). Australian Savings Bonds are also highly liquid in that they may be redeemed with one month's notice without capital loss.
The table below sets out the composition of domestic financing by instrument in 1980-81 and 1981-82.

DomestiC Financing, 1980-81 and 1981-82

1980-81 1981-82(P)

Domestic Financing (net) . . . . . Consisting of: Australian Savings Bonds and Special Bonds Treasury Notes (a) Treasury Bonds (b) Treasury Bills (c) Use of Cash Balances Other (d) . . . .

$m 1208
-319 1912
547 -600 -242 - 90

$m 182
-722 153
I 197 -500
151 - 97

(a) This item includes the net change in the official sector's holdings, which was $295m in 1980-81 and$48lmin 1981-82.
(b) This item includes the net change in the official sector's holdings, which was - $182m in 1980-81 and - $9m in 1981-82.
(c) On issue to the Reserve Bank only. (d) This item is derived by residual as the difference between total domestic
financing and the identified components. It is typically negligible in comparison with identified items. (P) Preliminary.

There was a net fall of $722m in holdings of Australian Savings Bonds and Special Bonds during 1981-82; this reflected gross subscriptions to Australian Savings Bonds of $131Om and total redemptions of these securities and of the superseded Special Bonds of $2032m. The heavy quitting of these instruments reflected their uncompetitive interest rates for virtually the whole of 1981-82.
Gross proceeds from the issue of Treasury Notes amounted to $12 594m in 1981-82 while redemptions amounted to $12 441m. Of the net proceeds of $153m, the official sector's contribution was $481m, which meant that the non-official sector's holdings of Treasury Notes actually fell by $328m.
There were eleven tap stocks available at various stages during 1981-82 and gross sales totalled $3463m. Maturities of outstanding bond holdings during the year amounted to $2266m, resulting in net bond raisings of $1197m. The official sector reduced its holdings by $9m which meant that the non-official sector increased its holdings of Treasury Bonds by $1206m in 1981-82.

376 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The Commonwealth Government ran down its cash balances at the Reserve Bank by $151 m in 1981-82. This, when taken with the outcome for the various financing transactions outlined above, meant that the Commonwealth was able to reduce its borrowings outstanding from the Reserve Bank in the form of Treasury Bills by $500m in 1981-82. When account is taken of the increase in the Reserve Bank's holdings of Treasury Notes and Treasury Bonds, as well as some other minor financing transactions with the Reserve Bank, the total borrowing from the Reserve Bank by the Commonwealth in 1981-82 was $264m.
Overview
From a monetary and debt management point of view, the increased reliance on Treasury Bond sales to finance the 1981-82 Budget deficit was an encouraging outcome, although a high proportion of these sales was to the domestic banking system. However, the large run-down in holdings of Australian Savings Bonds, which are only held by the non-bank sector, was associated with a substantial fall in the non-bank sector's contribution to the financing of the Budget deficit in 1981-82. The availability ofliquidity to the banking sector was boosted and this, along with its implications for the overall availability of credit from the banks, was an unsatisfactory aspect of the year's financing transactions.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 377

STATEMENT No.6-BUDGET AND OTHER PUBLIC SECTOR TRANSACTIONS SINCE 1972-73
This Statement presents information on Budget transactions since 1972-73 in both the functional and the national accounting classifications. It also provides data on transactions of the Commonwealth Non-Budget sector and other parts of the public sector.
The national accounts classification categorises Budget transactions by economic type, within a framework which is broadly consistent with conventions recommended in the United Nations publication A System ofNational Accounts. These conventions provide a consistent framework for the aggregation of Commonwealth, State and local government transactions into consolidated figures for the public sector as a whole. Their use also facilitates an assessment of the interrelationships between the Budget, other parts of the public sector and the rest of the economy.
The functional classification categorises Budget outlays according to their primary objectives or purposes. It aims to facilitate consideration of the nature and relative priorities of government outlays. The functional classification is based on that set out in A System of National Accounts and follows the same conventions for the determination of Budget totals as the national accounts classification.
Additional information on the two classification systems is presented in the Appendix to the Budget Statements.

BUDGET OUTLAYS-SUMMARY
The table below shows increases in both money and real terms in Commonwealth Budget outlays in each year since 1972-73 and the proportions of gross domestic product (GDP) represented by total outlays.

Budget

Increase on

Outlays Previous year

Real Increase(a)

Proportion of GDP

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83(e)

$m 10 190 12229 17838 21861 24124 26737 29014 31660 36291 41339 47067

%

%

%

12.6

5.7

23.8

20.0

5.5

23.8

45.9

19.5

28.9

22.6

4.9

30.0

10.4

- 0.8

29.0

10.8

2.4

29.6

8.5

1.7

28.4

9.1

- 0.5

27.6

14.6

4.2

27.8

13.9

2.0(b)

(p)27.9

13.9

2.6(b)

28.7

(a) Increase in outlays deflated by increase in the implicit price deflator for non-farm GDP. (b) If adjusted to remove the effects of an additional payday in 1981-82, these figures would be 1.1 % in 1981-82 and
3.6% in 1982-83. (p) Preliminary. (e) Budget estimate.

Rates of growth in Budget outlays in 1981-82 and 1982-83 are affected by the incidence in 1981-82 of an additional payday for Public Service wages and salaries and certain pensions and benefits. If outlays figures for 1981-82 are adjusted to remove the costs of the additional payday so that estimates are broadly on a 'constant number of paydays' basis, the rates of growth in outlays are reduced to 12.8% in 1981-82 and

378 REPRESENTATlVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

increased to 15.0% in 1982-83. In real terms-i.e-. after allowance for the forecast rise in prices as measured by the non-farm GOP deflator-the adjusted increases in outlays are 1.1 % in 1981-82 and an estimated 3.6% in 1982-83. This compares with unadjusted real increases of 2.0% in 1981-82 and 2.6% in 1982-83.
As a proportion of GOP, Budget outlays are projected to increase in 1982-83, reflecting the real growth in outlays combined with the expectation of no growth in GOP. Outlays continue to fluctuate around a level lower than their peak of 30% in 1975-76, but well above the levels of the early 1970s. Whereas growth in outlays was contained to a rate less than that of GOP growth over the period 1976-77 to 1979-80, resulting in a fall in the ratio of outlays to GOP to 27.6% in 1979-80, since then growth in outlays has equalled or exceeded that in GOP even when, in 1980-81, the economy was performing more strongly than it is now. This change in trend is reflected in the fact that real growth in outlays averaged well under 1% per annum from 1976-77 to 1979-80 but on current estimates will average about 3% per annum in the three years to 1982-83.

BUDGET OUTLAYS BY FUNCTION
Budget transactions for the period 1972-73 to 1981-82, together with estimates for 1982-83, are shown for the major functions in Table 1 at the end of this Statement. Table 2 shows the proportions of total outlays represented by each function over the period and Table 3 shows percentage increases for each function from year to year. Table 4 presents outlays data from Table 1 in greater detail.
Between 1972-73 and 1981-82, total Budget outlays increased at an average annual compound rate of 16.8% (compared with 14.8% for GOP). 'Education' was the fastest growing function while 'Social Security and Welfare', which also grew significantly faster than the total, accounted for the largest part of the increase over the period. If general purpose assistance to the States and Northern Territory in lieu of health payments in 1981-82 is included in outlays under the 'Health' function, that category also grew faster than average over the period. (The change in health funding arrangements is mentioned in the Notes on Tables at the end of this Statement.) On this basis, outlays on education, health and social security and welfare together account for half the total increase over the decade. While part of this increase reflects changes in arrangements such as the assumption by the Commonwealth of full financial responsibility for universities and colleges of advanced education in 1973-74 and the introduction of a scheme of family allowances in lieu of taxation rebates in 1976-77, the major part of the growth reflects increases in standards of services provided and in numbers of beneficiaries (whether because of liberalised eligibility criteria, demographic change or economic conditions) in a situation where the value of many benefits has been maintained at an approximately constant level in real terms.
While specific purpose payments to the States and the Northern Territory are classified to the relevant function, a large proportion of outlays is allocated to the function 'Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec'. Because of changes in funding arrangements such as that affecting health payments mentioned above, and others relating to payments to the Northern Territory and payments for housing, described in the Notes on Tables, growth in this category can vary significantly from year to year. However, the bulk of the category consists of tax sharing grants (financial assistance grants in earlier years) and general purpose capital

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 379

funds, which together constitute a major component of total outlays. The function as a whole, whether or not it is adjusted for changes such as those mentioned, accounts for about one-fifth of the increase in outlays from 1972-73 to 1981-82.
Over the period as a whole, there have been significant reductions in the proportions of total outlays devoted to defence and certain economic services. Defence expenditure over this period reflected, inter alia. Australia's involvement in, and withdrawal from, the war in Vietnam. From 1978-79, however, growth in defence outlays has accelerated significantly. The reduction in the relative importance of Budget outlays on economic services since 1972-73 reflects many factors, including the completion of the Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Scheme and repayments of earlier advances to the Australian Industry Development Corporation and the Australian Wool Corporation. In the area of industry assistance and development, particularly assistance to primary industry, outlays can fluctuate markedly according to seasonal and international trading conditions. The main factor, however, has been reductions from a peak in the mid 1970s in net advances to authorities such as the Australian Telecommunications Commission, Qantas Airways Ltd and the Australian National Airlines Commission (TAA) consequent upon those authorities funding more of their capital expenditure through internally generated funds and by borrowings on their own account.
The following table shows the increases in the main categories of outlays over the period 1972-73 to 1981-82.

Defence Education Health Social Security and Welfare Housing Urban and Regional Development nec and the
Environment Culture and Recreation Economic Services-
Transport and Communication Water Supply, Electricity and Gas Industry Assistance and DeVelopment Labour and Employment Other Economic Services
Total Economic Services General Public Services-
Legislative Services Law, Order and Public Safety Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid General and Scientific Research nec Administrative Services
Total General Public Services Not Allocated to Function-
Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec
Public Debt Interest
TOTAL OUTLAYS

1972-73
$m 1227
442 783 2101
77
49 116
749 36
407 93 39
1324
24 40 277 91 343 775
2623 674
10 190

1981-82
$m 4135 3341 2912 11498
458
77 483
I 180 67
917 460 134 2757
132 258 860 394 1243 2887

Proportion of Total Increase
% 9.3 9.3 6.8 30.2 1.2
0.1 1.2
1.4 0.1 1.6 1.2 0.3 4.6
0.3 0.7 1.9 1.0 2.9 6.8

9908 2881
41339

23.4 7.1
100.0

Average Annual Rate of Increase
% 14.5 25.2 15.7 20.8 22.0
5.2 17.2
5.2 7.0 9.4 19.5 14.7 8.5
20.7 22.9 13.4 17.7 15.4 15.7
15.9 17.5
16.8

Average annual rates of increase over a period of years can mask significant changes within that period. The following charts show year-by-year movements in the relative sizes of the major functional blocks of outlays.

380 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

It is emphasised that comparisons of relative movements in different blocks of expenditure are affected by a number of important factors including, in addition to those mentioned above, changes in the operation of certain retirement benefits schemes, changes in health care funding arrangements, the transfer of the South Australian and Tasmanian railways to the Commonwealth, the granting of self-government to the Northern Territory, and off-Budget funding of the capital programs of Commonwealth authorities such as the Australian Telecommunications Commission. These and other factors, such as differential rates of price increase, affect relative rates of growth and must be borne in mind when comparing movements in different categories of expenditure.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 381

Major Functional Blocks as Proportions of Total Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82

% of Total

% of Total

Defence 20

15

.,----

\0

f---I---

Education

f 'l-d 20

15

DII JII

\0

5
I
Social Security 30 and Welfare
~
25 r--
20 15
\0

5

Health (a)

15

~

\0

5 30

15
n10 5

25

20

10 General Public Services

15 '1ITlJ I I I I I I I'flO
10

5

5

Economic Services

20

20

15

15

Payments to States

and Northern Territory etc. nec. (b)

10

\0

30

30

25 r--

r--
20

...--

25
r--
20

Other (c)

15

15

15

15

r--r-

10

10 10 ....--

10

5

1972

1981

-73

-82

(a) Changed funding arrangements for Health affect comparability of the functional classification between 1980-81 and 1981-82. Adjusted for these changes, Health outlays in 1981-82 represent 9.9 per cent of total Budget outlays and Payments to States and NT, etc, nec represent 21.2 per cent.

1972

1981

-73

-82

(b) Includes outlays for Natural Disaster Relief. See also (a) and Notes on Tables.
(c) Outlays on Housing, Urban and Regional Development nec and the Environment, Culture and Recreation and Public Debt Interest. See also Notes on Tables.

382 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

BUDGET OUTLAYS BY ECONOMIC TYPE
The national accounts economic type classification provides information on Budget outlays in terms of direct expenditure on goods and services and transfers of income and capital funds to other sectors, namely the Commonwealth Non-Budget sector, the State and Local Government sector (including the Northern Territory), the private sector and overseas. This format enables Budget sector transactions to be related to transactions elsewhere in the public sector (see the final section of this Statement) and in the economy as a whole (see Budget Paper No. 10: National Income and Expenditure).
Table 5 at the end of this Statement shows Budget outlays classified by economic type and the following table shows increases in the main components over the period 1972-73 to 1981-82.

1972-73

1981-82

Proportion of Total Increase

Average Annual Rate of Increase

Net Expenditure on Goods and ServicesCurrent Capital
Transfer PaymentsPersonal Benefit Payments(a) Grants to States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Other
Net Advances-to States and Northern Territory to Commonwealth Authorities to Other Sectors(b)

$m
2345 223
2532
2784 1312
668 346 -18

$m
8509 421
13342
13 181 4637
862 344 43

%

%

19.8

15.4

0.6

7.3

34.7

20.3

33.4

18.9

10.7

15.1

0.6

2.9

-0.1

0.2

n.a.

TOTAL OUTLA YS

10190

41339

100.0

16.8

(a) Includes unfunded employee retirement benefits. (b) Comprises net advances to public financial enterprises and to the private sector.

Direct expenditure on goods and services has grown more slowly than GDP over the period, indicating that in relative terms the Budget's direct claim on resources has fallen. On the other hand, transfer payments have grown faster than GDP and total Budget outlays. In particular, the proportion of total outlays represented by personal benefit payments has increased from 24.8% in 1972-73 to 31.7% in 1981-82. The resulting impact on the general burden of taxation has been less than this comparison might suggest, however, because most personal benefit payments were made taxable during the period and a higher proportion of such payments are now made to recipients who are themselves taxpayers.
The degree of Commonwealth influence over the final manner of spending of funds which it transfers to other sectors varies greatly. For example, personal benefit payments are mainly a form of income supplementation in the hands of those who receive them and can be spent as they wish. Payments to other levels of government, which are an even larger proportion of Commonwealth outlays than are personal benefit payments, fall into two categories. Certain payments are made for specific purposes and the Commonwealth thus exercises a high degree of influence, even though it does not itself disburse the funds to individuals or enterprises in the private sector. General purpose funds, on the other hand, form an untied supplement to revenues of State, Northern Territory and local government authorities.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 383

Total payments to the States, the Northern Territory and local government authorities increased somewhat as a proportion of total outlays during the mid 1970s. By the end of the period 1972-73 to 1981-82, however, they had been brought back to about one-third of the total, the same as at the beginning. Also during the mid 1970s, there was a major shift in emphasis towards specific purpose payments, which increased from a little over one-quarter to half of total payments to the States, etc. Since then this change has been partially reversed. The effect of the changes in health funding arrangements (see the Notes on Tables at the end of this Statement) was to produce in 1981-82 a very substantial shift from specific purpose to general purpose payments, which represented two-thirds of the total in that year. (Although the general purpose grants in lieu of health payments are based on the amounts of those previous payments and are intended to replace them, the new grants are untied and can in fact be spent as the States and Northern Territory wish.)
There has also been a substantial shift in economic type from net advances to the States to grants. Advances, both gross and net, have increased slowly over the decade, while there has been strong real growth in grants.
As already mentioned, in recent years Commonwealth authorities such as the Australian Telecommunications Commission, Qantas Airways Ltd and TAA have borrowed on their own account to help finance their capital programs. This is reflected in a decline in the proportion of total Budget outlays represented by advances to such authorities.
Trends in the proportion of the major economic type components over this period are shown in the charts on the next page. These movements also must be viewed against the background of the various changes in Commonwealth financing arrangements referred to earlier. Such changes, of course, do not diminish the total Commonwealth sector borrowing requirement.

DOMESTIC AND OVERSEAS OUTLAYS
In Table 6 at the end of this Statement, the domestic and overseas components of estimated outlays in 1982-83 are compared with a dissection of actual outlays in the years 1972-73 to 1981-82. This dissection is presented for each of the major components of outlays in national accounting terms and is based on data supplied by Commonwealth departments and authorities of their past and prospective overseas transactions and on data contained in central accounting records.
The distinction between domestic and overseas transactions is based on the effects of the transactions on the demand for Australian resources. Domestic outlays, as defined, affect the demand for Australian resources while overseas outlays do not. Whether the relevant outlays require foreign exchange does not affect this basic distinction.
The overseas component of expenditure on goods and services in Table 6 consists of direct purchases by the Commonwealth from overseas suppliers. It excludes the wages and salaries of Australia's overseas posts and the pay and allowances of Australian defence forces stationed overseas, but does include other expenses of the overseas establishments and defence forces. The reason for this treatment is that while the overseas personnel may be paid in foreign currency, their wages and salaries or pay and allowances are included in Australian gross domestic product. This treatment reflects the

384 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Budget Outlays by Economic Type as Proportions of Total Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82

% of Total

Net Expenditure

30

on Goods and Services (a) 25

-

20

IS

10

% of Total 30 25 20 IS 10 5

Personal Benefit Payments (b) 35

35

30

30

.-----

25

.-----~t__

25

20

20

IS

IS

10

10

Grants and Net Advances to 40

40

States, Northern Territory

and Local Governments (c), 35

35

of which General Purpose

Payments are shaded

30

30

25

25

20

20

IS

15

10

10

Other Transfers (unshaded) 20

and

Other Net Advances (d)

IS

10

1972 - 73
(a) Comprises nct current expenditure on goods and services, gross fixed capital expenditure and changes in stocks.
(b) Includes pensions and allowances for the aged, the handicapped. veterans, etc; unemployment and sickness benefits. assistance to families, widows and other disadvantaged groups. Also includes unfunded employee retirement benefits.
(cJ Comprises grants and advances to the States, the Northern Territory and local government authorities for specific purposes and of a general purpose nature. Repayments of advances are deducted to arrive at net figures.
(d) Comprises subsidies, interest payments, grants for private capital purposes, transfers overseas, purchases of existing assets, nct advances to Commonwealth government authorities such as the Postal and Telecommunications Commissions, Qantas Airwavs Ltd.. Australian National Airlines Commission and net advances to other sectors apart from State and local authorities.

20 15 10
1981 -82

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 385

fact that the payments are in respect of Australian manpower resources, whether the personnel are stationed at home or abroad.
Most other national accounting categories also have domestic and overseas components.
While the major part of the category 'transfers overseas' does not directly affect domestic demand, there is a significant component which has an impact on the domestic economy. This is because part of the transfers made to overseas countries and international organisations under the aid program is used to purchase Australian goods and services.
The major components of overseas outlays are defence and aid expenditure and interest paid. Of these, overseas defence expenditure has been somewhat more variable than the others. It declined markedly in 1981-82 so that overseas outlays was a smaller proportion of total outlays in that year than at any time since 1976-77. An expected increase in overseas defence expenditure is largely responsible for the ratio of overseas to total outlays being estimated to increase in 1982-83.

386 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

BUDGET RECEIPTS
Details of Commonwealth Budget receipts for the period 1972-73 to 1981-82, together with the 1982-83 estimates, are shown in Table 7 at the end of this Statement. The aggregate figures are given in the table below.

Budget Increase on

Real

Receipts Previous Year Increase (a)

1972 73 1973-74 1974 75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83(e)

$m 9494 11950 15293 18295 21405 23427 25558 29627 35 181 40790 45393

%

%

6.5

-0.2

25.9

10.7

28.0

4.8

19.6

2.4

17.0

5.1

9.4

1.I

9.1

2.3

15.9

5.7

18.7

8.0

15.9

3.9

11.3

0.3

(a) Increase in receipts deflated by increase in the implicit price deflator for non-farm GDP. (p) Preliminary. (e) Budget estimate.

Proportion of GDP
% 22.1 23.3 24.8 25.1 25.7 25.9 25.0 25.9 27.0
(P)27.5 27.7

The following table illustrates the changing significance of the major receipts categories over the period, both as a percentage of GDP and as collections per member of the labour force in constant price terms.

Customs Duty Crude Oil and LPG Other Excise Sales Tax Income Tax
Individuals (net) Companies Other Receipts
TOTAL RECEIPTS

Collections as Percentage of GDP

1972-73

1981-82

Collections per Member of the Labour Force in Constant Prices
1972-73(a) 1981-82

%

%

$

$

1.2

1.5

248

317

2.1

465

3.0

1.9

613

416

1.8

1.9

369

420

9.5

14.3

1975

3 121

3.8

3.5

789

773

2.9

2.2

591

486

22.1

27.5

4585

(e)5999

(a) Gross non-farm product deflator used to inflate to estimated 1981-82 prices. (e) Estimated on the basis of 10 months' labour force data for 1981-82.

Receipts have increased from 22.1 % of GDP in 1972-73 to an estimated 27.5% in 1981-82. The ratio increased in each year of the period except 1978-79. The overall increase in the ratio-by 5.4 percentage points-can be attributed almost entirely to the increase in the ratio of personal income tax to GDP, from 9.5% in 1972-73 to an estimated 14.3% in 1981-82. The only other major receipt category to increase significantly in relation to GDP over the period was the crude oil and LPG levies, introduced in 1975-76. Receipts from these levies were equivalent to more than 2% of estimated GDPin 1981-82.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 387

The following chart shows the relative importance of the various major categories of receipts over the decade to 1981-82. The three most notable features are:
- the trend over the decade to increased reliance on personal income tax (and in particular net PAYE taxation);
- the strong growth in receipts from the levy on crude oil and LPG from 1975-76 to 1980-81; and
- the steady decline in the relative contribution from traditional excises.
In the period 1972-73 to 1981-82 personal income tax receipts increased as a proportion of total receipts from 43.1 % to 52.0%. The major share of the increase in total personal income tax has been borne by the PAYE taxpayer.

388 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Major Categories of Budget Receipts as Proportions of Total Budget Receipts - 1972-73 to 1981-82

Income Tax - Individuals

% of Total 55

50

45

..----

..----

40

35 30 25
20
15 IO 5

% of Total 55

~
r---

50

45

40

35

30

25 20

15

10

Income Tax - Companies

Oil and LPG Excise Duty Other Excise Duty

Customs Duty Sales Tax Other Receipts (a)

1972

1981

-73

-82

(a) Other General Taxation (Payroll Tax, Departure Tax, Estate Duty, Gift Duty, Stamp Duty and Other Taxes, Fees and Fines), Interest, Rent and Dividends, Net Receipts from Government Enterprise Transactions and Sale of Existing Assets.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 389

Until last year, revenue from the crude oil and LPG levies had grown rapidly from their inception in the 1975 Budget. The relative importance of these levies peaked in 1980-81 when they accounted for almost 9% of total receipts. The growth in revenue until 1980-81 was due to changes in the levy arrangements and substantial rises in the price of Saudi Arabian marker crude and, consequently, in Australian import parity prices. These changes to the marker crude price, the import parity prices and the levy have been detailed in Appendix I to Statement No. 4 in earlier Budget papers. In 1981-82, revenue growth tapered off markedly and little growth is expected in future years, barring a major jump in world oil prices. Details of receipts from the crude oil and naturally occurring LPG levies are set out in the table below.

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

Revenue from Crude Oil and
LPG Levies
$m 264 344 476 1227 2270 3108 3163

Increase on Previous Year
% na 30.3 38.2 157.8 85.0 36.9 1.8

Revenue as Proportion
of GDP
% 0.4 0.4 0.5 1.2 2.0 2.4 2.1

The relative contribution to receipts of traditional excises (on beer, potable spirits, tobacco products and refined petroleum products) and of the related customs duties on imports of these products has been declining for a number of years, primarily because the rates of duty are set in dollar terms which have been increased infrequently and by amounts insufficient to offset erosion due to the effects of inflation.
The table below shows the actual rates of excise duty for the major commodities, and the effects of inflation on these rates, since 1972-73. Revenue from the traditional excises is also shown in nominal terms and deflated by the implicit price deflator for non-farm GOP.
Real and Nominal Rates ofExcise Duty

Beer ($/Iitre)

Potable Spirits ($/It al)(a)

Cigarettes ($/kgtobacco)

Motor Spirit (cents/litre)

nominal real (b) nominal real (b) nominal real (b) nominal real (b)

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

0.253 0.253 0.253 0.394 0.394 0.394 0.520 0.520 0.520 0.520

0.253 0.223 0.182 0.243 0.218 0.202 0.250 0.228 0.207 0.185

4.27 6.80 9.35 10.21 10.21 10.21 18.75 18.75 18.75 18.75

4.27

11.46

11.46

3.800

3.800

5.98

14.00

12.31

4.905

4.314

6.74

16.10

11.60

4.905

3.534

6.30

19.36

11.94

4.905

3.026

5.66

19.36

10.73

4.905

2.719

5.23

19.36

9.92

5.155

2.641

9.01

24.75

11.89

5.155

2.476

8.21

24.75

10.84

5.155

2.258

7.47

24.75

9.86

5.155

2.053

6.69

24.75

8.83

5.155

1.838

(a) Rate for whisky used as an illustration. (b) Deflated by the non-farm product deflator; 1972-73 = 100.

390 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982
Traditional Excise Receipts
1972 73 1973 74 1974 75 1975 76 1976 77 1977-78 1978 79 197980 1980 81 1981 82
(a) Deflated by the non-farm product deflator; 1972-73 ~ 100.

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

Current Prices
$m 1268 1555 1729 2068 2141 2258 2618 2695 2725 2830

1972-73 Prices (a)
$m 1268 1367 1247 1276 I 196 I 187 1257 I 180 1085 1009

THE DEFICIT AND FINANCING TRANSACTIONS

The following table shows the overall Budget deficit in relation to GDP since 1972-73 together with estimated domestic and overseas deficits and surpluses.

Commonwealth Budget Results (+Surplus, - Deficit)

Domestic

Overseas

Total

Total as a Proportion
of GDP

1972-73 1973 74 197475 1975-76 1976-77 197778 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83(e)

$m - 202
+ 225
-1923 -2854 -1844
-2338 -2235 - 566
+ 446 + 918 + 230

$m 494 504 - 618 712 875 972 -1220 -1467 -1556 -1468 -1904

$m - 696 - 279 -2546 -3566 -2719 -3310 -3455 -2033 -1110 - 549 -1674

%
1.6 0.5 4.1 4.9 3.3 3.7 3.4 1.8 0.9 (P)0.4 1.0

(p) Preliminary. (e) Budget estimates.

There is no satisfactory single measure of the overall economic impact of Budget transactions, but the Budget deficit is a commonly used measure. In a purely accounting sense, total receipts and reductions in balances must equal total payments, and there can be no surplus or deficit. Transactions differ in many significant respects, however, and by selecting only certain kinds of transactions as deficit-determining transactions and other kinds as deficit-financing transactions on the basis of some appropriate analytical criterion, e.g. the Government's need to borrow, a measure of the balance of government operations may be derived.
While the deficit is sometimes taken as a shorthand or summary measure of budgetary impact, its use for this purpose is subject to important qualifications. The Budget has a wide variety of effects, including effects on income/expenditure flows directly, on liquidity and on expectations and confidence. No single measure of the Budget can serve as a wholly adequate indicator for all of them.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 391

It is also important to recognise, as discussed below, that the Budget deficit is only part of the total deficit of the Commonwealth sector and only part of the overall Public Sector Borrowing Requirement.
An indication of the direct income/expenditure effects of the Budget can be provided by distinguishing between domestic and overseas transactions. The basic rationale for this distinction is that government payments made overseas do not add directly to domestic incomes or to the demand for locally produced goods and services, while government receipts from overseas sources increase total receipts without withdrawing purchasing power from the domestic private sector. In the table above, overseas transactions have been netted out to arrive at estimates of the domestic and overseas deficits/surpluses. (For this purpose, estimates of overseas outlays in Table 6 at the end of this Statement are adjusted to include all wages and salaries paid to overseas personnel and to exclude payments for goods and services received in foreign currency.)
In each of the five years to 1978.:79, the overall Budget deficit was at historically high levels but it fell thereafter, and there was a small domestic surplus in 1980-81, the first since 1973-74: A larger domestic surplus was recorded in 1981-82.
The levels of, and the means of financing, the domestic and overseas deficits have important implications for economic and monetary developments. The domestic deficit measures the Budget's immediate contribution to liquidity in the economy. The overseas deficit does not contribute directly to the money creation process. Government receipts from abroad, for example, have no immediate monetary impact as they merely add to the Government's cash balances at the Reserve Bank. Only to the extent that the Government draws down those cash balances is the inflow of foreign exchange translated into domestic liquidity. Accordingly, the domestic Budget deficit or surplus is of key significance for monetary conditions and monetary management in the short term.
That said, the overseas Budget deficit does contribute indirectly to money formation. The key point is that, in the absence of government borrowing abroad, the overseas Budget deficit must eventually be matched by an equivalent private external surplus. If it were not then, in time, Australia would run out of international reserves. Under our exchange rate regime, the effects of the overseas deficit on money formation tend to be delayed. The repayment of government borrowings, together with payments to service the debt will, ceteris paribus, eventually make a call upon Australia's holdings of foreign exchange and/or exert downward pressure on the exchange rate. Both effects involve forces for the generation of a surplus on private external transactions, which contributes directly to money formation.
It follows that both the domestic and the overall Budget deficit are relevant to an assessment of the impact of fiscal policy on monetary conditions. Which measure receives greater prominence will depend upon the purpose of the analysis, its time frame, and the circumstances of the economy.
Table 8 at the end of this Statement provides a summary of Commonwealth Government Budget financing transactions for each year since 1972-73. Budget Statement No.5 provides more detailed information on the financing of the Budget deficit in 1980-81 and 1981-82.

392 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

THE BUDGET AND THE PUBLIC SECTOR AS A WHOLE
The Commonwealth Budget is only part-albeit an important part-of the public sector as a whole. The composition of the total public sector is shown in the following diagram.

. - - - - - - 1 ALL PUBLIC AUTHORITIES 1 - - - - - - - ,

COMMONWEALTH BUDGET SECTOR

COMMONWEALTH NON-BUDGET SECTOR

STATE BUDGET SECTOR

STATE NON-BUDGET SECTOR

LOCAL AUTHORITIES

This section outlines briefly the linkages between the Commonwealth Budget and the other parts of the public sector and indicates some broad trends in the public sector and its main components over the past decade.
COMMONWEALTH SECTOR
Table 10 at the end of this Statement sets out, in national accounts form, transactions of the total Commonwealth sector for the period since 1972-73. This sector comprises the transactions of the Commonwealth Budget and of those Commonwealth authorities that operate outside the Budget. Non-Budget authorities include the Australian Postal and Telecommunications Commissions, the Australian Shipping Commission, the Australian Wool Corporation, Qantas and TAA. Further information on the coverage of the Budget sector and the Commonwealth Non-Budget sector is provided in the Appendix to the Budget Statements. The data in Table 10 have been derived from information provided by the Australian Statistician in Budget Paper No. 10, adjusted for some conceptual differences.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 393

The following table summarises the transactions of the two elements of the Commonwealth sector in 1981-82.

Budget Sector

Non-

All

Budget Commonwealth

Sector

Authorities

OutlaysNet Expenditure on Goods and ServicesCurrent Capital Transfer Payments Net Advances

$m
8509 421
3\ 159 \ 250

$m
30 1732
997 17

$m
8539 2153 31425
922

"!otalOutlays

4\ 339

2776

43039

ReceiptsTaxation Interest, Rent and Dividends Other

37784 2585
421

-\
178 \ 754

37756 2082 2151

Total Receipts

40 790

1931

41989

Deficit

549

845

1050

As this table shows, the Budget accounts for the great bulk of Commonwealth sector outlays and receipts but Non-Budget sector transactions make important contributions in certain areas. In particular, about four-fifths of Commonwealth direct capital expenditure is attributable to Non-Budget authorities. Until the mid 1970s, almost all capital expenditure by Non-Budget authorities was financed by advances from the Budget and by the authorities' internally-generated funds. Since then, however, a number of these authorities have undertaken substantial borrowing programs on their own account to contribute to the financing of their capital expenditures; for some, use of internally-generated funds has also increased significantly. One consequence of this has been a substantial decline in the proportion of the Non-Budget sector deficit being met by advances from the Budget. In 1972-73, Budget advances more than covered the Non-Budget sector deficit, whereas less than half of the deficit was met in that way in 1981-82.

Movements in the Commonwealth sector deficit expressed as a proportion of GDP closely parallel movements in the Budget deficit. Like the Budget deficit, the Commonwealth sector deficit peaked as a proportion of GDP in 1975-76. However, the subsequent decline has been less steep than the decline in the Budget deficit.

Total Commonwealth Sector Deficit (a)

Budget Sector

Non-

All All Commonwealth

Budget Commonwealth

Authorities as

Sector

Authorities Proportion of GDP

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$m

$m

$m

%

696

283

646

1.5

279

526

352

0.7

2546

1056

2516

4.1

3566

625

3528

4.8

2719

613

3028

3.6

3310

641

3850

4.3

3455

230

3619

3.5

2033

534

2458

2.1

I 110

590

1520

1.2

549

845

1050

0.7

(a) The deficits of the Non-Budget sector have been financed in part from the Budget sector and the total Commonwealth sector deficit therefore differs from the sum of the deficits of the two component sub-sectors.

394 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 19H2

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

TOTAL PUBLIC SECTOR
The transactions of the Commonwealth sector can be consolidated with those of State and local government authorities to derive transactions of the public sector as a whole. These consolidated transactions provide summary indicators of total public sector demand for real and financial resources.

Outlays
The following table and Chart I show outlays as a proportion of GDP for the public sector as a whole and for each of the two main government sectors.

Outlays ofPublic Authorities as Proportions of GDP(aj

All Commonwealth
Authorities (b)

All State and Local Authorities

All Public Authorities

1972-73 1973-74 197475 1975-76 1976 77 1977 78

%

%

%

24.3

16.6

31.3

24.6

16.6

31.6

29.4

19.4

37.1

30.6

20.1

37.9

30.3

20.0

38.2

31.1

21.0

39.6

1978 79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82(p)

29.5(c) 29.0 29.0 29.2

20.3(c)

38.0

20.0

37.7

20.3

38.2

19.8

38.3

(a) Outlays of the public sector as a whole are less than the sum of the two component sectors because, on consolidation, transfers between sectors are netted out; ie grants and advances from the Commonwealth to State and local governmeni authorities, and payments of interest by those authorities on specific purpose advances and on securities allocated to the States under the Financial Agreement from the Commonwealth, are eliminated.
(b) Figures for the Commonwealth sector used in deriving this and the following tables differ from those appearing earlier in this Statement in respect of the treatment of some items, eg primary industry charges, in order that figures for all sectors may be on the same conceptual basis.
(e) From 1978-79 the Northern Territory is treated as part of the State and Local Government sector; before then, it is treated as part of the Commonwealth sector.
(p) Preliminary.

Total public sector outlays in the above table comprise final expenditure on goods and services as well as transfer payments and net advances by the public sector to other sectors of the economy.
Expenditures on goods and services represent direct claims on the real resources of the economy. Transfers and advances to and from the private sector influence the pattern and level of demand. These influences occur both through the payments made to the private sector and through the funding of those payments by taxation and/or government borrowing; in terms of their impact on governments' funding requirements, however, transfer payments and advances by governments are no different from final expenditure by them. Thus, the total levels of public sector outlays have obvious implications for the availability of resources to the private sector.
With respect to advances, the qualification needs to be made that their impact on governments' future funding requirements will differ from that of final expenditures and transfer payments because they involve the creation of financial claims on other sectors of the economy which wiJJ be serviced by way of interest payments and will, at

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 395

some stage in the future, be repaid. However, unlike government transactions in financial claims for purposes of monetary or debt management, advances (eg loans for welfare housing) are included in outlays since they are undertaken to pursue various public policy objectives, not to acquire profitable financial assets.
In the short run at least, growth in total public sector outlays (if not matched by increases in revenue and/or borrowing from the domestic non-bank sector) will increase the demand for resources. Over the longer term, there are implications for the mix of goods and services which are produced and the flexibility of the economy. The levels of taxation associated with increased government spending can also have implications for incentives, the allocation of resources and wage demands within the economy.
A feature of Chart 1 is the sharp jump in outlays as a proportion of GDP which occurred in both sectors in 1974-75. Since that time the proportions of outlays to GDP for the Commonwealth and the State and Local Government sectors have been relatively stable. There has been some drop in the Commonwealth proportion since the mid 1970s, in part reflecting the changed treatment of the Northern Territory.
The public sector's direct expenditure on goods and services, expressed as a percentage of GDP, is shown in the following table and in Chart 2.

Net Expenditure on Goods and Services as Proportions of GDP

All Commonwealth
Authorities

All State and Local Authorities

All Public Authorities

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78

%

%

%

7.3

13.3

20.6

7.4

13.4

20.8

8.5

16.1

24.6

7.8

17.1

24.9

7.6

17.0

24.7

7.6

17.8

25.4

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82(P)

~7(a)
6.8 7.1 7.3

17.3(a)

24.1

17.3

24.1

17.5

24.7

17.0

24.4

(a) See footnote (c) to previous table.
(P) Preliminary.
Comparing 1981-82 with 1972-73, the rise as a proportion of GDP in the other major component of public sector outlays-transfer payments to other sectors of the economy, such as personal benefit payments, subsidies and interest payments-has been even more rapid than the rise in expenditure on goods and services. Such payments now represent more than one-third oftotal outlays.
As the foregoing tables also indicate, the composition of total outlays differs markedly between the Commonwealth sector and the State and Local Government sector. Expenditure on goods and services represented approximately 25% of total Commonwealth outlays in 1981-82, but made up 86% of outlays of the State and Local Government sector. About 70% of direct public sector demands for goods and services derive from State and local government. On the other hand, about 90% of total transfer payments from the public to the private sector are provided directly by the Commonwealth.
The difference in composition of outlays reflects in part the funding of a large proportion of State and Local Government outlays by payments from the Commonwealth.

396 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Chart 1 - Outlays of Public Authorities as a Percentage of GDP

40 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 18 16 ~---"

All Public - - - - - - - - - Authorities
All Commonwealth - - - - - - - - Authorities
All State and Local Authorities

1972-7373-74 74-75 75-76 76-77 77-78 78-79 79-80 80-81 81-82

Chart 2 - Net Expenditure on Goods and Services as a Percentage of GDP

26 24 22 20 18 16 14
1--_/ 12 10 8
1-----6

All Public _ _ _ _ _- - - - - Authorities
All State _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - and Local
Authorities
All - - - - - - -_ _ _ _ _~------ Commonwealth
Authorities

1972-73 73-74 74-75 75-76 76-77 77-78 78-79 79-80 80-81 81-82

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 397

About 42% of total Commonwealth transfer payments in 1981-82 comprised grants to the State and Local Government sector. The difference in composition of outlays also reflects the differing Constitutional and traditional responsibilities of the levels of government and a concentration of social security payments in the Commonwealth sector.
Receipts
Over the decade to 1981-82 the bulk of total public sector receipts has been Commonwealth Budget receipts, of which the principal component has been income taxes. The following table shows trends in major public sector receipts as proportions of GDP.

Receipts ofPublic Authorities as Proportions of GDP

All Commonwealth Authorities

All State and Local Authorities

Income Taxes(a)

Total

Grants from Commonwealth

Own Revenue
Raising

All Public Total Authorities(b)

1972-73 1973-74 1974 75 1975-76 1976-77 197778 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 198182(p)

(1)

(2)

%

%

13.3

22.8

14.6

23.9

16.4

25.3

16.2

25.8

16.8

26.6

17.0

26.8

15.6

26.0

16.2

26.9

17.1

27.8

17.8

28.5

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

%

%

%

%

6.5

7.8

14.3

29.0

6.7

7.5

14.2

30.0

8.4

7.5

15.9

31.5

9.7

7.8

17.6

32.4

9.2

8.0

17.2

33.3

9.7

8.1

17.8

33.6

9.4

7.8

17.3

32.5

9.3

8.0

17.3

33.6

9.2

8.0

17.2

34.6

8.9

8.3

17.2

35.6

(a) Comprises income taxes on individuals and companies and withholding tax. (b) Net of all transfers between Commonwealth and State and Local Government sectors. Because such transfers-
which comprise Commonwealth grants to the States and interest payments by the States on specific purpose advances and on securities allocated to the States under the Financial Agreement from the Commonwealthare included as receipts of the relevant sector, columns (2) and (5) do not add to column (6). (p) Preliminary.

Public sector receipts have increased fairly steadily over the past decade and by 1981-82 represented a significantly higher proportion of GDP than at the beginning of the period. Much of this increase was due to growth in income taxes on individuals levied by the Commonwealth. The proportion of Commonwealth receipts transferred to the States has declined somewhat in recent years. This decline is more marked if Commonwealth advances to the States, in addition to grants, are taken into account. It is also noteworthy that to maintain its outlays as a proportion of GDP since the mid 1970s in the face of a relative decline in total Commonwealth assistance, the State and Local Government sector has relied more upon increased borrowings and lease-type arrangements than on increased revenue raisings.

The Deficit and Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR)
Over the past decade, total public sector outlays in Australia have consistently exceeded receipts. Borrowing to finance deficits can take several forms, and the ultimate effect upon the economy will vary according to the form chosen. Generally speaking, the higher the deficit and the associated borrowing requirement, the greater will be the pressures on domestic capital markets and hence upon interest rates.

398 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

In terms of the borrowing possibilities, an important distinction can be drawn between the Commonwealth Budget sub-sector and other parts of the public sector; that is, Commonwealth semi-government authorities and all State and local government authorities. For these authorities, financing possibilities have traditionally been limited to those approved by Loan Council and some forms of borrowing outside Loan Council, including short-term financing in the form of trade credits and promissory notes as well as the use of cash balances. The importance to the State and Local Government sector of sources of borrowing outside those covered by the Loan Council has increased in recent years, as the sector's real outlays have continued to increase (although recorded real outlays declined slightly in 1981-82) in the face of restrictions on Loan Council programs and a relative decline in the share of State and local government outlays financed by Commonwealth assistance.

In recent years, the most significant new means of funding outside Loan Council

tapped by State and local government, as well as by some Commonwealth Non-Budget

authorities, has been leasing. Under a leasing arrangement, ownership of the asset to be

leased is vested with the lessor-generally in the private sector-and consequently the

related investment is recorded in the national accounts as a private sector transaction.

Compared to an arrangement where the capital expenditure is undertaken directly by

the public sector, this has the initial effect of reducing recorded outlays and hence the

deficit (PSBR) of the public sector by an amount equal to the value of the investment

in question, less the amount by which any leasing payments made by the lessee with

respect to the asset in that period exceed interest payments which would have been

made had the investment been financed by conventional borrowings. (In the case where

a leasing payment is made by a public enterprise, it is treated as an operating cost and

would be reflected in a fall in the receipts item 'Income from Public Enterprises' in the

national accounts.)

,

Clearly, while the statistical classification of investment financed through leasing may have the initial effect of reducing the recorded deficit compared with alternative arrangements where the public sector undertakes the capital expenditure directly, the economic effects of both arrangements are the same, namely to supplement the resources available to the public sector and to increase competition for funds. From the point of view of assessing economic impact, a measure of the PSBR which excludes investment financed through leasing can be at best only an approximate measure of the public sector's pre-emption of real and financial resources.

A number of Commonwealth Non-Budget authorities have entered into leasing arrangements in recent years to finance investment. In 1981, the Commonwealth Government decided not to permit its non-taxable authorities to enter into leveraged leases and similar arrangements. Leasing arrangements have been used to a much greater extent by State government authorities (although the value of investments financed in this way in this sector is difficult to ascertain with accuracy).

The single largest financial arrangement of this nature undertaken in the public sector has been in connection with the Eraring power station. The Electricity Commission of NSW (ELCOM) commenced we,rk on the project some years ago. In late 1981 an agreement involving the sale of the station in stages over a three-year period was reached with a consortium of companies. Investment which had already been undertaken by ELCOM at the site, and which was transferred at the first stage of the sale in December 1981, had previously been recorded in the national accounts as gross fixed

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 399

capital expenditure (GFCE) by the public sector. The sale has subsequently been recorded in the national accounts as a reduction in public GFCE and an addition to private GFCE in 1981-82. Similar treatment is expected in 1982-83 and subsequent years as ownership of the remaining sections of Eraring is transferred.
It is estimated that the sale of the first unit of Eraring had the effect of reducing the PSBR in 1981-82 by around 0.4 percentage points of GDP from what it would have been if conventional forms of financing had been employed. If they had, the State and Local Government sector deficit as a proportion of GDP, which from the mid 1970s increased steadily, would have remained broadly unchanged in 1981-82 from the previous year. The increased borrowing requirement of the State and Local Government sector since the mid 1970s, together with private sector borrowing resulting directly from leasing arrangements of the type mentioned above, has had the effect of increasing competition for available funds with consequent increased pressure on interest rates in domestic capital markets.
These pressures on capital markets and interest rates cannot be relieved by permitting semi-government authorities to raise their required funds in overseas markets. While such action will reduce raisings on domestic markets, any resultant relief of market pressures will be very short-lived in the context of a given objective of monetary restraint. This is because the overseas borrowings by such authorities, converted to Australian dollars through the banking system, result in an immediate injection of primary liquidity into the economy and thus provide the basis for increased monetary growth. If those effects are to be offset, there will be a need for higher sales of Commonwealth securities to the non-bank sector than would otherwise be the case and this will re-assert pressure upon domestic capital markets and interest rates.
Unlike the rest of the public sector, the Commonwealth Budget sub-sector has the additional financing option of borrowing from the Reserve Bank. The extent to which the Commonwealth borrows from the Reserve Bank, if at all, is however related to the requirements of monetary management.
Financing the difference between Budget outlays and receipts (the Budget deficit or surplus) will lead to a change in primary liquidity. Under current institutional arrangements, the banking system operates on the basis of minimum LGS requirements and, to the extent that the change in primary liquidity is reflected in changes in bank holdings of LGS assets, there is a change in the rate of monetary growth both directly and through secondary credit creation by the banks. These changes result in an increase in money formation in the case of a domestic deficit and a decrease in the case of a domestic surplus.
Given that the underlying task of monetary management remains one of restraining the growth of the monetary aggregates, it follows that the pursuit of that task is facilitated to the extent that the domestic Budget deficit is reduced or surplus increased. In other words, for any given set of economic and financial conditions, a higher domestic Budget surplus reduces the need for liquidity to be withdrawn from the banking system by way of sales of Commonwealth Government securities to the non-bank sector. In that situation, pressures on interest rates will also be reduced below what they would otherwise be.
While the Commonwealth Budget deficit is an important element in monetary growth, it is not of course the sole factor in that growth, or in interest rate pressures. For

400 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

example, if there were an excessive growth in primary liquidity through the external account, this excess could be neutralised by sales of Commonwealth Government securities to the non-bank sector, whether or not such sales were needed to finance a Budget deficit.
There is also a distinction to be noted between the Commonwealth Budget subsector and other parts of the public sector in relation to overseas borrowings by each group. As noted earlier, overseas borrowings by public authorities other than by the Commonwealth Budget sub-sector lead to immediate increases in primary liquidity. That is not the case for overseas borrowings by the Commonwealth where, because the Commonwealth banks with the Reserve Bank, the conversion of foreign currency proceeds of overseas borrowings by the Commonwealth results in an increase in its cash balances with the Reserve Bank rather than (as for such borrowings by other parts of the public sector) an increase in balances with the banking system.
In summary, while there are distinctions to be noted regarding the effects of borrowing by different sectors and in different forms, reductions in the deficits of all parts of the public sector reduce governments' need to borrow and thus pressures on interest rates.
Against that background, the following table indicates the progress that has been made towards reducing the public sector borrowing requirement in recent years.

Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (Public Sector Deficit)

Levels

Proportions of GDP

Commonwealth
Budget Non-Budget (a)

State and Local
(a)

Commonwealth
Total Budget Non-Budget (a)

State and Local
(a)

Total

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80
1980-81
1981-82 (P)

$m

$m

$m

$m

%

%

%

%

696

-50

335

978

1.6

-0.1

0.8

2.3

279

72

460

812

0.5

0.1

0.9

1.6

2546

-31

932 3447

4.1

-0.1

1.5

5.6

3566

-36

456 3984

4.9

0.6

5.5

2719

310

1025 4055

3.3

0.4

1.2

4.9

3310

540

1617 5467

3.7

0.6

1.8

6.1

3455

164

1934 5554

3.4

0.2

1.9

5.4

2033

424

2229 4685

1.8

0.4

1.9

4.1

litO

411

3189 4708

0.9

0.3

2.4

3.6

549

501

2978 4027

0.4

0.3

2.0

2.7

(a) Because the deficits of Commonwealth Non-Budget authorities and of State and local authorities are financed in part by advances from the Commonwealth Budget, the borrowing requirements of those authorities are reduced to that extent. The figures shown here are net of these advances, to indicate the residual borrowing requirement of those sub-sectors.
(p) Preliminary.

The main features of the table are:
- the sharp increase in the total PSBR in 1974-75, associated in the main with a marked increase in the Commonwealth Budget deficit;
- the steady decline in the total PSBR in recent years, again attributable largely to developments in relation to the Commonwealth Budget deficit; and
- the tendency for the State and Local Government sector component of the PSBR to expand, both in nominal terms and as a proportion of GDP, from the mid 1970s up to and including 1980-81. If allowance is made for Eraring, this expansion-at least in nominal terms-continued in 1981-82.

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 401

NOTES ON TABLES
Wherever possible, the definitions and concepts adopted for the historical series are the same as those used in Statement No.3 and Statement No.4 (although the tables of outlays presented here provide less detail than do those in Statement No.3). To the extent practical, historical data have been adjusted to eliminate major breaks in series; however, some important changes affecting comparability cannot readily be removed and are mentioned below. Major discontinuities are indicated in the tables where appropriate.
In the case of outlays (Tables 1 to 4), changes to the functional classification from time to time require revisions to historical data in the tables. The figures therefore differ in some respects from those shown in the Budget Statements in previous years. Significant changes to the functional classification are noted each year in the Appendix to the Budget Statements.
The 1956-66 Housing Agreement was not renewed on its expiry at the end of 1970-71. Instead, the Commonwealth and State Governments agreed on arrangements under which housing allocations were to be met by States out of their approved Loan Council borrowing programs. Amounts totalling $160 million in 1971-72 and $166.9 million in 1972-73 were subsequently allocated by the States for housing projects similar in nature to those covered by the 1973 Housing Agreement. Tables 1 to 4 show this amount classified to 'Payments to or for the States, etc, nec', instead of 'Housing'.
The assumption by the Commonwealth Government in 1973-74 of full financial responsibility for universities and colleges of advanced education contributed to an increase in outlays classified to 'Education' but also involved a compensating decrease in general purpose funds provided to the States. As a consequence, the rate of increase in Commonwealth Government resources devoted to education, as shown for the function 'Education' in 1973-74, is somewhat overstated. A similar effect occurred in 1974-75, which was the first full financial year of the new tertiary education arrangements.
Changes in the operation of the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits, Ministerial Retiring Allowances and Parliamentary Retiring Allowances Schemes affect outlays for 1973-74 and subsequent years under the relevant functions and receipts under the heading 'Other Taxes, Fees and Fines-Unfunded Retirement Benefits Contributions'. These changes involved a move from funded schemes to unfunded benefit schemes. The implementation of a new Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme on 1 July 1976 gave rise to similar effects.
The scheme of Family Allowances introduced in 1976-77 involved the abolition of tax rebates for dependent children and students, offset by substantial increases in family allowances in place of child endowment. The effect of this measure was to increase significantly the level of outlays under the 'Social Security and Welfare' function in 1976-77, and to increase receipts from personal income taxation above what they would otherwise have been.
On 1 July 1978 the Northern Territory became a self-governing territory. Responsibilities transferred to the Ministers of the Territory from that date were mainly of a State-type character, as were the responsibilities transferred on 1 January 1977. In terms of financial arrangements, 1977-78 and 1978-79 were transitional years. During

402 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

those years the Commonwealth provided the bulk of its assistance to the Northern Territory through global (general purpose) allocations which were recorded under the heading 'Not Allocated to Function-Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territoryand Local Government Authorities nec'. Prior to 1977-78, outlays on the Northern Territory were undertaken as direct Commonwealth outlays, rather than payments to the Territory, and were classified under appropriate functional headings. From 1979-80 Commonwealth financial arrangements with the Northern Territory mirror those which exist between the Commonwealth and the States. In place of a global allocation, the Territory receives a combination of specific purpose and general purpose payments, the former classified to the relevant functions and the latter to 'Not Allocated to Function-Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec'.
Grants to the States for pensioner accommodation in 1977-78 and previous years are recorded under 'Social Security and Welfare'. In 1978-79 the scope of this scheme was extended to allow wider eligibility and to give the States greater flexibility in the application of the grants. In the light of these changes, grants under this program in 1978-79 and later years are now classified to the 'Housing' function.
Outlays for 198 I-82 and the estimates of outlays for 1982-83 shown in the tables reflect changes in health funding arrangements. Specific purpose payments in respect of hospital operating costs (for N.S.W., Vic., Qld, WA., and the N.T.), and community health and school dental services, recorded under the function 'Health' in previous years, have been replaced by general purpose grants, shown under 'Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec'.
The extensive changes in administrative arrangements made on 7 May 1982 have, through the provision of data associated with new appropriation items, allowed some improvements to the functional classification, particularly in respect of 'Defence' for the years 1980-81 to 1982-83-see the Appendix following this Statement for further details. There is, however, a resulting discontinuity between years up to 1979-80 and subsequent years.
The changes in administrative arrangements have also introduced a few other discontinuities into the series. The administrative expenditure of the former Department of Business and Consumer Affairs, apart from that relating to customs and bankruptcy administration, is classified to 'Other Economic Services'. The non-customs administrative expenditure of the new Department of Industry and Commerce, which gained functions from Business and Consumer Affairs, is classified to 'Other Assistance to Industry', reflecting the broader responsibilities of that Department in industry assistance matters than those of the former Department of Industry and Commerce. Its administrative expenditure is classified to 'Manufacturing Industry' within 'Industry Assistance and Development'.

Table l-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays and Receipts 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($m) (a) (b)

1972-73

OutlaysI. Defence 2. Education
3. Health . . . . .
4. Social Security and Welfare 5. Housing 6. Urban and Regional Development nec and the Environ-
ment
7. Culture and Recreation
8. Economic ServicesTransport and Communication Water Supply, Electricity and Gas Industry Assistance and Development Labour and Employment Other Economic Services

1227 442 783
2101 77
49 116
749 36
407 93 39

Total
9. General Public ServicesLegislative Services Law, Order and Public Safety Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid General and Scientific Research nec Administrative Services

1324
24 40 277 91 343

Total
IO. Not Allocated to FunctionPayments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nee Public Debt Interest Allowance for Wage and Salary Increases (NonDefence)

775
2623 674

TOTAL OUTLAYS

10190

ReceiptsI. Taxation Revenue 2. Interest, Rent and Dividends 3. Net Receipts from Government Enterprise Transactions 4. Sale of Existing Assets

8453 964 31 47

TOTAL RECEIPTS

9494

DEFICIT

696

(a) See Appendix for details of changes made to functional classification. (b) See Notes on Tables.

1973-74
1332 858 947
2487 337
144 159
868 45 419 112 46
1491
39 54 362 III 434
1000
2763 712
12229
10873 1045
9 22
11950
279

1974-75
1635 1663 1283 3712
702
378 237
1291 56 777 167 62
2353
42 84 435 143 584
1288
3700 888
17838
14085 I 195 -5 18
15293
2546

1975-76
1862 1894 2953 5030
562
408 253
1329 71 351 218 82
2051
53 108 469 167 648
1445
4436 968
21861
16843 1425 -3 30
18295
3566

1976-77
2191 2210 2543 6367
549
265 257
988 72 207 242 83
1592
63 126 516 185 725
1616
5123 1412
24124
19642 1648 85 30
21405
2719

1977-78
2385 2402 2698 7425
505
173 261
854 45 263 284 92
1538
75 135 564 198 813
1786
5915 1649
26737
21346 1834 225 22
23427
3310

1978-79
2614 2529 2901 8095
382
126 281
723 6
473 332 96
1630
70 173 608 229 832
1912
6573 1971
29014
23288 1946 300 24
25558
3455

1979-80
3017 2611 3169 8783
343
116 321
807 25 593 302 112
1839
79 200 664 271 927
2140
7100 2223
31660
27305 2033 265 24
29627
2033

1980-81
3550 2930 3650 9917
341
III 400
989 54 821 387 123
2374
112 221 748 314 1089
2484
7971 2561
36291
32467 2280 240 195
35181
I 110

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

4135 3341 2912 11498
458
77 483
1180 67 917 460 134
2757
132 258 860 394 1243
2887

4622 3792 3379 13272
571
113 501
1475 97
1016 510 123
3221
161 293 947 426 1363
3189

9908 2881
41339

10953 3243
210
47067

37784 2585 385 36
40790
549

41834 2939 475 146
45393
1674

:A.
.~..g....
is'
~. :::
:~:::
~
..:::
--.J
>
~
0<1
-.'~."..
\0 00 IV
:;Q tT1 "'0 :;Q tT1 rF.J tT1
.Z...,
.>...,
<
tT1
rF.J
.j:>.
0w

o.j:>.
.j:>.

:;t!

Table 2-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays by Function as Proportions of Total Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82 and

tTl "'d

1982-83 (estimated) (Per cent) (a)

:;t!
tTl

(/j

Function

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

.ZtT.,l

Defence

12.0

10.9

9.2

8.5

9.1

8.9

9.0

9.5

9.8

10.0

.., 9.8 :.>

Education Health Social Security and Welfare Housing Urban and Regional Development nee and the Environment Culture and Recreation

4.3 7.7

7.0 7.7

9.3 7.2

8.7 13.5

9.2 10.5

9.0 10.1

8.7 10.0

8.2 10.0

8.1 10.1

8.1 (b)7.0

8.1 (b)7.2

<

20.6

20.3

20.8

23.0

26.4

27.8

27.9

27.7

27.3

27.8

28.2

tTl

(e)0.8 0.5 1.1

2.8 1.2 1.3

3.9 2.1 1.3

2.6 1.9 1.2

2.3 1.1 1.1

1.9 0.6 1.0

1.3 0.4 1.0

1.1 0.4 1.0

0.9 0.3 1.1

1.1 0.2 1.2

1.2 0.2 1.1

(/j
---.J

Economic ServicesTransport and Communication Water Supply, Electricity and Gas Industry Assistance and DevelopmentPrimary Industry

7.3 0.4

7.1 0.4

7.2 0.3

6.1 0.3

4.1 0.3

3.2 0.2

2.5

2.6 0.1

2.7 0.1

2.9 0.2

3.1 0.2

:.>
Jg
s::

2.1

2.0

2.6

0.8

0.2

0.7

0.9

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.7 '.."...

Other Labour and Employment Other Economic Services

1.9 0.9

1.5 0.9

1.8 0.9

0.8 1.0

0.6 1.0

0.2 1.1

0.7 1.1

1.2 1.0

1.8 1.1

1.7 1.1

1.5 1.1

\0 00

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

tv

Total

13.0

12.2

13.2

9.4

6.6

5.8

5.6

5.8

6.5

6.7

6.8

General Public ServicesLegislative Services Law, Order and Public Safety Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid General and Scientific Research nee Administrative Services

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.4

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

2.7

3.0

2.4

2.2

2.1

2.1

2.1

2.1

2.1

2.1

2.0

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.9

1.0

0.9

3.4

3.6

3.3

3.0

3.0

3.0

2.9

2.9

3.0

3.0

2.9

Total

7.6

8.2

7.2

6.6

6.7

6.7

6.6

6.8

6.8

7.0

6.8

Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local

Government Authorities nee Public Debt Interest Allowances for Wage and Salary Increases (Non-Defence)
TOTAL OUTLAYS
(a) See Notes on Tables.

(e)25.7 6.6
100.0

22.6 5.8
100.0

20.7 5.0
100.0

20.3 4.4
100.0

21.2 5.9
100.0

22.1 6.2
100.0

22.7 6.8
100.0

22.4 7.0
100.0

22.0 7.1
100.0

(b)24.0 7.0
100.0

(b)23.3 6.9 0.4
100.0

::...
.~.g...
....

§"

(b) Changed arrangements for health funding affect comparability of the functional classification between 1980-81 and subsequent years. Adjusted for these changes, outlays under the 'Health' function in 1981-82

C-

and 1982-83 represent 9.9 per cent and 9.3 per cent of total Budget outlays respectively and outlays on 'Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nee' represent

;::

21.2 per cent and 21.1 per cent respectively. (e) See Notes on Tables. If the outlays under the two functions are adjusted to provide a comparable series, the proportion of outlays on 'Housing' to total outlays in 1972-73 becomes 2.4 per cent, while the pro-

~

portion for 'Payments to the States nee' becomes 24.1 per cent.

~

-.-..-..

:~ g..,

Table 3--Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays and Receipts 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) (Percentage Changes ..g.,

from Year to Year)

is'

1982-83

5°
;:

OutlaysI. Defence 2. Education 3. Health 4. Social Security and Welfare 5. Housing

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75

5.7

8.6

22.8

26.7

94.3

93.8

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78

13.8

17.7

8.9

13.9

16.7

8.7

1978-79
9.6 5.3

1979-80
15.4 3.2

1980-81 1981-82 (estimate)

17.7

16.5

11.8

12.3

14.0

13.5

-~
~

13.9

21.0

35.6

130.1

-13.9

6.1

31.6

18.4

49.3

35.5

26.6

16.6

7.5 9.0

9.3 8.5

15.2 (a)-20.2

12.9

15.9

(a)16.0 15.4

-.-..-..

(b)18.3 (b)339.2

108.4

-19.9

-2.4

-7.9

-24.4

-10.4

-0.4

34.3

24.6

6. Urban and Regional Development nec and the

Environment

29.1

193.3

161.7

8.0

-34.9

-34.9

-27.2

-7.9

-3.7

-30.4

45.9

7. Culture and Recreation

12.0

36.6

49.1

6.9

1.8

1.5

7.5

14.1

24.9

20.7

3.7

8. Economic ServicesTransport and Communication Water Supply, Electricity and Gas Industry Assistance and Development Labour and Employment Other Economic Services

2.6

15.9

48.8

2.9

-25.7

-13.6

-15.3

11.6

22.5

19.3

25.0

21.0

25.9

23.2

26.3

1.9

-37.2

-87.7

344.7

119.3

23.0

44.9

-15.2

2.8

85.5

-54.9

-40.9

26.6

80.0

25.4

38.5

11.7 (d) 10.8

-5.3

21.2

48.5

30.6

11.0

17.5

16.7

-9.0

28.0

19.0

10.9

7.0

19.1

32.7

33.5

0.6

10.8

5.0

16.7

9.2

8.9 (d) -8.3

Total

-3.7

12.6

57.8

-12.8

-22.4

-3.4

6.0

12.9

29.1

16.2

16.8

9. General Public ServicesLegislative Services Law, Order and Public Safety Foreign Affairs and Overseas Aid General and Scientific Research nec Administrative Services
Total

28.0

59.8

7.7

27.2

19.2

18.4

-6.4

12.1

42.3

18.2

21.3

22.7

35.1

54.3

29.1

16.1

7.7

27.6

15.6

10.9

16.4

13.7

-.J

15.7

30.8

20.2

7.7

10.1

9.3

7.7

9.2

12.6

15.1

10.0 :>

12.3

22.7

28.5

16.8

10.5

7.2

15.7

18.4

16.0

25.2

8.2

~

9.8

26.4

34.6

11.0

12.0

12.1

13.3

29.0

28.8

12.2

11.8

10.5

2.4 7.1

11.3 11.9

17.5 16.1

14.2 16.2

9.7 10.5

...(JQ
~
'"

10. Not Allocated to Function-

Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and

Local Government Authorities nee

(b) 10.5

(b)5.3

33.9

19.9

15.5

15.4

11.1

\0

00

tv

8.0

12.3

(a)24.3

(a) 10.5

Public Debt Interest

9.4

5.6

24.7

9.0

45.9

16.8

19.5

12.8

15.2

12.5

12.6 :;:e

TOTAL OUTLAYS

tTl

12.6

20.0

45.9

22.6

10.4

10.8

8.5

9.1

14.6

13.9 (c)13.9

.:;.:e"

ReceiptsTaxation Revenue Other Receipts

6.5

28.6

29.5

19.6

16.6

8.7

4.7

3.4

12.2

20.2

21.4

18.0

9.1

17.2

18.9

16.4

10.7

etTnl
tTl

9.1

2.3

16.9

10.7

18.4

Z

TOTAL RECEIPTS

6.3

25.9

28.0

19.6

17.0

9.4

9.1

15.9

18.7

15.9

11.3

:>>-l

>-l

(a) Changed arrangements for health funding affect comparability of the functional classification between 1980-81 and subsequent years. Adjusted for these changes, the percentage change in the 'Health' function in 1981-82 and 1982-83 would be II. 7 per cent and 7.7 per cent respectively and for 'Payments to or for the States, the NT and Local Government Authorities nec' the changes would be 9.7 per cent and 13.7 per cent respectively.

'<
etTnl

(b) See Notes on Tables. If the outlays under the two functions are adjusted to provide a comparable series, the percentage changes in 'Housing' in 1972-73 and 1973-74 become 8.3 per cent and 38.2 per cent re-

spectively, while the percentage changes for 'Payments to the States nec', become 11.0 per cent and 12.5 per cent respectively.

(c) Includes Allowance for Wage and Salary Increases (Non-Defence).

oj>.

(d) See Notes on Tables regarding changes in administrative arrangements made on 7 May 1982.

0
V>

Table 4-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($m)

I. DEFENCEManpower Costs~ Civilian (a) Forces Defence Equipment Stores and Facilities(a) Defence Industrial Capacity(a) Defence Science and Technology(a) Defence Aid and Co-operation Storage and Transport Other Outlays(a) Less Recoveries and Repayments(a) Allowance for Prospective Wage and Salary Increases
TOTAL DEFENCE

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76 1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

156 464 400
30 56 II 7 133 30
1227

185 619 331
47 59 10 8 137 65
I 332

217 748 438
59 79 89 12 133 /38
I 635

219 832 539 69
74 39 II 145 66
1862

243 915 712 87 78
25 13 180 64
2191

263 1004
782 89 85 27 15 203 82
2385

272 1076
903 102 87 25
15 217 82
2614

289 1206 I 105
118 96 30 19 253 99
3017

278 1390 1305
199 109 38 23 304 97
3550

330 1809 1320
261 127 40 31 338 J/9
4135

339 1880 1572
298 139 43 31 369 /59 110
4622

2. EDUCATlONUniversities Advanced Education Technical and Further Education Cost Supplementation of Tertiary Grants SchoolsSchools in the States and N.T.(b) Schools and Pre-schools in the A.C.T. Other Outlays School to Work Transition(c) Student Assistance Schemes Special Groups Other Outlays (net)
TOTAL EDUCATION

143

293

504

541

642

711

730

794

873

1007

1024

65

176

365

393

470

475

508

530

585

616

651

18

34

55

81

100

118

146

168

198

224

239

110

96

196

513

585

681

752

776

736

836

1016

I 238

25

34

57

80

84

89

93

94

106

117

136

3

4

5

5

5

6

6

6

5

I

I

3

8

28

34

43

63

73

100

133

162

174

182

182

190

200

221

22

38

49

55

46

56

65

72

88

102

108

9

13

18

21

20

20

21

22

20

19

18

442

858

1663

1894

2210

2402

2529

2611

2930

3341

3792

3. HEALTHMedical Services and Benefits Hospital Services and Benefits
Health Program Grants Pharmaceutical Services and Benefits Nursing Home and Domiciliary Care Services and Benefits Community Health Facilities and Services Treatment and Prevention of Tuberculosis Health Schemes for School Children Health Services in the Territories(d) Other Outlays (net)

217

229

287

774

602

430

605

713

792

902

1048

170

194

275

1290

1015

I 315

I 352

1479

1717

593

628

7

6

4

4

4

5

6

6

200

242

289

317

271

295

316

323

365

459

532

101

134

195

236

280

303

319

369

452

657

834

17

36

55

71

74

54

55

68

8

8

12

13

15

13

8

3

I

I

I

I

I

12

16

19

24

23

24

18

23

21

I

36

47

76

85

107

101

76

47

51

84

81

35

55

92

152

160

149

155

154

178

203

238

TOTAL HEALTH

783

947

I 283

2953

2543

2698

2901

3169

3650

2912

3379

(a) With the transfer of Department of Manufacturing Industry Rand D establishments to, and the reorganisation of, the Department of Defence, all readily identifiable expenditures on Defence Science and Technology activities have been grouped together for the period from 1974-75. Similarly, administrative expenditures under the Department of Industry and Commerce concerned with the operation of government factories have been grouped under the heading Defence Industrial Capacity, from 1975-76. Data are not available to adjust the figures for prior years to a comparable basis. See also Appendix regarding the allocation of certain defence expenditures to Defence Industrial Capacity in 1980-81, 1981-82 and 1982-83.
(b) Includes (from 197374) block grants to States for pre-schools; other outlays on pre-schools and child care under the children's services program are classified to the 'Social Security and Welfare' function. (c) The School to Work Transition Scheme commenced in 1979-80; earlier years' outlays under this heading are for analagous outlays on the Employment Program for Unemployed Youth. The EPUY program has
now been absorbed in the School to Work Transition Scheme. (d) Outlays under this heading from mid 1978-79 onwards relate only to the A.C.T.

~
0
0\
:;:e
tTl
:'";:te:I etTnl
tTl
Z
>-l
-;J>
>-l
<: etTnl ......
-..J
;J>
~ (JQ
~
'.."....
\0 00 tv
::gA
.g....
i.:..;. .
g"
;:,0
~
~

Table 4-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($m)-continued

4. SOCIAL SECURITY AND WELFAREAssistance to the Aged(a) Assistance to Veterans and their Dependants Assistance to the Handicapped Assistance to Widows and Single Parents Assistance to Families(b) Assistance to the Unemployed and Sick Other Outlays (net)

TOTAL SOCIAL SECURITY AND WELFARE

5. HOUSINGGrants and Net Advances to the States Home Deposit Assistance Housing Loans by Banks (net) . Defence Service Homes (net) Housing in the Territories (net)(d)
Housing for Migrants . . . . .
Accommodation for Aboriginals nec Other Outlays Less Other Recoveries and Repayments

TOTAL HOUSING

6. URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE ENVIRONMENTUrban and Regional Development Expenditure nec
Sewerage and Garbage Other Outlays (net)

NEC

TOTAL URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT NEC AND THE ENVIRONMENT

7. CULTURE AND RECREATIONBroadcasting and Television Services Other Outlays (net)

TOTAL CULTURE AND RECREATION

1972-73
922 301 197 150 263 181
85
2101
(c)7 21
13 24
I 4 10 3
77
30 8 II
49
91 26
116

1973-74
I 181 360 242 229 237 119 118
2487
223 25
38 32
I II 12 3
337
83 40 22
144
112 46
159

1974-75
1675 475 337 324 244 477 179
3712
391 13 120 105 35 I 26 16 3
702
206 139 33
378
152 85
237

1975-76
2236 565 469 462 294 776 228
5030
363 7
-23 71 112 I 30 4 3
562
218 146 43
408
169 84
253

1976-77
2562 659 581 542
1057 748 218
6367
369 8
-II 52 107 I 28 3 8
549
144 83 38
265
169 88
257

1977-78
3025 795 687 652
1075 951 238
7425
378 35
-II 42 39
25 3 6
505
118 19 35
173
171 90
261

1978-79
3311 855 793 752
1037 1076
271
8095
316 20 -II 39 -13
29 3 I
382
86 9
30
126
180 101
281

1979-80
3593 960 901 846
1054 1121
308
8783
258 72 -41 36 -21
33 5 I
343
82 6
28
116
201 120
321

1980-81
4023 I 187 1006 1069 1000 1256
376
9917
267 45 -14 34 -26
I 30
5 I
341
76 3
32
III
257 143
400

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

4610 1323 I 125 I 323 1099 1541
477
11498

5050 1576 1230 1479 1447 1948
541
13272

232

298

115

147

-5

-2

121

122

-19

-8

9

10

6

4

I

I

458

571

43

63

4

16

30

31

77

113

324

340

159

161

483

501

(a) See Notes on Tables regarding changed arrangements for Grants to the States for pensioner accommodation. (b) Excludes block grants paid to the States and the Northern Territory for pre-school education. Those amounts are recorded under the function 'Education'. (c) Excludes amounts totalling $166.9 million allocated by the States out of their Loan Council borrowing programs for housing projects similar in nature to those covered under the 1973 Housing Agreement. (d) Outlays under this heading from 1978-79 onward relate only to the A.C.T.

:~ g
..g...
.... is'
5:::°
-~
~
......
"-
--.J
>.,:
(JQ
-.'.,".:..
\0 00 tv :;Q
tTl
'":;Q
rtT.nl tTl
Z....,
->....,
<:
rtT.nl

~
0 -.J

Table 4-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($m)-continued

8. ECONOMIC SERVICES A. TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION Communications
Air TransportNet Advances and Contributions to the Airlines Aviation Services Other Expenditure Less Air Navigation Charges Less Other Recoveries
Total
Road Transport Road Grants Other Expenditure
Total

1972-73

197374

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

290

388

522

403

208

45

-22

-2

14

23

34

18

-10

34

25

-16

-23

-92

-96

-31

12

-II

128

146

170

179

177

188

197

226

290

363

470

I

I

2

2

2

2

4

~,

5

12

47

27

33

45

54

62

73

76

84

96

102

119

II

50

16

23

24

26

28

47

46

52

53

109

54

146

130

77

68

4

4

122

233

334

279

317

363

434

434

478

508

565

628

685

884

35

38

41

61

53

65

41

33

29

37

52

314

354

404

495

487

543

549

598

657

722

936

Rail Transport Australian National Railways Other Rail Projects (net)
Total
Sea Transport (net) Special Payment to the States for Transport Urban Public Transport Improvement Pipelines (net) Other Outlays Less Other Recoveries
TOTAL TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION
B. WATER SUPPLY, ELECTRICITY AND GASUrban Water Supply Snowy Mountains Scheme Gladstone Power Station Liquefied Petroleum Gas Subsidy Other Outlays Less Repayments
TOTAL WATER SUPPLY, ELECTRICITY AND GAS

II

9

24

94

75

93

109

96

76

77

78

-I

-3

12

I

-3

-4

-3

10

20

17

II

6

36

95

71

89

105

97

86

97

94

13

10

65

92

30

19

34

28

44

-4

35

65

45

34

58

51

42

42

44

2

9

54

63

65

37

15

12

12

10

7

4

13

16

26

31

37

47

48

49

57

48

47

9

15

17

15

19

22

23

27

29

30

35

749

868

1291

1329

988

854

723

807

989

1180

1475

5

4

10

20

36

28

15

6

4

6

14

13

2

-2

-5

-4

-5

-5

-7

-9

-8

14

27

32

39

26

-I

-2

-2

-3

20

31

34

7

9

12

17

18

25

30

43

46

74

4

8

3

3

3

4

4

5

5

2

36

45

56

71

72

45

6

25

54

67

97

.j:>.
0 00
:;>::I tTl ""Ci :;>::I tTl
\/l
tTl
Z
.....j
->
.....j
-<
tTl
\/l
--.l
>
t=
(JQ
-'.t.="...
\0 00 N
::g:t... ..g...
§...., C-
;::
~
-~
-~

Table 4-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982'-83 (estimated) ($ m)-continued

C. INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE AND DEVELOPMENTForestry and Fishing Industries (a)

1972-73 13

1973-74 10

1974-75 10

1975-76 II

1976-77 II

1977-78 4

1978-79 10

1979-80

1980-81

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

Agricultural and Pastoral IndustriesWool Industry Wheat Industry Sugar Industry Dairy Industry Fruit Industry Cattle, Sheep and Pig Meat Industry Rural Reconstruction Adjustment Assistance for Currency Variations Fertilizer Bounties Irrigation and Other Pastoral Water Projects (net) Other Outlays (net)
Total

15

18

305

-14

-119

-79

18

-23

3

-38

I

-17

9

7

-2

-2

-2

-2

-2

-3

-3

33

20

19

20

5

4

II

7

8

6

7

6

I

I

18

14

II

24

37

122

79

51

36

29

30

30

43

47

8

31

30

29

13

19

38

61

25

-27

39

13

2

-I

-I

2

-2

7

9

21

27

41

49

16

17

16

18

70

81

43

33

54

55

57

59

51

49

53

23

20

29

29

26

18

II

18

20

21

45

12

34

46

37

27

26

24

19

23

12

7

203

232

447

164

46

196

251

193

162

215

310

Mining, Manufacturing and Other IndustriesPetroleum Search Subsidy Other Mining Assistance (b) Shipbuilding Assistance Industrial Research and Development Scheme Export Incentives and Development Other Outlays (net)
Total
Tourist Industry

8

10

6

14

13

65

-18

24

-46

-3

-19

81

62

43

31

21

31

43

29

15

12

14

19

27

34

14

15

18

19

15

14

24

34

51

24

49

58

68

93

80

25

31

58

215

260

281

255

6

10

24

26

24

28

41

65

67

91

(c)134

131

137

238

151

117

42

I31

310

477

485

515

4

4

4

9

10

II

Other Assistance to IndustryPetroleum Products Subsidy Energy Research Australian Industry Development Corporation Export and Trade Promotion Other Outlays Less Recoveries

26

22

2

48

71

120

148

126

6

II

I3

16

17

13

56

13

-30

-39

15

15

15

15

16

17

21

23

26

28

30

4

2

4

I

I

2

4

II

14

(c)47

/

/

/

'/

/

2

3

3

2

4

Total

56

36

75

18

29

17

76

76

168

203

177

TOTAL INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE AND

DEVELOPMENT

407

419

777

351

207

263

473

593

821

917

1016

(a) Outlays prior to 1974-75 include expenditure on the Forestry and Timber Bureau, since transferred to CSIRO (,General Science nee'). (b) Includes repayments from the former Petroleum and Minerals Authority and divestment of petroleum and minerals investments. Also includes amounts relating to return of uranium concentrate to the Com~
monwealth stockpile. (c) See Notes on Tables regarding changes in administrative arrangements made on 7 May 1982.

::g.:.t,:.. .g.., igs.'
;:
~......
~
......
'-
--.I
;l> .,: (J.C,:l :!!.
\0 00 IV ~
tTl '"t:I
~
tTl
Vl
tTl
Z >-i
;l>
<>-i
tTl
Vl
.j::o.
0 \0

..j..:.o...
0

Table 4-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($m) -continued

m~

D. LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENTConciliation and Arbitration Payment to Stevedoring Industry Employment Training Schemes nee Assisted Migration (net) Other Outlays (net) (a)

'"I:i

1972-73

1973-74 1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

~ emmn

3 18 6 24 43

3 20 14 21 54

4 22 49 21 70

5 37 78 14 83

6 52 76 12 96

6 34 118 13 113

6 20 155 15 136

7 20 99 18 157

8 19 147 27 185

10 17 187 33 213

11 21 225 28 225

.Z...,
-.>...,
e-m<n

TOTAL LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT

93

112

167

218

242

284

332

302

387

460

510 ......

E. OTHER ECONOMIC SERVICESEconomic and Trade Regulation (net) Specialised ActivitiesMeteorological Services National Mapping Less Recoveries

-..J

13

16

17

16

15

15

16

17

> 17

~

(JQ

23

27

33

36

39

40

41

43

48

56

63

~

5

6

7

7

7

8

7

8

10

11

12 '.."....

8

9

II

13

I3

14

15

II

14

16

19 ......

Other Outlays (net)

14

15

20

36

33

42

47

58

62

66

(b) 50

\0

00

N

TOTAL OTHER ECONOMIC SERVICES

39

46

62

82

83

92

96

112

123

134

123

TOTAL ECONOMIC SERVICES

1324

1491

2353

2051

1592

1 538

1630

1839

2374

2757

3221

9. GENERAL PUBLIC SERVICESA. LEGISLATIVE SERVICESParliamentary Expenditure Australian Electoral Office Other Outlays
TOTAL LEGISLATIVE SERVICES

17

25

32

36

42

51

53

59

78

107

134

6

13

9

15

19

22

15

17

31

21

23

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

3

4

4

4

24

39

42

53

63

75

70

79

112

132

161

B. LAW, ORDER AND PUBLIC SAFETYCourts and Legal Services Police, Security and Criminology Other Outlays (net)
TOTAL LAW, ORDER AND PUBLIC SAFETY

9 22
9
40

13 28 13
54

20 43 21
84

37 50 22
108

48 55 23
126

58 57 21
135

70 77 26
173

80 89 32
200

75 114 33
221

87 136 35
258

98 150 45
293

:.:..ggl..:.:...

~.

(a) From 1973-74 onwards, expenditure on certain activities of the former Department of Immigration (e.g. passports, migrant welfare and education) has been included in the function relevant to the administering

C-

department.

::::

(b) See Notes on Tables regarding changes in administrative arrangements made on 7 May 1982.

~

~

::.gA.,.

Table 4-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($m)-continued

..g.,

1:;'

C. FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND OVERSEAS AIDAid Payments Papua New Guinea Bilateral Aid

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

6';:,:

-~

133 61

203 68

171 116

214 95

228 97

222 120

235 154

238 182

245 213

254 257

265 283

~

Multilateral Aid Other Outlays (net) (a)

14

16

43

41

56

77

67

79

95

130

165 ..:::

68

75

105

120

136

145

151

165

195

220

234

TOTAL FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND OVERSEAS AID

277

362

435

469

516

564

608

664

748

860

947

D. GENERAL AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH NEC-

Australian Atomic Energy Commission

14

16

18

20

21

23

24

26

29

38

36

Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research

Organization

63

81

(b)105

124

133

147

169

195

228

293

313

Antarctic Division

3

4

5

6

7

9

12

21

23

22

34

Research Grants

6

7

8

7

12

II

13

14

18

20

22

Other Research and Science nee

4

4

6

11

12

9

11

15

15

20

21

TOTAL GENERAL AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH NEC

91

111

143

167

185

198

229

271

314

394

426

--.J

E. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES-

Financial Affairs and Fiscal Administration

Statistical Services .

. ..

General Administration of the Territories (nee)

Other Administrative Services nee

133

169

209

227

263

302

313

332

371

467

502

:s>::

26 26 15

31 34 25

41 45 36

47 58 41

58 56 51

58 65 56

57 28 64

64 31 74

88

115

37

48

86

98

94 53 99

Ost:l:
.'."...

Common ServicesConstruction Services (net) Commonwealth Government Offices

54

66

90

96

97

104

93

100

119

145

152

'-0 00

29

28

45

36

33

28

24

27

33

29

36

IV

Property Management and Services

21

25

39

45

40

44

46

51

56

67

76

Rent

20

29

37

44

48

51

55

62

69

78

96

:;tI

Other

15

19

32

30

30

28

38

44

51

43

54

tTl

Net Superannuation Payments nee

27

33

42

59

91

128

162

197

237

218

273

'"ti

Less Recoveries

22

25

32

36

41

51

48

56

58

67

71

:;tI

TOTAL ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

343

434

584

648

725

813

832

927

1089

1243

1363

etTnl
tTl

Z

TOTAL GENERAL PUBLIC SERVICES

775

1000

1288

1445

1 «t16

1786

1912

2140

2484

2887

3189

>-l

:>

(a) Prior to the establishment of the Overseas Property Bureau in 1973-74, outlays on overseas properties were included in the general administrative expenses of the respective Departments and were not necessarily classified to this function.
(b) From 1974-75, CSIRO outlays include expenditure on the Forestry and Timber Bureau. Similarly, expenditure on the Kimberly Research Station is included from 1975-76.

><-:l
etTnl

.j:o.

+>-
N

Table 4-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($ m)-continued

10. NOT ALLOCATED TO FUNCTlONA. PAYMENTS TO OR FOR THE STATES, THE NORTHERN TERRITORY, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES NEC States Tax Sharing Grants(a) Grants to States in Lieu of Health Payments(a) Other General Revenue Assistance (net) State Government Loan Council Programs (net) Assistance Related to State Debts Local Government Tax Sharing Entitlements etc. Total Payments to or for the States and Local Government Authorities nee Payments to the Northern Territory Natural Disaster Relief (net)
TOTAL PAYMENTS TO OR FOR THE STATES, THE NORTHERN TERRITORY, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES NEC

B. PUBLIC DEBT INTEREST-

Gross Interest Paid

.

. ..

Less Interest on Government Securities and cash balances

held by the Commonwealth Government on its own

behalf

TOTAL PUBLIC DEBT INTEREST

C. ALLOWANCE FOR WAGE AND SALARY INCREASES (NON-DEFENCE)

TOTAL NOT ALLOCATED TO FUNCTION

TOTAL 'OUTLAYS

(a) See relevant text in Statement 3. (b) See Notes on Tables.

1972-73
1647 54
(b)850 78
2628 -5
2623 760 86 674
3297 10190

1973-74
1860 64 726 91
2740 23
2763 811 /()() 712
3475 12229

1974-75
2374 1I5 938 104 57
3587 1I3
3700
998 llO 888
4587 17838

1975-76
3073 39
I 139 47 80
4378 58
4436
1095 /28 968
5404 21861

1976--77
3696 17
1197 47 140
5096 27
5123
1525 114
1412
6535 24124

1977-78
4317 15
1263 49 165
5808 53 53
5915
1754
105 1649
7564 26737

1978-79
4779 12
1249 51 179
6269 280 24
6573
2079
108 1971
8544 29014

1979-80
5416 10
1050 53
222 6751
339 10
7100
2359
/36 2223
9323 31660

1980-81
6011 7
1104 55 301
7478 423 70
7971
2722
/6/ 2561
10 532 36291

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

6690 1137
59 1094
57 351
9387 500 21

7773 987 -20
1149 59 424
10 373 586 -6

9908

10953

3014
/33 2881

3353
llO 3243

12789 41339

210 14406 47067

:::0
tTl '"tI
:::0
tTl
C/1
tTl
Z
>>-l
><-:l
tTl
C/1
--.l
>
~ OQ ~
~ \D 00 N
:.:g..g:..t:.....
i:;'
:5: '
~
-~
-~

Table 5-Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) in National Accounts I'orm ($m)

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1981-82

1982-83 (estimate)

Net Expenditure on Goods and Services Current Expenditure Defence All Other
Capital Expenditure(a)

I 178 I 168

I 223 1491 2345 - -
223

1445 2029 2713 - 266

1680 2377 3474 - -
404

1999 2628 4057 - 564

2184 2941 4627 - 520

2401 3145 5125 - 388

2787 3341 5546 - 298

3304 3949 6128 - 290

3832 4677 7253 - 442

4257 5267 8509 - 421

9524 568

Total

2567

2978

3878

4621

5148

5512

5844

6417

7696

8930

10092

Transfer Payments Personal Benefit Payments Unfunded Employee Retirement Benefits
Grants to or for the States and Local Government Authorities For Current Purposes For Capital Purposes
Grants to the Northern Territory(b) Interest Paid Transfers Overseas Subsidies Grants for Private Capital Purposes Purchases of Existing Assets

2531
2092 692
674 252 310
59 17

3076
65 2532 - -
2532 903
2784 - -
712 289 277
70 30 1312--

4320
88 3141
3775 1404 3435 - -
888 349 228 121 121 1378 - -

6090

7390

106

121

4408-- 6196--

5521

6112

I 570

1549

5178 - - 7091 - -

968 370 254 173 26 1706 - -

1412 388 227 101 16
1791--

8280

9108

9910

II 232

13089

15149

139

162

181

207

252

298

7511-- 8419 - - 9270 - - 10090 - - 11439 - - 13342 - - 15447

7222 I 516 7661 - -
53 1649
417 372 124
15 2144 - -

7858 1492 8738 - -
290 1971
477
445 116 22 2630--

8800

9919

10 953

12283

I 502

I 595

1688

2121

9349 - - 10302 - - 11514 - - 12642 - - 14404

361

469

539

648

2223

2561

2881

3243

520

576

667

728

589

746

859

961

165

137

204

267

20

16

25

J6

3322 - - 3877 - - 4505 - - 5176 - - 5884

Total
Net Advances To States Works Purposes Housing Other
To Northern Territory To Commonwealth Government
Authorities Postal Commission Telecommunications Commission SMHEA Airlines Pipeline Authority Defence Service Homes(c) Other
To Other Sectors

6628

7954

II 293

15078

17316

19788

21940

24269

27457

31 159

35735

591

448 201

592 366

709 343

745 350

785 362

771 285

635 126

668 131

658 101

691 99

77

99

267

32.1

183

114

73

56

54

23

74

6 6 8 - - 749-- 1225 - - 1372-- 1278 - - I 261

1129-- 8 1 7 - - 8 5 3 - - 782-- 864

-2

79

83

80

83

288

385

518

3 392

-3

-28

-23

215

6:1'

10

9

2

-2

-5

-4

-5

18

-II

34

25

-16

-23

-92

10

56

65

67

39

17

14

13

37

78

48

45

30

26

7

15

468

176

28

45

147

346-- 491

1165-- 709-- 303-- 101

-18

59

278

81

79

76

-14

-5

-7

-9

-8

-96

-31

12

-II

14

10

7

4

23

18

104

105

187

189

230

196

6 6 - - 1 1 0 - - 179-- 344-- 285

37

-32

22

43

9

Total

996

1298

2669

2162

1660

1438

1230

974

I 138

I 250

1241

Total Outlays

10190

12229

17838

21861

24124

26737

29014

31660

36291

41339

47067

(a) Consists of fix.ed capital ex.penditure on new assets plus increase in stocks less sales of previously rented houses. (b) For details of the changed arrangements for the Northern Territory refer to Chapter V of Budget Paper No.7 Payments to or for the States. the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities 1982-83. (e) Prior to 1975 76 advances were made by Defence Service Homes direct to the pUblic. Since then advances have been made through an authority classified outside the Budget sector.

:g::to..
..g...
....
§"
c-
:::I
:b::::I:
~
---'"-
--.I
)C
(JQ
-.'C."..
\0 00
tv :;0
tTl '"Ci :;0 tTl
rJl
tTl
.Z..., .)..-.,
:;::
tTl
rJl .;,. w

Table 6-Domestic and Overseas Outlays of the Commonwealth Government Budget-1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($m)

1972-73

1973 74

Net Expenditure on Good and Services Defence Other Current Expenditure Capital Expenditure
Total
Transfer Payments and Net AdvancesTo or for the States. Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities Personal Benefit Payments (0) Interest Paid Transfers Overseas Net Advances (Other than to States) Other(b)
Total
TOTAL DOMESTIC OUTLAYS

1033 1083
210
2325

I 119 1398
257
2773

3452 2529
598 97 281 386
7343
9667

4184 3135
644 101 494 377
8934
11706

Net Expenditure on Goods and Services
Defence Other Current Expenditur~ Capital Expenditure

145

104

84

92

13

9

Total

242

205

Transfer Payments and Net Advances Personal Benefit Payments (a) Interest Paid Transfers Overseas Net Advances (Other than to States)

3

6

76

68

155

188

47

56

Total

281

318

TOTAL OVERSEAS OUTLAYS

523

523

(a) Indude~ unfunded employee retirement benefits. (b) Consists of subsidies, grants for private capital purposes and purchases of existing assets.

1974--75
I 338 1923
383 3644
6403 4397
822 158 I 314 470 13 565 17208
107 106 21 234
II 66 191 129 397 631

1975-76
I 506 2269
540 4314
8463 6178
885 190 670 453 16839 21 153
174 108 24 307
18 83 180 120 400 707

1976-77

1977-78

197879

Domestic Outlays

1688 2510
492
4690

I 856 2789
353
4997

I 984 3002
272
5258

8939 7486 I 302
145 318 344

10 053 8385 1500
156 130 511

10766 9229 1674
166 83 583

18534

20735

22502

23224

25731

27760

Overseas Outlays

311

328

417

118

152

143

28

35

26

457

515

586

25

34

41

110

149

297

243

261

311

64

47

19

442

491

668

900

1006

I 253

197980
2269 3170
274 5712
11558 10045 1849
206 44 773 24475 30187
517 171
16 705
45 374 314
34 768 1473

1980-81
2733 3747
430 6910
12919 II 387 2200
248 157 899 27809 34719
571 202
12 786
52 361 328 44 786 I 572

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

3399 4443
410
8252

3558 5024
549
9131

14043 13278 2539
282 328 1088
31 559
39811

15999 15388 2843
304 217 I 265
36015
45145

433 233
12
678
64 342 385
59
849
I 528

699 243
19
961
59 400 424
77
960
1922

-l'>-l'>-
:;Q tTl ""0 :;Q tTl Vl tTl
Z....,
-;..I.>.,
<:
tTl
Vl
......
-.J
;I>
s::
...(JsQ:: til ...... \D
00 N
::gA.
.... .§ ....
i:;"
5::.' ~
~

Table 7-Commonwealth Government Budget Receipts 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($m)

General Taxation RevenueCustoms DutyImports Coal Exports Excise DutyOil and LPG Other Sales Tax
Income TaxIndividualsPAVE Less Refunds
NetPAYE Other
Total Income Tax-Individuals Companies Withholding Taxes Special Tax to Recover Evaded Company and Division 7 Taxes Tax on Certain Bank Transactions Payroll Tax Departure Tax Estate Duty Gift Duty Stamp Duty Other Taxes, Fees and FinesUnfunded Retirement Benefit Contributions Stevedoring Industry Collections Broadcasting and Television Licences etc. Other
Total Other Taxes, Fees and Fines Less Remissions
Total Taxation Revenue

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

513
1268 765

604
I 555 969

841
1729 I 154

932 112
264 2068 1408

I 152 121
344 2141 1650

I 132 100
476 2258 1758

1363 94
1227 2618 1770

I 538 91
2270 2695 1865

3777 616
3161 929
4089 1561
73
6
66 7 4
I 18 71 15
105 6
8453

5010 772
4238 1252
5490 1954
79
8
66 10 4
27 20 73 19
140 6
10873

6919 848
6071 1643
7714 2359
88
16
64 16 4
35 22 25 26
107 7
14085

8362 1343
7020 2200
9219 2523
95
20
76 10 4
40 40
7 32
119 8
16843

9811 1282
8529 2525
11054 2824
96
21
76 II 5
52 52 II 38
152 8
19642

10 579 940
9639 2490
12129 3095
118
22
96 7 5
61 32 21 44
158 8
21346

11438 1040
10 398 2406
12804 3037
114
16 12 82
I 6
63 19 23 48
153 8
23288

13287 I 127
12160 2880
15040 3406 141
16 18 48
I 7
67 20 31 53
170 I
27305

1980-81
1800 85
3108 2725 2102
15291 1170
14121 3423
17543 4695
161
I7 19 17
73 19 33 63
188 I
32467

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

2060 97
3 163 2830 2854

2167 77
3287 3434 3629

18836 1418
17417 3807
21224 5053 205
19 36 4
13
86 18 47 76
227 2
37784

21073 2100
18973 4373
23346 5000 231 255 80 17 40 I
14
97 21 54 85
256 I
41834

:g::t:...
..., ~...,
i:;' ~.
;:: ~
~
~
~
-"---
--.J
;I>
I:::
(Jq
eI.:.n:.:..
1.0 00 IV
::0 tTl
""C
::0 etTnl tTl
.Z...,
-.;.I.>.,
<: etTnl

oj:. V>

~ 0\

Table 7-Commonwealth Government Budget Receipts 1972-73 to 1981-82 and 1982-83 (estimated) ($m)-continued

Interest, Rent and DividendsInterest ReceivedFrom the StatesStates Works and Housing Other Other Interest ReceiptsDefence Service Homes Snowy Mountains Australian Coastal Shipping Commission Postal Commission Telecommunications Commission Qantas Airways Limited Australian National Airlines Commission Wool Corporation Pipeline Authority Other
Total
Rent, Dividends, elc.Qantas Airways Ltd Australian National Airlines Commission Overseas Telecommunications Commission Offshore Petroleum Royalties Royal Australian Mint Other
Total
Total Interest, Rent and Dividends
Net Receipts of Government EnterprisesReserve Bank Commonwealth Bank Other
Total Net Receipts of Government Enterprises
Sale of Existing Assets
TOTAL RECEIPTS

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

567

604

663

695

832

948

1018

1089

1258

1421

1619

94

101

121

160

200

227

248

274

287

285

299

36

36

38

66

68

69

74

77

83

93

111

39

41

45

48

47

47

47

47

49

55

58

2

3

3

14

18

20

19

18

16

17

17

158

179

210

7 268

7 290

6 321

4 323

3 325

2 328

3 394

4 480

7

11

14

14

15

8

5

3

3

3

4

5

5

6

5

1

1

1

8

34

24

9

1

3

8

15

21

24

25

27

29

31

33

30

37

41

58

66

74

87

85

91

136

158

936

1013

1149

1 378

1590

1764

1868

1958

2150

2440

2782

2 3 8 13 2
27
964
20 6 5
31
47
9494

2 3 11 14 3
32
1045
7 2
9
22
11950

6 5 12 20 3 46 1 195
5 -10
-5
18 15293

3 1 5 13 19 5
47
1425
5 -8
-3
30
18295

3 13 14 21 7
57
1648
80 12 -7
85
30
21405

2 13 23 22 11
71
1 834
216 15 -7
225
22
23427

6 2 13 28 24 5
78
1946
263 28 9
300
24
25558

6 20 43
6
75
2033
226 36 3
265
24
29627

2 25 55 35 14
130
2280
198 42
240
195
35181

2 20 52 53 17
145
2585

2 24 56 55 20
157
2939

345 39 1
385
36
40790

438 34 4
475
146
45393

:::0 tTl
'"0
:::0 tTl
Vl
tTl
Z
>-l
-)-
>-l
<:
tTl
Vl
......
-.I
)-
s::
(J's.Q".:.:.
'Cl 00 N
:.:g..g:..t..-
§"
;c::"
~
-j
~

Table 8-Summary of Commonwealth Government Budget Financing Transactions 1972-73 to 1981-82 ($m)

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1981-82

Overseas

Credit Arrangements for Defence Purchases in the

USA.

51

Less-Repayments

59

54

45

35

28

24

15

9

Net Drawings

-8

-54

-45

-35

-28

-24

-15

-9

Aircraft Loans for Qantas and Australian National Air-

lines Commission

31

16

59

58

2

Less-Repayments

38

26

25

25

26

23

92

96

31

13

Net Drawings Other Overseas Loan Proceeds(o)
LessRedemptions, etc. (0)

-7 28 78

-10

213

66

201

34 221 93

33

-24

-23

-92

-96

-31

-13

457

1760

I 557

471

173

919

47

100

101

180

240

538

Net Proceeds

-50

-66

12

128

410

1660

1456

291

-67

381

Total Net Loan Proceeds Overseas

-66

-130

126

357

1612

1349

187

-98

368

Domestic Borrowings Proceeds of Loans Raised in Australia(b) Less-Redemptions, etc.

971

1651

232

837

930

3068

640

434

2349 489

1454 402

1376 387

1790 1693

4899 4767

4342 4279

Net Proceeds of Loans Raised in Australia(b) Net Change in Treasury Notes On Issue

739

814

289

2633

1860

1052

989

97

132

63

165

-38

1689

-1620

-87

-7

1047

205

1912

153

Residual Financing Net Increase in Treasury Bills On Issue Net Issue of Other Securities to the Reserve Bank Use of Cash Balances

904

776

1978

1014

1773

1045

2036

302

2044

216

850

450

200

500

500

-600

-500

500

159

-175

-480

660

296

27

103

-454

635

-242

151

Total Residual Financing
Total Domestic Borrowings Other Financing Transactions(c)

-175
729 33

-480
295 113

660
2638 -94

1646
2659 780

477
2250 III

462
1507 192

46
2082 24

I 135
1437 408

-842
1202 5

-349
-133 315

Total Financing Transactions

696

279

2546

3566

2719

3310

3455

2033

I 110

549

(0) Overseas 'refinancing' transactions are treated in the table as adding to both loan proceeds and redemptions where they involve receipts to and outlays from the Loan Fund. (b) Includes State domestic raisings. (c) Includes amounts borrowed by Australian Government trust accounts, net amounts available from Australian Government trust account transactions in Government securities, amounts available from moneys
held in trust, etc.

::t:..
~.... ~....
~.
C-
;::
~
~
......
'-
--...]
s>::-
(JsQ::
'.."...
\0 00 N :;tl
tTl "1:1 :;tl tTl
(/)
tTl
Z
....oj
>-
....oj
<
tTl
(/)

.j::o -...]

.j:>00

Table 9-Receipts and Outlays of Commonwealth Government Authorities Outside the Budget 1972-73 to 1981-82 ($m) (a)

::0 tTl

""0

::0

1972 73

1973-74

1974-75

1975 76

1976 77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980 81

1981 82

tTl

(p)

(/J

tTl

Outlays

Z

Net Expenditure on Goods and

Services

Current Expenditure

Capital Expenditure (b)

543

-19

-15

778

I 263

-7

-15

-29

945

1099

I 244

-21

-7

-10

30

919

1221

1440

I 732

~
;.-
~
=2

547

759

I 248

938

1084

I 215

898

I 214

1430

I 762

tTl

Transfer Payments

(/J

Per~onal Benefit Payments

I

3

2

I

-2

2

3

Inlerest and Dividends, etc., Paid Subsidies Grants for Private Capital Purposes Income Tax Paid
Net Advances

229

255

330

463

570

647

692

683

775

939

-.J

4 I

-5

-6

-3

-5

6

6

5

I

-I 30

;.-

13

12

15

16

10

14

18

16

26

26

~ (JQ

244

269

353

493

586

665

713

698

804

997

~

~

By Defence Service Homes(c)

8

12

16

-4

-14

-4

72

Other TOTAL OUTLAYS

27

-19

42

18

-50

-3

52

60

-55

\0

00

IV

792

1056

I 582

1481

I 699

I 846

1604

1951

2289

2776

Receipts Indirect Taxes Interest. Rent and Dividends, etc Gross Income of Public Enterprises Net Sales of Existing Assets

-2

-3

-3

-5

-4

-4

-9

-I

2

3

81

104

106

125

162

178

518

540

547

864

1026

1099

I 267

1302

1462

1698

-II

-10

-22

-12

-18

7

5

-6

83

56

TOTAL RECEIPTS

508

531

526

857

1086

I 205

I 374

1417

1698

1931

DefIcit Financed Sy-

Net Advances from Budget Domestic Borrowings Overseas Borrowings Decrease in Cash Balances Decrease in Security Holdings Other Funds Available

333

454

1087

661

303

101

66

110

179

344

}27
-89 10 2

} 26
9 5 29

} 22
-72 -3 23

}19
-4 -5 -45

344 100 -200 -II
79

106 224 174 -7

222 -27 -125 -22

359 83 -288 -20

}'"

}~,

57

115

289

:.~ .g.g....

DEFICIT

283

526

1056

625

613

641

230

534

590

845

5'

(a) Derived from information published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in Budget Paper No. 10, adjusted for some conceptual differences.

g"
;::

(b) Consists of fixed capital expenditure on new assets plus increase in stocks less sales of previously rented houses. (e) See Footnote (e) to Table 5. (p) Preliminary.

~

~

Table 100Receipts and Outlays of Commonwealth Government Sector as a Whole 1972-73 to 1981-82 ($m) (a)

1972-73

1973-74

1974 75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1981-82 (P)

Outlays Net Expenditure on Goods and Services Current Expenditure Capital ExpenditureFixed Capital Expenditure (b) Change in Stocks

2349
808 -42

2694
1002 42

3459
I 353 314

4050
I 579 -71

4612
1666 -47

5096
I 754 -122

5525
1426 -209

6121
I 577 -66

7243
I 807 75

8539
1970 183

Total

3115

3738

5126

5558

6231

6728

6742

7632

9125

10 692

Transfer Payments Personal Benefit Payments Unfunded Employee Retirement Benefits Grants to or for the States and Local Government Authorities Grants to the Northern Territory Interest Paid Transfers Overseas Sub!;idies Grants for Private Capital Purposes

2533 I
2784
676 252 310
59

3077 65
3435
717 289 278
70

4323 88
5178
898 349 232 122

6093 106
7091
977 370 259 179

7392 121
7661
1446 388 222 110

8284 139
8738 53
I 738 417 366 130

9108 162
9349 290
2074 477 442 121

9908 181
10 302 361
2363 520 584 171

II 234 207
11514 469
2753 576 746 138

13 093 252
12642 539
3139 667 858 235

Total

6615

7931

11190

15075

17340

19865

22 023

24390

27 637

31 425

Net Advances To States To Northern Territory By Defence Service Homes (c) Other

668

749

I 225

I 372

I 278

I 261

I 129

817

853

782

-2

79

83

80

13

37

78

56

12

16

-4

-14

-4

72

-18

86

259

123

97

26

34

20

82

-12

TOTAL OUTLAYS

10393

12540

17878

22184

24958

27896

29923

32923

37776

43039

Receipts Taxation Indirect Taxes Direct Taxes

2594 5846

3183 7676

3789 10 279

4872 II 952

5518 14111

5828 15499

7174 16094

8578 18707

9948 22484

II 187 26569

Total Taxation

8440

10 859

14068

16824

19629

21 327

23268

27 285

32432

37756

Other Receipts Interest. Rent and Dividends, etc. (d) Gross Income of Public Enterprises Net Sales of Existing Assets (e)

738

797

877

549

549

542

19

-18

-125

979

I 194

I 381

1463

1615

I 859

2082

861

1111

I 324

I 567

I 567

1702

2083

-8

-4

14

7

-2

262

68

TOTAL RECEIPTS

9746

12188

15362

18656

21930

24046

26304

30465

36255

41989

DEFICIT

646

352

2516

3528

3028

3850

3619

2458

I 520

1050

(a) Derived from information published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in Budget Paper No. 10, adjusted for some conceptual differences. (b) Consists of fixed capital expenditure on new assets less sales of previously rented houses. (c) See Footnote (c) toTable 5. (d) From I January 1982 the Commonwealth will collect petroleum royalties from offshore oil-fields and pay the States amounts corresponding to those they earlier collected and retained. Figures are net of such payments, and so
comparable throughout. (e) Excludes sales of previously rented houses. See footnote (b). (,,) Preliminary.

:~ g
.g....
....
igs.-
;:,:
~
~
-:::
--.)
>s:: (J.'sQ.":.:.
\0 00 tv
:;tl tTl '"'C:I :;tl tTl
\FJ
tTl
Z
>>-l
<>-l
tTl
\FJ ~ \0

Table 100Receipts and Outlays of Commonwealth Government Sector as a Whole 1972-73 to 1981-82 ($m) (a)

1972-73

1973-74

1974 75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1981-82 (P)

Outlays Net Expenditure on Goods and Services Current Expenditure Capital ExpenditureFixed Capital Expenditure (b) Change in Stocks

2349
808 -42

2694
1002 42

3459
I 353 314

4050
I 579 -71

4612
1666 -47

5096
I 754 -122

5525
1426 -209

6121
I 577 -66

7243
I 807 75

8539
1970 183

Total

3115

3738

5126

5558

6231

6728

6742

7632

9125

10 692

Transfer Payments Personal Benefit Payments Unfunded Employee Retirement Benefits Grants to or for the States and Local Government Authorities Grants to the Northern Territory Interest Paid Transfers Overseas Sub!;idies Grants for Private Capital Purposes

2533 I
2784
676 252 310
59

3077 65
3435
717 289 278
70

4323 88
5178
898 349 232 122

6093 106
7091
977 370 259 179

7392 121
7661
1446 388 222 110

8284 139
8738 53
I 738 417 366 130

9108 162
9349 290
2074 477 442 121

9908 181
10 302 361
2363 520 584 171

II 234 207
11514 469
2753 576 746 138

13 093 252
12642 539
3139 667 858 235

Total

6615

7931

11190

15075

17340

19865

22 023

24390

27 637

31 425

Net Advances To States To Northern Territory By Defence Service Homes (c) Other

668

749

I 225

I 372

I 278

I 261

I 129

817

853

782

-2

79

83

80

13

37

78

56

12

16

-4

-14

-4

72

-18

86

259

123

97

26

34

20

82

-12

TOTAL OUTLAYS

10393

12540

17878

22184

24958

27896

29923

32923

37776

43039

Receipts Taxation Indirect Taxes Direct Taxes

2594 5846

3183 7676

3789 10 279

4872 II 952

5518 14111

5828 15499

7174 16094

8578 18707

9948 22484

II 187 26569

Total Taxation

8440

10 859

14068

16824

19629

21 327

23268

27 285

32432

37756

Other Receipts Interest. Rent and Dividends, etc. (d) Gross Income of Public Enterprises Net Sales of Existing Assets (e)

738

797

877

549

549

542

19

-18

-125

979

I 194

I 381

1463

1615

I 859

2082

861

1111

I 324

I 567

I 567

1702

2083

-8

-4

14

7

-2

262

68

TOTAL RECEIPTS

9746

12188

15362

18656

21930

24046

26304

30465

36255

41989

DEFICIT

646

352

2516

3528

3028

3850

3619

2458

I 520

1050

(a) Derived from information published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in Budget Paper No. 10, adjusted for some conceptual differences. (b) Consists of fixed capital expenditure on new assets less sales of previously rented houses. (c) See Footnote (c) toTable 5. (d) From I January 1982 the Commonwealth will collect petroleum royalties from offshore oil-fields and pay the States amounts corresponding to those they earlier collected and retained. Figures are net of such payments, and so
comparable throughout. (e) Excludes sales of previously rented houses. See footnote (b). (,,) Preliminary.

:~ g
.g....
....
igs.-
;:,:
~
~
-:::
--.)
>s:: (J.'sQ.":.:.
\0 00 tv
:;tl tTl '"'C:I :;tl tTl
\FJ
tTl
Z
>>-l
<>-l
tTl
\FJ ~ \0

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 421

APPENDIX: COVERAGE AND CLASSIFICATION OF INFORMATION IN THE BUDGET STATEMENTS
Budget information in the Statements accompanying the Budget Speech is classified in two ways:
- an economic type classification corresponding to that used in the National Accounts; and
- a functional classification.
This Appendix briefly describes the coverage of information and the basic principles and uses of the classifications.
COVERAGE
Most of the information in the Budget Statements relates to the Commonwealth Budget sector.
The Commonwealth Budget sector comprehends those transactions which are recorded in the Minister for Finance's statements prepared pursuant to section 50 of the Audit Act 1901. It includes all transactions passing through the Commonwealth Public Account, whether recordd1:in the Consolidated Revenue Fund, Trust Fund or Loan Fund. All transactions of the National Capital Development Commission are also analysed within the Budget sector.
Other transactions of Commonwealth authorities (i.e. largely those transactions which are not directly recorded in the Public Account), with the exception of transactions of Commonwealth-owned financial enterprises, constitute the Commonwealth Non-Budget sector.(a) In addition, transactions of the Defence Service Homes Corporation and of the Royal Australian Mint, which pass through Trust Accounts within the Public Account, are analysed in the Non-Budget sector. In the first case this treatment was adopted to allow consistency in the analysis of transactions over the period covered; from June 1975 to December 1976 the Australian Housing Corporation, which operated outside the Public Account, administered the Defence Service Homes Scheme.
In the case of the Mint, the treatment has been adopted because of the increasing importance of business-type revenues from the Mint's activities and because of limitations on the availability of detailed monthly costings of the different types of Mint activities-see also the section 'Changes in the Functional Classification' below.
All the transactions of departments are recorded in the Public Account and are accordingly part of the Budget sector. Furthermore, many Commonwealth authorities, such as the Australian Broadcasting Commission, the CSIRO and the Industries Assistance Commission operate largely or wholly through the Public Account; to the extent that they do, their transactions form part of the Budget sector. Those of their transactions which do not pass through the Public Account (e.g. independent income and expenditure financed from that income) are recorded in the Non-Budget sector.

(a) Transactions of Commonwealth financial enterprises, which include the Reserve Bank, the Commonwealth Banking Corporation, the Australian Industry Development Corporation and the Export Finance Insurance Corporation, are analysed in the National Accounts as part of the Financial Enterprises Sector.

422 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

By far the larger part of the Non-Budget sector, however, consists of the transactions of authorities which operate wholly or largely outside the Public Account; these are mainly business enterprises such as the Australian Postal Commission, the Australian Telecommunications Commission, Qantas Airways Ltd and the Australian National Airlines Commission (TAA). Most of the transactions of such authorities are not reflected in the Budget Statements. There are, however, some transactions between the Budget sector and the Non-Budget sector (e.g. advances from the Budget to an authority, repayments of advances and payments of interest, dividends and, in some cases, company tax by the authority to the Budget sector). These transactions by authorities with the Public Account are reflected in the Budget Statements.
Information on the transactions recorded in the Commonwealth Non-Budget sector is presented separately and also consolidated with transactions of the Commonwealth Budget sector in Budget Statement No.6.

NATIONAL ACCOUNTING CONVENTIONS
Underlying the classifications of information in the Budget Statements are national accounting conventions used by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in producing data for the Commonwealth sector and for the economy as a whole. While there are some differences between the treatment of data in the Budget Statements and the treatment in Australian Bureau of Statistics publications (see below), the basic principles are generally the same and are those set out in the 1968 United Nations publication A System of National Accounts, which provides a widely accepted international standard. The use of national accounting conventions allows a consistent treatment of Budget transactions, other public sector transactions, and the transactions of the private sector. Their use thus facilitates an assessment of the interrelationship between the Budget and rest of the economy.
A basic distinction is made in the Budget Statements between 'above the line' transactions-outlays and receipts, the difference between which is the deficit-and 'below the line' transactions-transactions undertaken to finance the deficit. Budget financing transactions are transactions in, or giving rise to, financial assets or liabilities and consist of borrowings and changes in holdings of financial assets such as cash and investments recorded in the Public Account, but excluding advances to other sectors. Such advances are more akin to direct expenditures and transfer payments in their impact and are accordingly classified above the line as outlays.
Budget outlays consist of expenditure on goods and services, transfer payments (such as personal benefit payments, grants and interest), and advances. Budget receipts consist of taxes together with interest, dividends, gross operating surpluses of Budget sector business enterprises, and proceeds from sales of existing assets. These categories are used in the National Accounts presentation of information in the Budget Statements.
The adoption of national accounting conventions requires that the receipts and outlay figures in the Statements show the net transactions of the Budget sector with the rest of the economy. Some important implications of this treatment are as follows:
(a) The transactions of the three Funds forming the Commonwealth Public Account (the Consolidated Revenue Fund, Trust Fund and Loan Fund) are

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 423

consolidated and inter-fund transfers are eliminated. For example, an appropriation of the Consolidated Revenue Fund paid to a Trust Account through which ordinary government expenditure is channelled (e.g. the Transport and Construction Services and Transport and Storage Trust Accounts and various research funds) and the receipt of that transfer from Consolidated Revenue by the Trust Account are netted and not themselves shown as part of either aggregate receipts or outlays; rather the expenditure of the Trust Account is shown in outlays. Thus only transactions between the Budget sector and the rest of the economy are presented.
(b) Budget outlays are intended to show the net extent to which resources are directed through the Budget to other sectors of the economy. Therefore, recoveries and repayments (usually recorded as Consolidated Revenue Fund receipts) are normally offset against the relevant outlays to arrive at net figures. For example, air navigation charges paid by airlines are offset against outlays on the provision of civil aviation services. Similarly, repayments of principal on advances are offset against the corresponding advances.
(c) Budget tax receipts are shown net of refunds. Thus income tax receipts, for example, are shown net of refunds of PAYE deductions. Similarly, remissions and reimbursements of import duties and sales tax are offset against taxation collections. Budget receipts include gross operating surpluses from activities in the Budget sector which are carried out as business-type enterprises, i.e. operating revenues less operating expenses other than depreciation. Dividends, etc., from Commonwealth business enterprises outside the Budget sector (which are usually paid into the Consolidated Revenue Fund) are also included in Budget receipts.
(d) Some Consolidated Revenue Fund transactions are classified as financing transactions. For example, some loan redemptions are met by appropriations of the Consolidated Revenue Fund.
(e) Certain transactions which are netted in published totals of the receipts and payments of the Public Account are shown in gross form. The more important of these are interest on loans raised by the Commonwealth Government for State works programs and for the Australian National Airlines Commission and Qantas Airways Ltd. Interest paid on these loans is included under the outlay heading 'Public Debt Interest', while interest received on advances made to the relevant authorities is included as a receipts item. This has the effect of making the coverage of interest in the Statements the same as the coverage of the debt to which it relates.
A reconciliation between total outlays shown in Statement No.3 and the appropriations of the Consolidated Revenue Fund is set out in Tables 1 and 2 of Budget Paper No.5, Estimates ofReceipts and Summary ofEstimated Expenditure.
A fuller account of the principles and methods used in the national accounting presentation of Budget data is set out in the Appendix to the supplement to the Treasury Information Bulletin entitled National Accounting Estimates of Receipts and Expenditure of Australian Government Authorities, September 1974.
As mentioned earlier, the principles are essentially conceptually consistent with those used by the Australian Statistician in his publications but with the significant

424 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

difference that outlays on primary industry assistance are shown in the Budget Statements net of the relevant primary industry levies and charges whereas the Statistician shows these outlays on a gross basis.
It should also be noted that in the Statistician's publications separate data are not provided to date on transactions of the Commonwealth Budget sector and transactions of the Commonwealth Non-Budget sector; the two sectors are aggregated to show the transactions of the Commonwealth sector as a whole.

THE FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICAnON
The functional classification brings together outlays directed towards like objectives or purposes. It thus facilitates presentation of information on the functional nature of Government activities and on the total resources devoted by the Commonwealth to those objectives or purposes. The classification is based on that set out in A System of National Accounts referred to earlier, and is essentially the same as that used in Australian Bureau of Statistics publications. The contents of each function are described briefly in the final section of this Appendix. The major functions are, of course, relatively aggregative in nature, but Statement No.3 also shows outlays under each functional heading further dissected into sub-functions and individual expenditure blocks which lend themselves to more detailed comment and analysis. Within each function a separate line shows any departmental administrative outlays which are classified to that function but which cannot, for practical reasons, be allocated to particular sub-functions.
One limitation on the extent to which data can be dissected into detailed purpose oriented sub-functions or programs arises from the need to monitor and report monthly on actual outlays and receipts on a basis consistent with the annual estimates. To meet this need it has been necessary in practice to work largely from existing central accounting records. These records are built around the Appropriation Acts, which are the legal authority for expenditure rather than being detailed costing documents. The figures in the functional classification, therefore, have been derived essentially by reclassifying appropriation data, supplemented by a limited amount of additional data on large appropriation items which cover more than one function or purpose.
Functional categories do not necessarily correspond with appropriation or departmental structures. For this reason, votes and revenue heads under the control of a particular department may be classified under more than one functional heading, and it is not always possible to identify individual appropriation items in the Budget Statements.
Although the basic aim of a functional classification scheme is to reveal the allocation of Government outlays to the broad purposes for which they are undertaken, such a classification cannot always be applied unambiguously. Particular outlays will often serve two or more distinct functions: military colleges, for example, may be said to serve both a defence and an education purpose. The application of a functional classification scheme therefore requires that an outlay be classified to a particular function; in this classification, that which it is considered primarily to serve. In the example quoted, the primary function is considered to be defence; this treatment is in line with United Nations recommendations.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 425

Any single classification system cannot, of course, focus at one and the same time on every outlay characteristic that may be of interest to all users. Statement No.3 brings together all Budget outlays undertaken for similar purposes, whichever department is responsible for them. To provide information on Ministerial responsibilities in relation to each function, a separate document shows a detailed functional breakdown of the outlays within each Minister's portfolio. This document, Functional Classification of Outlays-Departmental Estimates, which is made available shortly after the Budget, indicates how much is contributed by each department to functions in which more than one department is involved. Supplementary information on particular aspects of outlays is also provided in other documents. The document Estimates of Receipts and Summary of Estimated Expenditure has already been mentioned; it presents detailed information on receipts, special appropriations and Loan Fund expenditures, and also provides details of estimates for some statutory authorities which are largely financed from the Budget. A separate Budget Paper is provided on Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities. Other Budget Papers issued with the Budget Speech deal with the Civil Works Program and Australia's Overseas Development Assistance Program.

CHANGES IN THE FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION
From time to time it is necessary to amend the functional classification to reflect changes in the organisation, coverage and nature of government activities. Furthermore, additional information sometimes becomes available that leads to appropriation items being reclassified or allows items that had previously been classified to a single function to be split between functions.
Changes have been made this year to the classification of transactions of the Royal Australian Mint. Previously, the Mint was treated as a Budget sector authority providing a service to government with revenue from numismatic sales being offset against outlays and earnings from seigniorage being treated, not as a receipts item, but as a financing transaction. In recognition of the increased significance of the business-type income from the Mint's numismatic activities, and to bring the treatment of amounts received by the Budget in respect of seigniorage more closely into line with the treatment of profits received from the note issue activities of the Reserve Bank (and because of difficulties in maintaining detailed monthly costing data), the following changes have been made:
- the Mint is now treated as an enterprise in the Non-Budget sector with transactions between the Mint and the remainder of the Public Account being recorded in the Budget; and
- advances will be recorded as made from the Budget to the Mint and the Mint will make payments to the Budget of 'dividends' (relating to seigniorage and numismatic profits) and interest and repayments of advances.
As a result of changed administrative arrangements under which naval dockyards and other minor activities related to defence industrial capacity have become the responsibility of the Department of Defence Support, it has .become possible for outlays related to these activities to be allocated to that functional block under 'Defence'. At the time of preparing the Budget Statements, however, data were not available to reclassify these expenditures in years prior to 1980-81.

426 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

With the transfer of responsibility for defence purchasing from the Department of Administrative Services to the Department of Defence Support, these administrative expenditures have also been reclassified to 'Industrial Capacity' in the 'Defence' function. Previously expenditure on this activity was classified together with other administrative expenditures in relation to government purchasing under 'Common Services' in the function 'Administrative Services'.
The sub-function 'Common Services' has also been affected because information has become available which enabled expenditure on consultants for defence projects to be identified and now shown under 'General Administrative Expenditure' in the 'Defence' function. Previously expenditure on consultants for both civil and defence projects was classified to 'Construction Services' within 'Common Services'.
in addition to these changes in classification, minor amendments have been made to the structure of some headings within the 'Housing' and 'Transport and Communication' functions.
Historical data for the period 1972-73 to 1981-82 classified by function are presented in Statement No.6. Because data classified by function are derived from the appropriation accounting system, adjustments to the historical series are constrained by the availability of data in that system. In particular, significant changes to departmental administrative arrangements have made it difficult to produce a strictly consistent series of outlays for the period covered in the Budget Statements. Wherever possible the more important discontinuities have been eliminated by sub-costing and regrouping appropriation data, but it has not been practicable to eliminate all inconsistencies. Information on the significant discontinuities that remain in historical data is given in the section 'Notes on Tables' at the end of Statement No.6.

DESCRIPTION OF FUNCTIONS
The following notes indicate briefly the nature and scope of the net outlays encompassed under each functional heading; they are not intended to provide a definitive listing of the contents of each category.
I. Defence
Outlays on military defence, including outlays to keep the armed services in a state of readiness. Includes outlays on central administration and on research in connection with activities carried out for defence purposes; outlays on military construction and equipment, inspection, transport and storage; all outlays on recruiting, training, equiping and housing the armed forces, and on medical care and other services for them; outlays on military colleges; expenditure for the provision of quarters for families of military personnel; outlays on pensions and other payments for military personnel under the Defence Forces Retirement and Death Benefits Scheme; outlays on civil defence; outlays on foreign military aid and contributions to international military organisations and alliances.
2. Education
Outlays on the provision, management and support of all levels of educational services, including pre-schools, schools, trade and technical courses, courses in music and fine arts and university and other higher education. Includes outlays relating to the provision of scholarships and allowances to students at all levels; special educational

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 427

programs designed specifically for the benefit of Aboriginal students, for migrants and other special groups; expenditure on non-vocational adult education courses, school bus services and general administration, regulation and research activities related to education.
3. Health
Outlays on facilities or services for the prevention and treatment of human illness. Includes outlays related to the prevention of diseases, such as immunisation and vaccination programs; regulation of standards of sanitation, etc.; outlays concerned with the provision of hospital and clinical services, including treatment and care of those suffering from psychiatric disorders, infectious diseases, etc.; and expenditure on nursing schools associated with hospitals. Also includes the payment of hospital, nursing home, medical and pharmaceutical benefits which are designed to cover all or part of the costs of hospitalisation and medical treatment; health care of specific groups, such as Aboriginals, the aged, veterans and their dependants; community health centres, drug treatment centres, and domiciliary care services; general administration, regulation and research related to health matters. The function does not include general purpose grants to the States and the Northern Territory provided from 1981-82 in lieu of former specific assistance for hospital operating costs, community health and school dental services.

4. Social Security and Welfare
Provision of pensions and allowances and other benefits to persons who, because of age, physical or mental disability, domestic circumstances or other reasons, are unable or not expected to earn a sufficient livelihood for themselves and their dependants. Includes the provision of benefits such as unemployment benefits, age and veterans' pensions, sickness benefits, other benefits to compensate for loss of income, and unemployment relief schemes. Provision of financial assistance towards the expenses associated with the bearing and raising of children, child care facilities in the States, marriage guidance, other social security benefits, child welfare services and institutions, homes for and care of the aged and disabled, and welfare programs to meet specific needs of disadvantaged groups.
5. Housing
Outlays on the provision of dwellings for sale or rental, mortgage finance for purchase or construction of dwellings, and other financial assistance aimed at facilitating the purchase or construction of dwellings or home ownership. Also includes general administration, regulation and promotion of standards, and research in the field of housing.
6. Urban and Regional Development nec and the Environment
Urban and Regional Development nec: Outlays on general promotion and assistance for urban and regional planning and development. Includes outlays on decentralisation assistance and the development of new cities, towns or settlements where it is not possible to distinguish expenditure as being specifically for housing, roads, sewerage or other purposes, or it is not appropriate to classify the expenditure to other categories (e.g. in the case of outlays for urban development or renewal, including the purchase of

428 REPRESENTATIYES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

land for such purposes); identifiable administrative costs associated with urban and regional planning and development activities, together with outlays for the provision of community amenities.
Environment: Outlays on water quality control, air pollution and monitoring and other outlays related to pollution prevention and protection of the environment including identifiable outlays on research, planning and investigation.
Sewerage and Sanitation: Outlays on the treatment and disposal of sewerage, refuse collection and disposal.
7. Culture and Recreation
Outlays related to the support of performing and creative arts; libraries and galleries; support of organisations concerned with sporting and other leisure-time activities, and provision of facilities serving purposes primarily related to these activities, such as swimming pools, community centres, athletic fields, etc.; contributions to youth and social organisations; outlays on the protection and preservation of historic sites and buildings, parks and wildlife reserves, and other elements of the national estate; outlays on the provision, operation and regulation of radio and television broadcasting services.
8. Economic Services
This category covers regulation of, and assistance provided to, the private sector; direct government participation in economic activity and provision of economic infrastructure.
A. Transport and Communication. Outlays concerned with postal services, and domestic and overseas telecommunications; outlays on construction, maintenance, promotion, administration and research relating to the various modes of land, sea and air transport, including urban transportation systems and pipelines for petroleum and gas transport. (Road traffic control services are shown under the category 'Law, Order and Public Safety'.)
B. Water Supply, Electricity and Gas. Outlays on construction and other assistance, regulation and research in connection with the production, transmission and distribution of electricity; assistance to domestic users of gas; and outlays on the conservation, collection, purification and distribution of water primarily for domestic and industrial use.
e. Industry Assistance and Development. Direct assistance to primary, secondary
and service enterprises in various forms including bounties, subsidies, export incentives, advances from the Budget and other transfers, including commodity price support arrangements; support of agricultural and other industrial research and development and of promotional activities, including export promotion; outlays on the management and development of timber and fishery resources; provision of veterinary, extension and other services to agriculture; land clearing, reclamation and settlement activities; outlays on programs of rural debt reconstruction and farm rehabilitation and adjustment; investigation, measurement, development and management of water resources for irrigation and pastoral purposes and rural flood mitigation; assistance for and encouragement of mineral exploration; geological surveys; development of tourist facilities and tourist promotion; administration, promotion, regulation and research directly associated with specific primary, secondary or service industries.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

17. August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 429

D. Labour and Employment. Outlays related to the regulation of working conditions, the prevention and settlement of industrial disputes and the enforcement of industrial awards and agreements; various occupational training schemes for adults and young people, including assistance to enter or re-enter the work-force; provision of labour exchange facilities; outlays directly related to the assisted passage migration scheme; general administration, regulation and research in the field of industrial relations, employment and immigration affairs.
E. Other Economic Services. Outlays related to regulation of monopolies and restrictive trade practices, price control and justification-, tariff regulation, other forms of business regulation; outlays on patents and trade marks administration, outlays on meteorological services and other technical services not allocable to specific kinds of industry; outlays on general administration in the area of economic and commercial affairs not allocable to other outlay categories within the 'Economic Services' function.

9. General Public Services
This category covers outlays on a number of general public services and activities concerned with the organisation and operation of government.
A. Legislative Services. Outlays of the legislative and executive bodies of government, including Parliamentary committees and the operation of the Governor General's establishments; outlays related to the conduct of elections and maintenance of registers of voters.
B. Law, Order and Public Safety. Outlays on law courts (other than those concerned with industrial relations) and bodies concerned with the administration of the legal system and preparation and execution of law court action; provision of legal aid; registration of legal titles to property; outlays in respect of prisons and other places of detention and correction, and probation services; police services, including traffic control; fire protection and other public safety promotion or services; general administration and research related to these activities.
C. Foreign Affairs, Overseas Aid and External Territories. Outlays of departments and agencies charged primarily with the handling of foreign relations; outlays on overseas economic aid and contributions to international bodies other than military alliances and organisations; administration and other expenditure relating to external territories.
D. General and Scientific Research nec. Contributions for the promotion of and outlays on basic and general research in the biological, physical and social sciences, which cannot readily be classified to other outlay categories or linked with the provision or promotion of a particular service or activity.
E. Administrative Services. Outlays on the collection of taxes, raising public loans, managing public debt, and controlling the disbursement and audit of public funds. Outlays on general services for the government as a whole, such as statistical services, the purchase and operation of government buildings and equipment (including the construction, repair and maintenance of general purpose buildings), rent, office cleaning, personnel and other administration. General administrative expenses of departments which cover a variety of government activities and cannot be readily apportioned over relevant functions are also included under this heading.

430 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10. Outlays Not Allocated to Function
A. Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nec. General purpose grants and advances to States, the Northern Territory and local government authorities which may be spent at the recipient's discretion and are not therefore classifiable to specific functions. This category includes payments to assist the States and the Northern Territory to meet debt charges and general purpose funds provided from 1981-82 in lieu of previous separate specific purpose assistance for hospital operating costs, community health and school dental services.
Payments to States and direct assistance for the relief of victims of drought, flood, fire and other natural disasters, and for the restoration of community services and facilities; longer-term reconstruction activities of a specific nature are, to the extent possible, classified according to purpose.
B. Public Debt Interest. Interest payments made from the Budget sector to other sectors, including interest payments on government securities, or under credit arrangements with other countries. Interest received from Government investments in Commonwealth Government securities is offset against gross interest payments.

Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill 17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 431

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.2) 1982-83
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation for proposed expenditure announced.
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (9.34)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill seeks appropriations of the Consolidated Revenue Fund in 1982-83 totalling $1,976,195,000. Of this amount, $797,209,000 was authorised by the Supply Act (No.2) 1982-83; the balance of $1,178,986,000 would be authorised by this Bill. The Bill provides for proposed expenditure on the construction of public works and buildings, the acquisition of sites and buildings, certain advances and loans, items of plant and equipment which are clearly definable as capital expenditure and expenditure on new policy initiatives for which legislation has not previously been provided. Provision is also made for grants to the States under section 96 of the Constitution and for payments to the Northern Territory. An amount of $100,000,000 is included under the Advance to the Minister for Finance, the same level as provided in the past four years. Details of the proposed expenditures are set out in Schedule 2 to the Bill and the main features were outlined in my Budget Speech. 1commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
APPROPRIATION (PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS) BILL 1982-83
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation for proposed expenditure announced.
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (9.38)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is to provide appropriations for the parliamentary departments. The Bill seeks appropriation of the Consolidated Revenue Fund in 1982-83 totalling $30,208,000. Of this amount, $10,902,000 was authorised by the Supply Act (No. I) 1982-83, the balance of $19,306,000 being authorised by this Bill. The Bill arises from the Government's consideration of, and response to,

the report of the Senate Select Committee on Parliament's Appropriations and Staffing which was tabled on 19 August 1981. Two of the principal recommendations of the report dealt with the provision of a separate parliamentary Appropriation Bill and with the Parliament's control of its funding. Honourable members will recall that the Government agreed to the provision of a separate Appropriation Bill which, consistent with the Select Committee's recommendations, will not be treated as a Bill for the ordinary annual services of the Government. Honourable members will also recall that the Government recognised that detailed control over individual expenditure items for the Parliament was not necessary. Accordingly, the Government proposed that it would approve the overall recurrent and capital expenditure provisions of the Bill. This has been done and the amounts included in the Bill have been agreed to between the leaders of the Houses and the Presiding Officers. 1 commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
BUDGET 1982-83
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-I present the following papers for the information of honourable members in connection with the Budget of 1982-83:
Budget Statements 1982-1983.
Estimates of Receipts and Summary of Estimated Expenditure for the year ending 30 June 1983.
Civil Works Program 1982-83.
Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities 1982-83.
Government Securities on Issue at 30 June 1982.
Australia's Overseas Development Assistance Program 1982-83.
National Income and Expenditure 1981-82.
Income Tax Statistics.
Ordered that the papers be printed.
SALES TAX AMENDMENT BILLS (Nos 1 to 9) 1982
Bills presented by Mr Fife, and read a first time.
Second Readings
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) (9.40)-1 move:
That the Bills be now read a second time.
These Bills will give effect to the Budget proposal to increase the various rates of sales tax by 2.5 percentage points. The Bills will increase the respective rates from 5 per cent to 7.5 per cent, from 17.5 per cent to 20 per cent and from 30 per cent to 32.5 per cent. These Bills do not alter any

432 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Sales Tax Amendment Bills

of the exemptions from sales tax that are conferred by the first Schedule to the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act. Some deletions of existing exemptions are, however, proposed by another Bill that 1will shortly introduce.
The second Schedule to the exemptions and classifications Act identifies the goods that are to be taxed at the top rate, now to be $32.5 per cent. Goods embraced by the second Schedule include radio and television receivers, record players, cameras, household-type video recorders, films and photographs, non-commercial slide projectors and viewing equipment, watches, jewellery, cosmetics, fountain pens, certain goods made of precious metals and furs. Goods in the third Schedule to the exemptions and classifications Act have attracted a rate of 5 per cent, which is now to be increased to 7.5 per cent. This covers household furniture, appliances such as refrigerators, washing machines and a range of household goods. Motor cars and commercial motor vehicles are in the fourth and fifth Schedules to the exemptions and classifications Act and they, together with goods not coming within any Schedule to the Act, are at present taxed at 17.5 per cent. It is proposed that they be taxed in future at 20 per cent. Other goods also now to be taxed at 20 per cent include boats, confectionery, stationery, computers, soft drinks, potable spirits and imported wines and beers.
It is customary for changes in the rates of sales tax to take effect on the day following the introduction of amending Bills and these Bills, when enacted, will accordingly operate on and after 18 August 1982. The sales tax is basically a tax on sales at the wholesale level and, in the ordinary case of sales by a wholesaler to a retailer, the increased rates of tax will accordingly apply to sales made after Budget day. As usual, an explanatory memorandum covering technical aspects of the Bills and providing, on this occasion, a detailed listing of the goods affected by these measures is being made available to honourable members. The net result of the changes in sales tax rates will be an increase in revenue estimated at some $370m in 1982-83 and $490m in a full year. 1commend the Bills to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Young) adjourned.
SALES TAX (EXEMPTIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS) AMENDMENT BILL
1982
Bill presented by Mr Fife, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) (9.44)-1 move:

That the Bill be now read a second time.
As announced in the Budget Speech this evening, the Government has decided on two sales tax changes. Legislation for one of them-an increase of 2.5 percentage points in existing rates-has just been introduced. The Bill I am now introducing deals with the second aspect and will impose sales tax of 7.5 per cent on a range of goods that are now exempt from tax. This extension of the sales tax base will have effect on goods that pass the taxing point-normally the last wholesale sale-on or after I January 1983. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) drew attention last year to the clear advantage that lies in effecting some change in the mix of direct and indirect taxation. 1 again emphasise the potential that such a change generates for desirable reduction in direct taxes, particularly personal income tax.
The technical effect of the Bill will be tax at 7.5 per cent, on and after I January 1983, goods which are at present exempted by items 53, 58, 105,107 and 113F, sub-items (4), (SA), (6), (7) and (10) of item 120 and item 120A in the first Schedule. The broad classes of goods which fall within the scope of the items other than 113F, are maps, hand tools, motion picture films, household drapery and soft furnishings, cleaning and polishing cloths, braid, ribbon and tape, blankets, handkerchiefs, cleaning sponges and enginecleaning cotton waste. The goods covered by item 113F are, very broadly, servicing equipment and construction equipment. More particularly, this equipment covers servicing equipment used to service, repair or recondition motor vehicles, aircraft, ships or railway rolling stock or in retreading and repairing of tyres and repairing of footwear for human wear. The item also covers equipment used for constructing, maintaining or repairing buildings or other structures, roads, dams, pipelines, drains, trenches, tunnels or other works.
I should emphasise that this item deals with equipment et cetera which is used in the course of servicing, repair or construction as the case may be. It does not include goods which become part of the goods being repaired or the structures built. Using buildings as an example, equipment for use in construction of a building will become taxable at 7.5 per cent but the materials used to construct the building and thereby become part of the building will remain exempt from sales tax. 1emphasise that goods falling within any of these categories will still be exempt from sales tax if they are sold in circumstances in which an overriding exemption in the first schedule to the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act applies. Similarly, where a manufacturer purchases such goods for

Diesel Fuel Tax Legislation

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 433

use as 'aids to manufacture', the goods will remain exempt under the 'aids to manufacture' head of exemption.
I do not think that I need to go into greater detail at this stage. As usual, however, an explanatory memorandum covering technical aspects of the Bill is being made available to honourable members and this provides details of the goods affected by these measures. The net result of the changes will be an increase in revenue estimated at some $44m in 1982-83 and $1 05m in a full year. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
DIESEL FUEL TAXES LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (9.50)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is one of several measures to give effect to the new diesel fuel duty payments and administration arrangements foreshadowed by my colleague the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his Budget Speech earlier tonight. On and from 8 o'clock tonight the existing diesel fuel certificate scheme, wherein certificates were issued to purchasers of diesel fuel for 'off road' use to obtain the fuel at duty free prices, will be terminated. In its place this Bill will introduce a new rebate system which will require all purchases of diesel fuel to be made at the duty paid price with rebates payable to persons in certain categories for their 'off road' use. I have already revoked the relevant Customs and excise by-laws which provided the authority for the issuance of diesel fuel certificates under the previous scheme.
This Bill contains amendments to a number of pieces of legislation including amendments to the Diesel Fuel Taxation (Administration) Act 1957, to terminate the operation of that Act on and from 8 o'clock tonight. Any purchases of diesel fuel for 'off road' use made at duty free rates under the certificate scheme up to 8 o'clock this evening will remain subject to the end use provisions of that Act. Similarly, purchasers who, before 8 o'clock this evening, purchased diesel fuel at duty inclusive prices and used that fuel for 'off road' purposes will be entitled to rebates as provided for under the old arrangements.

The Bill also amends the Customs Act and the Excise Act to introduce new provisions into both of those Acts relating to the new rebate system. I would now like to outline some of the details of the new rebate system. As from 8 o'clock tonight all diesel fuel sales will be required to be made at a price inclusive of the duty. This means that no users of diesel fuel will be able to purchase, as they did in the past, duty free diesel fuel from oil companies, agencies or distributors. The users of diesel fuel in the categories defined in clause 5 of the Bill who use the fuel for 'off road' purposes are eligible for a rebate of the duty paid on the diesel fuel used in their operations. To obtain the rebate the user must lodge a claim with a collector of Customs. The categories I have just referred to relate to the use of diesel fuel in the agriculture, mining, forestry and fishing industries, in domestic premises, hospitals, aged persons homes and nursing homes. The overriding qualification for rebate will be that the fuel so used will be used otherwise than for the purposes of propelling a road vehicle on a public road.
It has been necessary to include in the Bill powers that are similar to those powers contained in the Diesel Fuel Taxation (Administration) Act. These investigative powers are essential for the protection of the revenue and for the effective administration of the new rebate system. It is proposed that the Customs and excise regulations be amended to require certain information to be submitted by claimants for rebate and for claimants to keep records of their purchases and use of the fuel for a period of not less than two years from the date of their purchase of the fuel. Claims for rebate for domestic use may be lodged on a continuous basis but all other claims for rebate will be limited to a minimum rebate amount of $100. Claims for rebate will not normally be payable unless they are lodged within 12 months of the date of the purchase of the fuel. Claims will be processed after the date upon which the amending legislation receives the royal assent.
The Department of Industry and Commerce will be issuing an information pamphlet detailing eligibility and operation of the new rebate scheme and copies of this pamphlet will be available from Customs offices, oil companies, their agencies and distributors. It is expected that the rebates paid to claimants under the new scheme will amount to approximately $112m per annum. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.

434 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Diesel Fuel Tax Legislation

DIESEL FUEL TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No.1) 1982
Bin presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (9.55)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill amends the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957 to terminate the operation of that Act on and from 8 o'clock tonight. The Bill forms part of a package of measures designed to terminate the diesel fuel certificate scheme and introduce a new rebate system for diesel fuel as foreshadowed by my colleague the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his Budget Speech earlier tonight. From 8 o'clock this evening all diesel fuel will be required to be duty paid but rebates win be available to certain categories of users on condition that they use the fuel that they have purchased for 'off-road' purposes.
The provisions of the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No. I), however, will continue to apply in respect of diesel fuel entered for home consumption before 8 o'clock tonight. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
DIESEL FUEL TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1982
Bin presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (9.57)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill amends the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No. 2) 1957 to terminate the operation of that Act on and from 8 o'clock tonight. The Bill forms part of a package of measures designed to terminate the diesel fuel certificate scheme and introduce a new rebate system for diesel fuel as foreshadowed by

my colleague the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his Budget Speech earlier tonight. From 8 o'clock this evening all diesel fuel will be required to be duty paid but rebates will be available to certain categories of users on condition that they use the fuel that they have purchased for 'off-road' purposes. The provisions of the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2), however, will continue to apply in respect of diesel fuel entered for home consumption before 8 o'clock tonight. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Ministerial Statement
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security)-by leave-In his Budget Speech the Treasurer (Mr Howard) made reference to a number of initiatives in the social security area. I should like to expand upon some of the points he covered and give the House a more detailed account of what this Budget has achieved in terms of the Government's social welfare objectives. In this year's Budget the Government has allocated $11,983m for social security pensions and benefits, other welfare programs and services and housing programs administered by the Department of Social Security.
During the year the Department has acquired important new functions relating to housing, and the allocation for these programs in 1982-83 is $512m, an increase of 31.6 per cent over last year's expenditure. In the area of more traditional social security and welfare programs, spending has increased from $9,997m to an estimated $ll,471m, an increase of 14.7 per cent. However, just as the apparent increase in expenditure announced last year was slightly reduced effectively by an extra pension pay-day that had to be accounted for, so this year's figure is increased. This means that the effective rate of increase in social welfare spending is some 18 per cent. I have a table illustrating this, which I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

CHANGES IN EXPENDITURE BY DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY: 1981-82 TO 1982-83

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimated

Amount

Change Per cent

Expenditure on social security and welfare Less effect of additional pension pay day in
1981-82 . . . . . . . . . . . . .

$m 9,997
279

$m 11,471

$m +1,474

% +14.7

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 435

1981-82 Actual

1982-83 Estimated

Amount

Change Percent

$m

$m

$m

%

Plus housing programs transferred from former Department of Housing and Construction

9,718 *389

11,471 512

+1,753 + 123

+18.0 +31.6

Total

10,107

11,983

1,876

18.6

- Includes $342m charged to former Department of Housing and Construction.

Mr WILSON-I thank the House. While this is a larger increase than we have seen in the welfare areas in recent years, in terms of the assistance it will provide I believe it is an increase that represents particularly good value for money. This is because many of the initiatives included in this year's welfare budget are designed as incentives to welfare recipients to improve their own positions and so become less dependent on government for direct assistance.
This Budget provides valuable benefits to many groups who are clients of the Department. We have taken significant steps to improve our total package of assistance for Australian families. We have moved to improve the financial position of many age pensioners. We have provided additional help for many unemployed people, and provided greater opportunities for them to supplement their benefits through part time work. We have developed new schemes of assistance for the disabled.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Sir James Killen-I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
SOCIAL WELFARE
Ministerial Statement
Debate resumed.
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security)-We have also introduced measures in the field of housing that will be of benefit both to individual home buyers and, through increased activity, to the housing industry as a whole. Before I go into detail in each of these areas I should like to say something about the overall strategy that the Government has adopted

in framing this year's welfare Budget. Decisions we have taken in this Budget complement the important measure adopted by the Fraser Government in 1976, to protect automatically most pensioners and beneficiaries who receive the basic rate of pension against inflation, by twice-yearly adjustments in pension rates linked to consumer price index increases. These automatic increases are the best indication that Australian pensioners could have of the Government's continuing concern for these people in Australia who have nothing to live on except the pension or benefit they receive from the social welfare system. Because those changes have been made automatic it is easy to overlook the fact that they are an important and costly commitment. In November 1982 and in May 1983 increases will cost about $770m in a full year. Indeed, the provision we have had to make for indexation accounts for some 40 per cent of this year's increase. That is a substantial basic commitment when you are beginning to shape a Budget. There are other areas of increase too that could not be avoided, such as expected increases in the number of welfare beneficiaries. These, and other increases already built into the system, account for over 30 per cent more of the overall increase. So, in total we were committed to an extra expenditure of more than $1.3 billion before we began to look at any new policy initiatives-and that $1.3 billion accounts for some 75 per cent of our expenditure increase. Given this, our aim has been to spend the funds we felt able to allocate for new initiatives in a way that would alleviate the particularly pressing problems in the welfare system and also to give taxpayers good value for the extra dollars we proposed to spend.
The Government is aware that there are some areas falling within the scope of the welfare system where inflation has caused special problems for particular groups of people. Many of the initiatives we have adopted this year are aimed at alleviating these problems. They will also, as I have already mentioned, provide greater incentives for

436 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Social Welfare

people to improve their own positions and become less dependent on government.
Help for Families
In developing our package of assistance for families we have had in mind the additional costs that all parents undertake in bringing up children, and the particularly harsh impact of inflation on families with low incomes. To help in meeting these extra costs we have decided to increase the rate of family allowance by 50 per cent for the first and second children in a family from October 1982. This will bring family allowance for the first child to $22.80 a month and for the second child to $32.55 a month. This increase, which is part of the Government's tax relief measures in this Budget, will cost some $250m in 1982-83 and will consolidate the increases for third and subsequent children we introduced in last year's Budget. While it will be of particular benefit to the 1.6 million families in Australia who have one or two children, all 2.1 million families with children will gain. In addition to this general assistance for families, we will introduce, from May 1983, a tax free family income supplement for low income families apart from pensioners and beneficiaries of up to $10 a week for each dependent child. This not only reflects our recognition of the particular cost burden borne by low income families who are bringing up children, but it also helps to avoid the unfair and clearly undesirable situation where an unemployment beneficiary can be better off financially than a person in similar family circumstances who is in employment, but earning low wages.
The income limit for this supplement will be closely linked to the income test for health care cards. However, full details of the new arrangements will be announced well before the implementation date, which has been set in May 1983. The Government is anxious to get this new scheme of assistance operating as soon as possible, and has settled on Mayas the earliest date by which the necessary administrative action to introduce a completely new benefit can be completed. Because the family income supplement is a completely new benefit aimed at assisting low income families who are mainly in employment, the Government will monitor it closely

to ensure that it meets its objective of relieving hardship among those families who are not pensioners or beneficiaries. Low income families will also be assisted by a rise in the qualifying limits for health care cards which, as a result of CPI-linked increases and adjustments to the income test for unemployment benefit to which they are linked, will go up from November to $184 per week for a married couple without children plus $20 for each child in the family. Holders of the health care cards will be able to get certain pharmaceutical items at concessional rates from 1 January 1983 under the new scheme announced by the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton). There will also be changes in the rates and income tests for certain education and living allowances, details of which will be announced by the appropriate Ministersbut parents who receive allowances for children under the Secondary Allowances Scheme and related schemes will not also be able to get family income supplement for the same child.
There has been widespread concern recently about the growth in the number of sole parent families in Australia. There has also been particular concern about the growth in the number of such families receiving income support from the Commonwealth. On the other hand, there is no doubt that some sole parent families are among the most needy of all families in the Australian community. In shaping its policy of asistance to families the Government has kept these concerns in mind and has sought to strike a balance which recognises the particular problems faced by sole parents, but, as far as possible, avoids creating further financial incentives for separation and reduces disincentives for forming new, lasting relationships. The increases in family allowances, the introduction of the family income supplement, and the adjustments in personal income tax announced by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) will have a significant impact on the disposable income of many Australian families. I have a number of tables detailing the gains for families in various circumstances, which I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 437

Table I ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Single Income Family with OneChild

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Family income supplement( I)

Increase in family
allowances

Reduction in personal income tax
Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week 145 160 180 184 200 204 220 240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 500

$a week 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 2.00

$ a week 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75

$a week 11.75 11.75 11.75 11.75 3.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75

$ a week 3.59 3.89 4.29 4.37 4.69 4.77 5.09 5.49 5.89 6.29 6.69 7.09 7.49 10.12 12.52 12.52 12.52

$a week 1.03 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85

$ a weekS a week % 4.62 16.37 11.4 7.74 19.49 12.6 8.14 19.89 11.9 8.22 19.97 11.7 8.54 12.29 6.8 8.62 10.37 5.6 8.94 10.69 5.5 9.34 11.09 5.3 9.74 11.49 5.2 10.14 11.89 5.0 10.54 12.29 4.9 10.94 12.69 4.8 11.34 13.09 4.7 13.97 15.72 5.5 16.37 18.12 6.1 16.37 18.12 5.9 16.37 18.12 5.0

(I) Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When FIS is introduced in May 1983. this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.
Table 2 ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Single Income Family with Two Children

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Family income supplement( 1)

Increase in family
allowances

Reduction in personal income tax
Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week 145 160 180 184 200 204 220 224 240 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 500

$a week 20.00 20.00 20.00 20.00 12.00 10.00 2.00

$ a week 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 24.25 24.25 24.25 24.25 16.25 14.25 6.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 3.59 3.89 4.29 4.37 4.69 4.77 5.09 5.17 5.49 5.89 6.29 6.69 7.09 7.49 10.12 12.52 12.52 12.52

$a week
1.03 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85

$ a weekS a week % 4.62 28.87 19.4 7.74 31.99 20.1 8.14 32.39 18.8 8.22 32.47 18.5 8.54 24.79 13.3 8.62 22.87 12.1 8.94 15.19 7.6 9.02 13.27 6.5 9.34 13.59 6.4 9.74 13.99 6.2 10.14 14.39 6.0 10.54 14.79 5.8 10.94 15.19 5.7 11.34 15.59 5.5 13.97 18.22 6.2 16.37 20.62 6.8 16.37 20.62 6.6 16.37 20.62 5.6

(1) Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When FIS is introduced in May 1983. this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.

438 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Social Welfare

Table 3 ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Single Income Family with Three Children

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Family income supplement (I )

Increase in family
allowances

Reduction in personal income tax
Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$ a week 145 160 180 184 200 204 220 224 240 244 260 280 300 320 340 360 380 400 500

$a week 30.00 30.00 30.00 30.00 22.00 20.00 12.00 10.00 2.00

$a week 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 34.25 34.25 34.25 34.25 26.25 24.25 16.25 14.25 6.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 3.59 3.89 4.29 4.37 4.69 4.77 5.09 5.17 5.49 5.57 5.89 6.29 6.69 7.09 7.49
10.12 12.52 12.52 12.52

$a week 1.03 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85

$ a week$ a week % 4.62 38.87 24.6 7.74 41.99 25.0 8.14 42.39 23.3 8.22 42.47 23.0 8.54 34.79 17.8 8.62 32.87 16.6 8.94 25.19 12.1 9.02 23.27 11.0 9.34 15.59 7.0 9.42 13.67 6.1 9.74 13.99 5.9 10.14 14.39 5.8 10.54 14.79 5.6 10.94 15.19 5.5 11.34 15.59 5.4 13.97 18.22 6.0 16.37 20.62 6.6 16.37 20.62 6.4 16.37 20.62 5.5

(I) Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When FIS is introduced in May 1983, this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.
Table 4 ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Single Income Family with Five Children

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Family income supplement ( I)

Increase in family
allowances

Reduction in personal income tax
Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$ a week 145 160 180 184 200 204 220 224 240 260 280 284 300 320 340 360 380 400 500

$a week 50.00 50.00 50.00 50.00 42.00 40.00 32.00 30.00 22.00 12.00 2.00

$a week 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$ a week 54.25 54.25 54.25 54.25 46.25 44.25 36.25 34.25 26.25 16.25 6.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 3.59 3.89 4.29 4.37 4.69 4.77 5.09 5.17 5.49 5.89 6.29 6.37 6.69 7.09 7.49 10.12 12.52 12.52 12.52

$a week 1.03 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85

$ a week $ a week % 4.62 58.87 33.2 7.74 61.99 33.0 8.14 62.39 31.0 8.22 62.47 30.6 8.54 54.79 25.5 8.62 52.87 24.3 8.94 45.19 19.8 9.02 43.27 18.7 9.34 35.59 14.7 9.74 25.99 10.2 10.14 16.39 6.1 10.22 14.47 5.3 10.54 14.79 5.2 10.94 15.19 5.1 11.34 15.59 5.0 13.97 18.22 5.7 16.37 20.62 6.2 16.37 20.62 6.0 16.37 20.62 5.2

(I) Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When FIS is introduced in May 1983, this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 439

Table 5 ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Single Income Family with Seven Children

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Family income supplement( I)

Increase in family
allowances

Reduction in personal income tax
Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week 145 160 180 184 200 204 220 224 240 260 280 300 320 324 340 360 380 400 500

$a week 70.00 70.00 70.00 70.00 62.00 60.00 52.00 50.00 42.00 32.00 22.00 12.00 2.00

$a week 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 74.25 74.25 74.25 74.25 66.25 64.25 56.25 54.25 46.25 36.25 26.25 16.25 6.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 3.59 3.89 4.29 4.37 4.69 4.77 5.09 5.17 5.49 5.89 6.29 6.69 7.09 7.17 7.49 10.12 12.52 12.52 12.52

$a week 1.03 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85 3.85

$ a week$ a week %
4.62 78.87 39.8 7.74 81.99 39.3 8.14 82.39 37.1 8.22 82.47 36.7 8.54 74.79 31.7 8.62 72.87 30.6 8.94 65.19 26.1 9.02 63.27 25.1 9.34 55.59 2l.l 9.74 45.99 16.6 10.14 36.39 12.5 10.54 26.79 8.8 10.94 17.19 5.4 11.02 15.27 4.8 11.34 15.59 4.7 13.97 18.22 5.3 16.37 20.62 5.8 16.37 20.62 5.7 16.37 20.62 4.9

(I) Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When FIS is introduced in May 1983, this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.
Table 6 ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Two Income Family with One Child (Income split 60:40 between partners)

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Family income supplement (I)

Increase in family
allowances

Reduction in personal income tax
Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week 240 260 280 300 320 350
400 500 600 700

$a week

$a week 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75

$a week
1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75

$a week 6.19 6.59 6.99 7.39 7.79 8.39 9.39 11.39 15.61 18.81

$a week $ a week$ a week % 6.19 7.94 3.6 6.59 8.34 3.6 6.99 8.74 3.6 7.39 9.14 3.5 7.79 9.54 3.5 8.39 10.14 3.5 9.39 11.14 3.4 11.39 13.14 3.3 15.61 17.36 3.8 18.81 20.56 3.9

(I) Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When FIS is introduced in May 1983, this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.

440 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Social Welfare

Table 7 ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Two Income Family with Two Children (Income split 60:40 between partners)

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Increase in

Family income

family

supplement ( 1) allowances

Reduction in personal income tax
Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$ a week 240 260 280 300 320 350 400 500 600 700

$a week

$a week 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 6.19 6.59 6.99 7.39 7.79 8.39 9.39 11.39 15.61 18.81

$a week

$ a week$ a week %
6.19 10.44 4.7 6.59 10.84 4.6 6.99 11.24 4.5 7.39 11.64 4.4 7.79 12.04 4.3 8.39 12.64 4.2 9.39 13.64 4.1 11.39 15.64 3.9 15.61 19.86 4.3 18.81 23.06 4.4

(1) Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When F1S is introduced in May 1983, this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.
Table 8 ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Two Income Family with Three Children (Income split 60:40 between partners)

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Increase in

Family income

family

supplement (I) allowances

Reduction in personal income tax
Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$ a week 240 244 260 280 300 320 350 400 500 600 700

$ a week 2.00

$a week 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 6.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 6.19 6.27 6.59 6.99 7.39 7.79 8.39 9.39 11.39 15.61 18.81

$a week $ a week$ a week % 6.19 12.44 5.4 6.27 10.52 4.5 6.59 10.84 4.4 6.99 11.24 4.3 7.39 11.64 4.3 7.79 12.04 4.2 8.39 12.64 4.1 9.39 13.64 4.0 11.39 15.64 3.8 15.61 19.86 4.2 18.81 23.06 4.3

(1) Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When FIS is introduced in May 1983, this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 441

Table 9 ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Two Income Family with Five Children (Income split 60:40 between partners)

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Family income supplement( I)

Increase in family
allowances

Reduction in personal income tax
Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week 240 260 280 284 300 320 350 400 500 600 700

$a week 22.00 12.00 2.00

$a week 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$ a week 26.25 16.25 6.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$ a week 6.19 6.59 6.99 7.07 7.39 7.79 8.39 9.39 11.39 15.61 18.81

$a week

$ a week$ a week % 6.19 32.44 12.9 6.59 22.84 8.6 6.99 13.24 4.7 7.07 11.32 4.0 7.39 11.64 4.0 7.79 12.04 3.9 8.39 12.64 3.9 9.39 13.64 3.8 11.39 15.64 3.6 15.61 19.86 4.0 18.81 23.06 4.2

(I) Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When FIS is introduced in May 1983, this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.
Table 10 ILLUSTRATIVE EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES (EXCLUDING HOUSING) ON FAMILIES
Two Income Family with seven children (Income split 60:40 between partners)

Income

Increase in cash assistance

Increase in

Family income

family

supplementlJl allowances

Reduction in personal income tax

Change in Increase in thresholds and dependent Total standard rate spouse rebate

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week 240 260 280 300 320 324 350 400 450 500 600 700

$a week 42.00 32.00 22.00 12.00 2.00

$a week
4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 46.25 36.25 26.25 16.25 6.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$a week 6.19 6.59 6.99 7.39 7.79 7.87 8.39 9.39 10.39 11.39 15.61 18.81

$a week

$a week $a week % 6.19 52.44 19.2 6.59 42.84 15.0 6.99 33.24 11.1 7.39 23.64 7.5 7.79 14.04 4.3 7.87 12.12 3.7 8.39 12.64 3.6 9.39 13.64 3.6 10.39 14.64 3.5 11.39 15.64 3.5 15.61 19.86 3.9 18.81 23.06 4.0

'" Assumes FIS operating from November with maximum entitlement payable up to joint parental income of $184 a week. When FIS is introduced in May 1983, this income limit will have increased in line with the income limits for a health care card for a married couple without children.

442

REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Social Welfare

Private income
$ a week
o
10 20 24 26 30 31 36 40 50 55 56.82 60 70 74 90 120 160 200 206.30 211 212.50 216 222.50

Table II EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON PENSIONERS-AS FROM NOVEMBER 1982

Sole Parent Pensioner with one child (not under 6 or invalid)

Increase in cash assistance

Pension indexation

Increase
in rate or
supplementary assistance( 1)

Increase in pension
free area

Increase in fringe benefits income
limits

Increase in rate of
family allowances

Reduction in personal income tax

Total

Change in structure

Special rebate for pensioners

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3,10 3,10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3,10 3.10 3,10 0,75

$ a week 2,00 2,00 2.00 2.00 1.00

$ a week
2.00 2.50 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5,00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 3.25

$ a week

$a week $a week 1.75 6,85

$a week

1.75 6.85

1.75 6,85

1.75 6.85

1.75 5.85

1.75 4.85

1.75 6.85

1.75 7.35

1.75 9.85

1.75 9.85

1.75 9.85

FB(2)

1.75 9.85+FB

FB

1.75 9.85+FB 0.01

FB

1.75 9.85+FB 0.51

FB

1.75 9.85+FB

2.11

FB(2)

1.75 9.85+FB

2.75

1.75 9.85

4.74

1.75 9.85

5.04

1.75 9.85

5,44

1.75 9.85

8.54

1.75 9.85

8.66

1.75 7.50

8.76

1.75 6.75

8.79

1.75 5.00

8.86

1.75 1.75

8.99

$ a week $ a weekS a week

%

6.85

6.7

6.85

6.4

6.85

6.2

6.85

6.0

5.85

5.0

4.85

4.1

6.85

5.6

7.35

6.0

9,85

7.9

9.85

7.8

9.85

7.5

9.85+ FB 7.3

0.01 9,86+ FB 7.3

0.51 10.36+ FB 7.6

2.1\ 1I.96+FB 8,6

2.75 12.60+FB 8,9

0.33 5.07 14.92

10.2

5.04 14.89

9.5

5.44 15.29

9.0

8.54 18.39

10.2

8.66 18.51

10.2

8.76 16,26

8.8

8.79 15,54

8.4

8.86 13.86

7.4

8.99 10.74

5.6

( I) Assumes sole parent pensioner is paying rent of $30 or more a week. (2) Eligibility for fringe benefits ceases when private income reaches $55 a week (currently) and $74 a week (from November). Note: Maximum pension rates will be increased again in May 1983 by the percentage increase in the CPI between the June and December quarters 1982.

Private income
$ a week
o
12 20 30 32 37 40 42 50 50,82 60 66 80 85

Table 12 EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON PENSIONERS-AS FROM NOVEMBER 1982
Sole parent pensioner with two children (not under 6 or invalid)

Increase in Cash Assistance

Pension indexation

Increase in rate of supplementary assistance( I)

Increase in pension
free area

$ a week 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3,10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10

$a week 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.00

$a week

2.50 5,00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5,00 5,00

Increase in fringe benefits income
limits

Increase in rate of
family allowances

Reduction in Personal Income Tax

Total

Change in structure

Special rebate for pensioners

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week

$a week $a week 4.25 9.35

$a week

4.25 9.35

4.25 9,35

4.25 8.35

4.25 7.35

4.25 9.85

4.25 12.35

4.25 12.35

4.25 12.35

4.25 12.35

0.01

4.25 12.35

1.47

FB(2) 4.25 12.35 + FB 2.43

FB

4.25 12.35+FB 4.67

FB

4.25 12.35 + FB 4.76

$ a week $ a week$ a week

%

9.35

8.0

9.35

7,3

9.35

7.0

8.35

6.0

7.35

5.2

9,85

6.9

12.35

8.5

12.35

8,5

12.35

8.3

0.01 12.36

8.2

1.47 13.82

9.0

2.43 14.78+FB 9,5

4.67 17.02 + FB 10.6

0.26 5.02 17.37 + FB 10.7

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 443

Increase in Cash Assistance

Private income

Increase in rateaf Pension supplementary indexation assistance( 1)

Increase in pension
free area

Increase in fringe benefits income
limits

Increase in rate of
family allowances

Reduction in Personal Income Tax

Total

Change in structure

Special rebate for pensioners

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week 94 120 160
200 232.30 237 238.50 242 248.50

$a week 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 0.75

$a week

$ a week 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 3.25

$a week $ a week $ a week

$ a week

FB(2)

4.25 12.35+ FB

4.84

4.25 12.35

5.10

4.25 12.35

5.50

4.25 12.35

8.54

4.25 12.35

9.18

4.25 10.00

9.28

4.25 9.25

9.31

4.25 7.50

9.38

4.25 4.25

9.51

$ a week $ a weekS a week

%

4.84 17.19+FB 10.4

5.10 17.45

10.1

5.50 17.82

9.5

8.54 20.89

10.6

9.18 21.53

10.6

9.28 19.28

9.3

9.31 18.56

8.9

9.38 16.88

8.0

9.51 13.76

6.4

( I) Assumes sole parent pensioner is paying rent of $30 or more a week. (2) Eligibility for fringe benefits ceases when private income reaches $66 a week (currently) and $94 a week (from November). Note: Maximum pension rates will be increased again in May 1983 in line with CPI movements.

Table I3 EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON PENSIONERS-AS FROM NOVEMBER 1982
Single Age Pensioner under 70

Private income
$ a week 0 6.56 10 15 18 20 25 30 40 50 54 60
100 140 168.30 170 174.50 180 184.50

Increase in cash assistance

Pension indexation

Increase in rate of supplementary assistance-

Increase in pension
free area

Increase in fringe
benefits income
limits

Reduction in Personal Income Tax

Total

Change in structure

Special rebate for pensioners

Total

$a week 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 2.25

$ a week 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.00

$ a week
2.50 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 2.25

$ a week
FBt FB FBt

$ a week

$ a week

5.10

5.10

0.01

5.10

1.11

5.10

1.54

4.10

1.60

3.10

1.64

5.60

0.94

8.10

0.24

8.10+ FB 0.34

8.IO+FB 0.44

8.IO+FB 0.48

8.10

0.54

8.10

0.94

8.10

1.34

8.10

1.63

7.25

1.91

5.00

2.68

2.25

3.61

4.38

$ a week $a week

0.01

1.11

1.17

2.71

2.07

3.67

2.67

4.31

4.17

5.11

4.45

4.69

3.82

4.16

3.20

3.64

2.95

3.43

2.57

3.11

0.07

1.01

1.34

1.63

1.91

2.68

3.61

4.38

Total increase in disposable
income

$ a week

%

5.10

6.2

5.11

6.0

6.21

7.2

7.81

9.0

7.77

8.8

7.41

8.2

10.71

11.7

12.79

13.7

12.26+FB 12.7

II.74+FB 11.7

II.53+FB 11.4

11.21

10.8

9.11

7.8

9.44

7.2

9.73

6.9

9.16

6.5

7.68

5.3

5.86

4.0

4.38

2.9

- Assumes pensioner is paying rent of $30 or more a week. t Eligibility for fringe benefits ceases when private income reaches $40 a week (current) and $54 a week (from November). Nole: Maximum pension rates will be increased again in May 1983 by the percentage increase in the CPI between the June and December quarters 1982.

Private income
S a week
o
6.56

Table 14 EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON PENSIONERS-AS FROM NOVEMBER 1982
Single Age Pensioner 70 and Over

Increase in cash assistance

Pension indexation

Increase in rate of supplementary assistance-

Increase in pension
free area

Increase in fringe
benefits income
limits

Reduction in personal income tax

Total

Change in structure

Special rebate for pensioners

Total

$a week 3.10 3.10

$a week 2.00 2.00

$ a week

$a week

$a week 5.10 5.10

$ a week 0.01

$ a week $a week 0.01

Total increase in disposable
income

$ a week

%

5.10

6.2

5.11

6.0

444 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Social Welfare

Private income
$ a week 10 15 18 20 25 30 40 50 54 60 65.4°t 71.60 75 81.60§

Increase in cash assistance

Increase
in rate or

Pension supplemerytary

indexation

assistance-

Increase in pension
free area

Increase in fringe
benefits income
limits

Reduction in personal income tax

Total

Change in structure

Special rebate for pensioners

Total

$a week 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 0.80

$ a week 2.00
2.00
1.00

$a week
2.50 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 3.30

$aweek $aweek 5.10

$ a week 1.11

5.10

1.54

4.10

1.60

3.10

1.64

5.60

0.94

8.10

0.24

FBt

8.IO+FB

0.34

FB

8.IO+FB

0.44

FBt

8.10+FB

0.48

8.10

0.54

8.10

0.61

5.80

1.66

3.30

2.23

3.36

$ a week
1.17 2.07 2.67 4.17 4.45 3.82 3.20 2.95 2.57 2.24 1.85 1.64 1.22

$ a week 1.11 2.71 3.67 4.31 5.11 4.69 4.16 3.64 3.43 3.11 2.85 3.51 3.87 4.58

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week

%

6.21

7.2

7.81

9.0

7.77

8.8

7.41

8.2

10.71

11.7

12.79

13.7

12.26+FB 12.7

11.74+ FB 11.7

11.53+ FB 11.4

11.21

10.8

10.95

10.4

9.31

8.5

7.17

6.4

4.58

3.9

- Assumes pensioner is paying rent of$30 or more a week. t Eligibility for fringe benefits ceases when private income reaches $40 a week (current) and $54 a week (from November).
:I: Level of private income at which income-lest-free pension currently becomes payable.
§ Level or private income at which income~test~rree pension becomes payable rrom November. Note: Maximum pension rates will be increased again in May 1983 by the percentage increase in the CPI between the June and December quarters 1982.

Table 15 EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON PENSIONERS-AS FROM NOVEMBER 1982
Married Age Pensioner Couple Under 70 (all private income in the hands of one partner)

Increase in cash assistance

Private income
$ a week
o
10 18 20 24.80 34.50 40 50 68 80 90 100 200 281.70 290 292.10 300 307.60

Pension indexation

Increase in in rate or
supplementary assistance-

Increase in pension
rree area

Increase in rringe
benefits income
limits

Reduction in Personal Income Tax

Total

Change in structure

Special rebate for pensioners

Total

$ a week 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 1.05

$a week 2.00 2.00 1.00

$a week
2.75 7.75 7.75 7.75 7.75 7.75 7.75 7.75 7.75 7.75 3.80

$aweek
tFB FB
tFB

$aweek 7.20

$ a week

7.20

6.20

5.20

5.20

0.01

5.20

1.18

7.95

0.50

12.95

-0.70

12.95+FB -0.46

12.95+FB -0.28

12.95+FB -0.11

12.95

0.02

12.95

1.52

12.95

4.13

8.80

5.18

7.75

5.37

3.80

6.13

6.84

$ a week $ a week

0.01

1.93

3.11

3.58

4.08

3.56

2.86

1.87

1.41

0.75

0.47

-0.11

0.02

1.52

4.13

5.18

5.37

6.13

6.84

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week

%

7.20

5.5

7.20

5.3

6.20

4.4

5.20

3.6

5.21

3.5

8.31

5.4

12.03

7.7

15.81

9.9

14.36+FB 8.7

I3.42+ FB 7.9

12.84+ FB 7.4

12.97

7.4

14.47

6.9

17.08

7.3

13.98

5.8

13.12

5.5

9.93

4.0

6.84

2.7

... Assumes pensioner couple is paying rent or $30 or more a week. t Eligiblit) for rringe beneflls ceases when private income reaches $68 a week (currently) and $90 a week (rrom November). Note: Maximum pension rates will be increased again in May 1983 by the percentage increase in the CPI between the June and December quarters 1982.

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 445

Table 16 EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON PENSIONERS-AS FROM NOVEMBER 1982
Married age pensioner couple 70 and over (all private income in the hands of one partner)

Private income
Sa week 0 10 18 20 24.80 34.50 40 50
68 80 90 100 IIO-IOW 115 120.50 130 136(§)

Increase in cash assistance

Pension indexation

Increase in in ralcor
supplementary assistance*

Increase in pension
free area

Increase in fringe
benefits income
limits

Reduction in Personal Income Tax

Total

Change in structure

Special rebate for pensioners

Total

Total increase in disposable
income

$a week 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 2.75

$a week $ a week $ a week $a week

$ a week

$ a week $a week $a week

%

2.00

7.20

7.20

5.5

2.00

7.20

7.20

5.3

1.00

6.20

6.20

4.4

5.20

5.20

3.6

5.20

0.01

0.01 5.21

3.5

5.20

1.18

1.93

3.11 8.31

5.4

2.75

7.95

0.50

3.58

4.08 12.03

7.7

7.75

12.95

-0.70

3.56

2.86 15.81

9.9

7.75

tFB

12.95+FB -0.46

1.87

1.41 14.36+FB

8.7

7.75

FB

12.95+FB -0.28

0.75

0.47 13.42+FB

7.9

7.75

tFB

12.95+FB -0.11

--0.11 12.84+FB

7.4

7.75

12.95

0.02

0.02 12.97

7.4

7.75

12.95

0.20

0.20 13.15

7.3

7.75

10.50

0.97

0.97 11.47

6.3

7.75

7.75

1.83

1.83 9.58

5.1

3.00

3.00

3.33

3.33 6.33

3.3

4.27

4.27 4.27

2.2

(*) Assumes pensioner couple is paying rent of$30or more a week. (t) Eligibility for fringe benefits ceases when private income reaches $68 a week (currently) and $90 a week (from November). (t) Level of private income at which income-lest-free pension currently becomes payable. (§) Level of private income at which income-test-free pension becomes payable from November. Note: Maximum pension rales will be increased again in May 1983 by the percentage increase in the CPI between the June and December quarters 1982.

Table 17
EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON BENEFICIARIES-INCREASE IN CASH ASSISTANCE FROM NOVEMBER 1982"
Single Unemployment or Sickness Beneficiary Aged 16 or 17

Private income
$ a week 0 3 6 10 20 30 40 50 54 57.50 60 61.50 70 75

Increase in rate of benefit
$a week 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 4.00 1.50

Increase in benefit free
area and taper range
$a week
1.50 3.50 3.50 3.50 3.50 8.50 10.50 12.25 13.50 \3.50 5.00

Extension of health benefitst
HC,HBt HC,HB HC,HBt
HB HB HB HB

Total
$a week 4.00 4.00 5.50 7.50 7.50 7.50 7.50+HC,HB l2.50+HC, HB 14.50 + HC, HB l6.25+HB l5.00+HB l3.50+HB 5.oo+HB

- Excludes supplementary allowance which may be paid to sickness beneficiaries who pay rent or for lodgings and have been in receipt of benefit for a continuous period of six weeks. To qualify for any of the increase of $2 a week supplementary allowance from November, the beneficiary would have to be paying rent of $30 or more a week.
t A Health Benefits card is available to sickness beneficiaries, and a Health Care card to unemployment beneficiaries.
t Eligibility for a Health Benefits card or Health Care card ceases when private income reaches $40 a week currently. From November all sickness beneficiaries will be eligible for a Health Benefits card while eligibility of unemployment beneficiaries for a Health Care card will cease when private income reaches $54 a week.

446 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Social Welfare

Table 18
EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON BENEFICIARIES-INCREASE IN CASH ASSISTANCE FROM NOVEMBER 1982
Unemployment Beneficiary Aged 18 or Over Without Dependants

Private income

Increase in rate of benefit

Increase in benefit free
area and taper range

Increase in health care card income
limits

Total

$ a week 0 6 8 10 20 30 40 50 54 60 70 80 86.10 90 92.40 95 99.40

$a week 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 6.30 2.40

$a week
1.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 4.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 4.40

$ a week

6.30

6.30

7.30

8.30

8.30

8.30

HC'

8.30+HC

HC

8.30+HC

HC'

1O.30+HC

13.30

13.30

13.30

13.30

9.40

7.00

4.40

, Eligibility for a Health Care card ceases when private income reaches $40 a week (currently) and $54 a week (from November).
Table 19 EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON BENEFICIARIES-INCREASE IN CASH ASSISTANCE FROM
NOVEMBER 1982 Sickness Beneficiary aged 18 or over Without Dependants

Private income

Benefit indexation

Increase in rate of
supplementary allowance'

Increase in benefit free
area and taper range

Extension of health benefits

Total

$ per week
o
6 8 10 18 20 30 40 50 60 80 100 102.15 104 105.25 110 112.25

$ per week 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 3.10 1.25

$perweek 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.00

$ per week
1.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 4.75

$ per week

5.10

5.10

6.10

7.10

6.10

5.10

5.10

tHB

5.IO+HB

HB

5.10+HB

HB

10.10+HB

HB

10.10+HB

HB

IO.IO+HB

HB

IO.IO+HB

HB

8.25+HB

HB

7.00+HB

HB

4.75+HB

* Supplementary allowance is payable to sickness beneficiaries who pay rent or for lodgings and have been in receipt of a benefit
for a continuous period of six weeks. Assumes beneficiary is paying rent of $30 or more a week. t Eligibility for a Health Benefits card currently ceases when private income reaches $40 a week. From November eligibility will
be extended to all sickness beneficiaries.
Note: Maximum benefit rates will be increased again in May 1983 by the percentage increases in the CPI between the June and December quarters 1982.

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 447

Table 20 EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON BENEFICIARIES-INCREASE IN CASH ASSISTANCE FROM
NOVEMBER 1982
Married Unemployment and Sickness Beneficiaries Without Children

Private income

Benefit indexation

Increase in rate of
supplementary allowance"

Increase in benefit free
area and taper range

Total

Extension

of health Unemployment

benefitst

beneficiary

Sickness beneficiary

$ a week

$ a week

$a week

$a week

$ a week

$a week

0 6 8 10 18 20 40 50 60 68 80 90 100 120 140 151.60 155 156.80 160 163.80

5.20

2.00

5.20

7.20

5.20

2.00

5.20

7.20

5.20

2.00

1.00

6.20

8.20

5.20

2.00

2.00

7.20

9.20

5.20

1.00

2.00

7.20

8.20

5.20

2.00

7.20

7.20

5.20

2.00

7.20

7.20

5.20

2.00

7.20

7.20

5.20

7.00

12.20

12.20

5.20

7.00

HC,HBt 12.20+HC

12.20+HB

5.20

7.00

HC,HB

12.20+HC

12.20+HB

5.20

7.00

HC,HBt 12.20+HC

12.20+HB

5.20

7.00

HB

12.20

12.20+HB

5.20

7.00

HB

12.20

12.20+HB

5.20

7.00

HB

12.20

12.20+HB

5.20

7.00

HB

12.20

12.20+HB

1.80

7.00

HB

8.80

8.80+HB

7.00

HB

7.00

7.00+HB

3.80

HB

3.80

3.80+ HB

* Supplementary allowance is payable to sickness beneficiaries who pay rent or for lodgings and have been in receipt of benefit
for a continuous period of six weeks. Assumes beneficiary is paying rent of $30 or more a week. t A Health Benefits card is available to sickness beneficiaries and a Health Care card to unemployment beneficiaries. t Eligibility for a Health Benefits card or Health Care card currently ceases when private income reaches $68 a week. From
November all sickness beneficiaries will be eligible for a Health Benefits card, while eligibility of unemployment beneficiaries for a Health Care card will cease when private income reaches $90 a week. NOTE: Maximum benefit rates will be increased again in May 1983 by the percentage increase in the CPI between the June and
December quarters 1982.
Table 21
EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON BENEFICIARIES-INCREASE IN CASH ASSISTANCE FROM NOVEMBER 1982
Married Unemployment and Sickness Beneficiaries with one Dependent Child

Private income
$ per week 0 6 8 10 18 20
40 50 '60 80 84 100 110 120 140 160

Benefit indexation

Increase in rate of
supplementary allowance'

$ per week 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20

$ per week 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.00

Increase in benefit free
area and taper range
$ per week
1.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00

Extension of health benefitst
He, HBt HC,HB HC,HBt
HB HB HB

Increase in family allowance

Total
Unemployment beneficiary

Sickness beneficiary

$ per week 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75

$ per week 6.95 6.95 7.95 8.95 8.95 8.95 8.95 8.95 13.95 13.95 13.95+HC 13.95+HC 13.95+HC 13.95 13.95 13.95

$ per week 8.95 8.95 9.95 10.95 9.95 8.95 8.95 8.95 13.95 13.95 13.95+HB 13.95+HB 13.95+HB 13.95+HB 13.95+HB 13.95+HB

448 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Social Welfare

Private income

Benefit indexation

Increase in rate of
supplementary allowance'

Increase in benefit free
area and taper range

Extension of health benefitst

Increase in family allowance

Total
Unemployment beneficiary

Sickness beneficiary

$ per week 161.60 165 166.80 170 173.80

$ per week

$ per week $ per week

5.20

7.00

HB

1.80

7.00

HB

7.00

HB

3.80

HB

$ per week 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75 1.75

$ per week 13.95 10.55 8.75 5.55
1.75

$ per week 13.95+HB 10.55+HB 8.75+HB 5.55+HB
1.75

, Supplementary allowance is payable to sickness beneficiaries who pay rent or for lodgings and have been in receipt of benefit for a continuous period of six weeks. Assumes beneficiary is paying rent of $30 or more a week.
t A Health Benefits card is available to sickness beneficiaries and a Health Care card to unemployed beneficiaries. t Eligibility for a Health Benefits card or Health Care card currently ceases when private income reaches $84 a week. From
November all sickness beneficiaries will be eligible for a Health Benefits card, while eligibility of unemployment beneficiaries for a Health Care card will cease when private income reaches $110 a week. Note: Maximum benefit rates will be increased again in May 1983 by the percentage increase in the CPI between the June and December quarters 1982.

Table 22
EFFECT OF BUDGET MEASURES ON BENEFIC[ARIES-INCREASE IN CASH ASSISTANCE FROM NOVEMBER [982
Married Unemployment and Sickness Beneficiaries with two dependent children

Private income

Increase in rate of
Benefit supplementary indexation allowance'

Increase in benefit free
area and taper range

Extension of health benefitst

Increase in family allowance

Total
Unemployment beneficiary

Sickness beneficiary

$ per week 0 6 8 10 18 20
40 50 55 60 80 100 130 150 171.60 175 176.80 180 183.80

$ per week 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 5.20 1.80

$ per week 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 1.00

$ per week
1.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 4.50 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 7.00 3.20

HC,HBt HC,HBt
HB HB HB HB HB

$ per week 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25 4.25

$ per week

$ per week

9.45

1.45

9.45

11.45

10.45

12.45

11.45

13.45

11.45

12.45

11.45

11.45

1.45

11.45

11.45

11.45

13.95

13.95

[6.45

16.45

16.45

16.45

16.45+HC

16.45+HB

16.45+HC

16.45+HB

16.45

16.45+HB

16.45

16.45+HB

13.05

13.05+HB

1l.25

1I.25+HB

7.45 7.45+HB

4.25

4.25

, Supplementary allowance is payable to sickness beneficiaries who pay rent or for lodgings and have been in receipt of benefit for a continuous period of six weeks. Assumes beneficiary is paying rent of$30 or more a week.
t A Health Benefits card is available to sickness beneficiaries and a Health Care card to unemployment beneficiaries.
t Eligibility for a Health Benefits card or Health Care card currently ceases when private income reaches $100 a week. From November all sickness beneficiaries will be eligible for a Health Benefits card, while eligibility of unemployment beneficiaries for a Health Care card will cease when private income reaches $130 a week.
Note: Maximum benefit rates will be increased again in May 1983 by the percentage increase in the CP[ between the June and December quarters 1982.

Mr WILSON-Tables to 12 show, in particular, the impact of our proposals on single income families, two income families and sole parent pensioners. The Government has also taken the opportunity to remove two unintended anomalies in the treatment of sole parent pensioners and beneficiaries. If supporting parent beneficiaries get maintenance of more than $6 a

week for a child, the excess will, from February 1983, be treated as the parent's own income for income test purposes. This will bring the treatment of maintenance for the children of supporting parent beneficiaries into line with that applying to widow pensioners. From November 1982 it will be no longer possible for a supporting parent beneficiary to be regarded as a dependant of

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 449

another person for the purpose of any payment of pension, benefit or allowance, although existing recipients will be exempted from the affect of the change. In addition, existing provisions in the Social Security Act concerning the requirement to take reasonable steps to pursue maintenance action will be reactivated.
Children's Senices
The Government also proposes to develop a rationalised and extended program of children's services. To this end there will be an increase of almost 50 per cent in funding for child care services under the Children's Services Program for 1982-83 from an expenditure of $47.56m in 1981-82 to $70.04m. Under the program the States and the Northern Territory will also receive $33.09m as a contribution to pre-school education. In future not less than 75 per cent of funds under the Children's Services Program, apart from the pre-school grants, will be spent on 'mainstream' services~that is, day care services for young children. The Budget allocation for the 1982-83 year will, broadly speaking, enable the Government to continue to support existing services and, where necessary, increase grants to maintain their viability; direct additional assistance to those people in the community who need it most, through revised funding arrangements for day care services ($6.86m has been specifically earmarked for this purpose); carry out a pilot testing of the feasibility of providing a subsidy to enable the children of parents with modest incomes to attend commercial child care centres ($200,000 has been allocated for this in 1982-83); fund new projects to meet high priority needs for children's services ($5m has been specially set aside for this purpose).
The revised funding arrangements for day care will ensure that economically needy families are not denied access to care because they cannot afford to pay the fees. The major aspects of the new funding package are: There will be an increase in the operational support grant for family day care schemes to $10 per week per equivalent full time child. This new rate will represent an approximate overall increase of 33.3 per cent over the amounts payable under the existing formula and will be paid from I July 1982. A new fee rebating arrangement for economically needy users will be introduced. This will replace existing special need arrangements where appropriate, and will provide each service with funds according to the need for fee rebates among its economically needy users. This will be known as the Special Economic Need Subsidy. New grants will be introduced to assist children with particular

development and cultural needs. These will be known as Supplementary Services Grants.
Housing Assistance
Another area where we have recognised the adverse impact of inflation is in housing. To tackle some of the problems here, we have increased our commitment to direct assistance to home buyers and improved funding arrangements for welfare housing. Our housing initiatives will not only provide significant additional assistance for families in need but will serve to boost activity and employment in the housing industry. The new arrangements the Treasurer has announced for taxation relief in respect of mortgage interest payments will be a significant measure to assist Australian home buyers and will extend the assistance already provided through the housing package announced in March this year.
Funding for the various components of that package in the 1982-83 Budget is as follows: A total of $147m has been allocated to meet commitments under the Homes Savings Grant Scheme and under the new Home Deposit Assistance Scheme which has replaced it. This compares with expenditure of $114.6m in 1981-82. The sum of $20m has been allocated for distribution to the States to fund the new mortgage and rent relief scheme which will help low income families who face severe financial difficulty with their mortgage or rent payments. The tax rebate for first home buyers announced in March is expected to cost some $1 OOm in 1982-83, although in a full year of operation it will cost some $230m.
There has also been an increase of 27 per cent in direct funding to the States and Northern Territory for welfare housing, with specific allocations earmarked for the high priority areas of housing for pensioners and Aboriginals. In addition to these increases in funding, the money available for the family crisis accommodation program, which provides short term emergency accommodation for families, has been doubled to $4m for 1982-83. A total of $6.7m has also been allocated in 1982-83 to subsidise new and existing services for homeless people under the Homeless Persons Assistance Program. Of this total, $3m has been earmarked for new capital projects. In addition, from I October 1982, the subsidy paid to funded organisations for food and accommodation costs will increase to $1.35 a person a day and the subsidy for a meal provided to a homeless person who does not stay overnight will rise to 45c.

450 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Social Welfare

Assistance for Pensioners
Adjustments to the pension system in conjunction with the adjustments to the income tax system announced by the Treasurer will benefit invalid pensioners, widow pensioners and supporting parent beneficiaries, as well as age pensioners. Tables II to 16 of the tables I referred to earlier show the impact of these adjustments on the disposable incomes of pensioners in different circumstances. Retired people on fixed incomes have been among the groups hardest hit by inflation in recent years, and many have suffered a significant erosion of their living standards. We have made a number of adjustments to the pension and benefits system designed to improve the position of such people, and also to act as an incentive for people who want to improve their position by savings or by casual employment. We have therefore liberalised the income test, both for the basic pension and for fringe benefits.
From November 1982, single pensioners will be able to have $30 of private income a week without affecting their entitlement to a full pension. Couples may have $50 a week. This compares with current rates of $20 a week for single people and $34.50 for couples. The Government has also decided to increase the income limit for pensioner health benefits to $54 a week (single) and $90 a week (married couples) to take effect from November 1982. A new uniform increased limit of $20 for each dependent child in a family, on top of the base limits, is also to apply. The additional income limits for children currently vary between $11 and $17 a week.
Pensioners who qualify for a pensioner health benefit card are entitled to a range of Commonwealth concessions, the most important being free medical and hospital treatment, free pharmaceuticals and telephone rental concessions. The Government was concerned that a number of pensioners had lost entitlement to fringe benefits, perhaps through no action of their own, because their incomes had risen above the limits set in 1979. It was also concerned that others might have placed themselves at a disadvantage by arranging their financial affairs so as to keep their incomes below the current limits and qualify for a card. The increase in the income limits should help people in both these categories. The higher limits will also apply to eligibility for pensioner funeral benefits.
In addition, all pensioners who are not eligible for fringe benefits, including all supporting parent beneficiaries and people over 70 who get an income-test-free pension, will be able to get pharmaceuticals at a new concessional rate of $2

under the proposed new three-tiered pharmaceutical benefits scheme to be announced by the Minister for Health. A further small but important change is that from November 1982 wife pensioners resident overseas may qualify for a widow's pension without having to return to Australia.
Supplementary Assistance
The Government has also decided to increase the maximum rate of supplementary assistance by a further $2. It will go up to $10 a week from November 1982. In particular all pensioners and long term sickness beneficiaries paying private rents above $26 a week and with private income below $16 a week will gain from this change. At the same time, to ensure that pensioners do not suffer any loss of entitlement to a pension or supplementary assistance, rent subsidies paid to private tenants by State public housing authorities will be excluded from the definition of income for pension, benefit and supplementary assistance income test purposes.
Increased Subsidies for Services for the Aged
We have also extended our assistance for aged people by increasing the money available for subsidies for accommodation for elderly people and services for old people living at home. Funds available in 1982-83 for capital grants under the aged or disabled persons accommodation program have been increased by more than 46 per cent, compared with expenditure of $56. 7m in 1981-82. This includes an additional allocation of $18m to expand the program in 1982-83, the last year of the current three-year funding period. The additional allocation will effectively allow the approval of approximately 100 new projects. Funding of $87m for 1983-84 under this program has also been approved.
Under the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act the maximum building grant has been increased to $14,000 for each single unit or person housed and $16,240 for double units. Under the Aged or Disabled Persons Hostels Act the maximum grant is now $21,000 per person housed. Both changes apply to contracts entered into on or after 1 July 1982. Subsidies for land components, furniture and so on remain unchanged. The subsidy paid to organisations caring for frail aged people in approved hostels will be increased to $30 a week for each eligible person from July 1982. This is an increase of 50 per cent on the present level, or 100 per cent since October 1980 when the rate was last increased from $15 to $20. It will help to ensure that a high standard of care continues to be provided.

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 451

Help for the Unemployed
In its overall Budget strategy, the Government has been concerned to introduce measures that will improve the employment prospects for many Australians. However, we are aware that unemployed people, and particularly those who are unemployed for long periods, have special difficulties. We have taken steps to help them by a series of initiatives that will raise the level of payments for many unemployment beneficiaries and increase the scope for them to obtain additional income and valuable work experience through casual employment. From November 1982, single unemployed people age 18 years and over who have no dependants will get a rise of $6.30 a week in their benefit, bringing their weekly rate to $64.40. Single unemployed people and sickness beneficiaries aged 16 and 17 years will also get a rise. They will get an extra $4, giving them a total of $40 a week.
At the same time, the regular automatic adjustments for CPI increases will mean a rise in the maximum single and married rates of benefits by $3.10 for a single person and $5.20 for a married couple. The new rates will be $77.25 a week for single people over 18 with dependants and $128.80 for a couple. To encourage unemployed people to take advantage of opportunities to earn extra income and gain job experience by casual work, they will also be allowed to earn more without losing their benefit. This will apply to people receiving sickness benefit as well as to the unemployed. The more generous income test will mean that everyone who receives unemployment or sickness benefit will be able to have $10 a week of private income without affecting their rate of benefit. The amount allowed currently is $3 a week for single people under 18 and $6 for everyone else.
People who have more than $10 a week of private income will lose 50c benefit for every $1 of extra income up to an income limit of $60. This represents a substantial increase in the amount of extra income that can be earned before the benefit is reduced by $1 for every $1 of income. At present the upper limit is only $40 for single people under 18 years and $50 for others.
Eligibility for health cover will also be extended. Unemployment and special beneficiaries will be eligible for heath care cards under the higher pensioner fringe benefits income limits I have already outlined. All sickness beneficiaries will be eligible for pensioner fringe benefits. Tables 17 to 22 of the tables I referred to earlier show the impact of welfare initiatives in this

Budget on the assistance received by unemployment and sickness beneficiaries in different circumstances with different levels of income.
The Government is also specially concerned about young Australians who are homeless because of family breakdown or violent family relationships, or for other reasons. Many of these young people are also unemployed and have particular difficulties in finding suitable accommodation. Long term measure to help in this area will be considered in the light of the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare's recent report on the problems of homeless youth and in the light of the final evaluation of the Youth Services Scheme. However, as an interim measure, $300,000 has been allocated in 1982-83 to help non-profit organisations provide accommodation or other assis~nce for homeless single people under 18 years of age who receive unemployment, sickness or special benefit. The Government hopes that an additional effort in this area will help to prevent many young people from falling into a pattern of homelessness and chronic poverty.
Assistance for Disabled People
The Government's wish to encourage people to help themselves by finding employment is also reflected in its proposals for assistance to disabled people. Our initiatives in this area have a basic orientation towards helping people to get into employment that is sound in economic terms and reflects the wishes of disabled people themselves, particularly as they were conveyed to the Government during the International Year of Disabled Persons in 1981. At the same time there are initiatives in this Budget that will be of assistance to all disabled people, whether in terms of improving their financial position or increasing the services available to them. Invalid pensioners, for example, will benefit directly from the package of adjustments to the pensioner system which I outlined when speaking of our initiatives to help aged people.
In addition, we have introduced a series of measures that will be of particular assistance to disabled people who are in the work force or who want to work. From April 1983 a mobility allowance of $10 a week will be introduced for severely handicapped people who are in employment or undertaking vocational training and who are unable to use public transport to travel to their work or training because of their disability. This benefit, which will cost some $18.2m in a full year, will be free of any income test or income tax. It will not, however, be available to those receiving the

452 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Social Welfare

benefit of sales tax exemptions on new motor vehicles. The new allowance recognises the additional travel costs incurred by disabled people who undertake employment or vocational training. The Government has decided to move as quickly as possible in this area to meet pressing needs but will keep the scheme under review to make sure it is effective in its operation. On a related front, we have also decided to carry out a pilot study to test alternative modes of attendant care assistance. Additional funds have been earmarked for this purpose and $100,000 will be available in 1982-83.
From March 1983, a new form of income maintenance payment will be introduced for people who undertake a Commonwealth rehabilitation program and who otherwise would be eligible for another social security pension or benefit. The new rehabilitation allowance will be at the same rates and under the same conditions as invalid pensions; that is, income-tested but income tax free and attracting the same fringe benefits. It may be paid during the rehabilitation program and for up to six months afterwards. The plans announced in June for the extension and development of the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service are also to be set in train during 1982-83.
During IYDP the Government also had put before it the views of numerous invalid pensioners who feel that existing invalid pension arrangements prevented them attempting to take up employment. The Government wishes to give as much help as possible to invalid pensioners who feel able to make the transfer to open employment. A major concern is the loss of pensioner health benefits. To meet this concern we have decided to grant health care cards to people who give up an invalid pension or sheltered employment allowance to take up open employment. The card will last for 12 months and will not be subject to an income test. The Health Insurance Act will be amended to enable this provision to be introduced from 1 January 1983. This decision should improve incentives for invalid pensioners and people in sheltered employment to attempt to enter, or to re-enter, the open work force. It will also protect them against any above average health costs during the period of adjusting to employment. As health care card holders they will be eligible for free medical and hospital treatment. They will also qualify for concessional charges for pharmaceuticals, because the Government has decided to introduce a concessional $2 rate of contribution for health care card holders under its proposed three-tiered pharmaceutical benefits scheme.

Their other major concern is that, should their efforts to retain employment be unsuccessful because of their disability, the very fact of having made the effort might disqualify them from regaining their pension. Therefore as a further means of encouraging invalid plo!nsioners to take up employment where possible, the Director General of Social Security will be arranging for them to be reconsidered for a pension immediately if they have to give up work within 12 months. In some cases the pension will be granted again without the need for a medical review, and in others they will be given priority in arranging such a review.
From November 1982 the incentive allowance paid to people in sheltered employment will be increased to $10 a week. In addition, from February 1983, eligibility for incentive allowance will be extended to invalid pensioners undertaking activity therapy and adult training centre programs under the Handicapped Persons Welfare Program. In all the above cases the incentive allowance, unlike the supplementary assistance which it replaces, will be paid regardless of the income a person receives or rent paid. These measures remove the anomalies that previously existed in the treatment of handicapped people attending these different categories of special services. Another change will affect people who get a sheltered employment allowance. Currently they enjoy a more liberal income test for fringe benefits, particularly if they are single. It is not proposed to increase the current income limit for single people, which at $68 a week will still be $14 higher than the general limit proposed. However, for married people the income limit will increase from $73 to $90, the same as for other married pensioners.
To improve incentives for invalid pensioners to participate in activity therapy and adult training centres, the higher income limit of $68 a week for fringe benefits will also apply, from November 1982, to single invalid pensioners participating in the programs of such centres. Families with a severely handicapped child who is cared for at home will be assisted by an increase in handicapped child's allowance by $12 a month to $85 a month from November 1982. Increased funds are to be provided to subsidise building projects under the handicapped persons welfare program, which makes grants to non-profit organisations providing prescribed services for disabled people such as training, activity therapy, sheltered employment and associated residential accommodation. Details are provided in the Minister for Social Security's news release of II August 1982. The increases mean that, during the financial years

Social Welfare

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 453

1982-83 and 1983-84, some $37m will be available to subsidise capital projects, of which about $21m will be ear-marked for entirely new projects. In addition there will be a new provision for new services not requiring building subsidies and $500,000 will be available for this in 1982-83. The money available for funding recurrent expenditure such as salaries, rent, equipment, minor works and the payment of Handicapped Children's Benefit and for upgrading services provided under the program has also been increased.

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (10.37)-At this late hour of the evening there are only two brief observations that I wish to make on the ministerial statement. Firstly, I think it should be observed that nothing concentrates the mind of this Government so wonderfully on the needs of the poor as the nearness of an election. Secondly, the figures given in the statement clearly underwrite the accuracy of the costing of the Australian Labor Party's health plan. I seek leave to continue my remarks later.

Conclusion
In summary our welfare Budget for 1982-83 has addressed many areas of need within the welfare system, particularly those that have been exacerbated in recent years by the effects of inflation. Addressing those problems has meant that the total expenditure in the welfare area for 1982-83 will be close to $12 billion. Some will inevitably see this as inadequate; others will see it as extravagant. At the beginning of this statement. I provided figures showing how the increase in total estimated expenditure for 1982-83 is made up. However, in looking at the total size of the welfare budget it should be borne in mind that $1 ,360m for family allowances, which shows up as welfare expense, could more correctly be presented as a reduction in taxation for families with children.
Like the dependent spouse rebate and the former dependent child tax rebates, family allowances provide an offset to tax in recognition of the lower capacity to pay tax of taxpayers with dependants. For this reason, the Government decided to increase the rates of family allowances for first and second children this year as part of its review of the personal income tax system. The cost of this initiative-$250m in 1982-83-is a substantial component of the overall increase in expenditure in the welfare area this year. I believe that we have spent the additional funds allocated to welfare wisely-on initiatives that, as well as being on a sound welfare basis, have many spin-off benefits in encouraging people to do more to help themselves, providing incentives for pensioners and beneficiaries to make better use of their savings, and providing a significant boost to the housing industry. I hope this Budget will be welcomed as a constructive attempt to come to grips with the problems our community faces in 1982. I present the following paper:
Social Welfare Objectives, Ministerial Statement, 17 August 1982.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.

Leave granted; debate adjourned.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS FREIGHT SUBSIDY SCHEME
Ministerial Statement
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce)-by leave-As the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has announced the Government has decided to review the Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy Scheme. This review will commence immediately and will enable the Government to examine the objectives of the scheme and options for ensuring that it is not subject to abuse. The Government's objective in introducing the scheme was to assist in achieving equality in the price of petroleum products between city and country locations.
Under present arrangements the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority determines maximum justified wholesale prices for each of the major oil companies. These comprise a base wholesale price-the capital city price-plus a maximum justified freight differential for various country locations. The operation of the freight subsidy scheme ensures that maximum wholesale prices in country areas are not more than 0.44c per litre above the maximum capital city prices. Despite the freight subsidy scheme variations exist between retail prices for petroleum products in various localities. While the scheme has ensured that freight is not a significant cause of these variations, there are other factors at work including differences in State fuel taxes, discounting and differences in reseller margins between capital city and country areas, reflecting differences in throughput volumes and the degree of competition. These factors will of course be taken into consideration in the review.
Since the scheme was introduced the Government has become concerned that it is being abused by certain parties. Investigations have led to some successful prosecutions for fraudulent claims, while there have been allegations that the scheme

454 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Budgetfor New Parliament House

is being manipulated in other ways by certain distributors for gain. The Government has also become concerned at the escalating costs of the scheme, which rose to $147m in 1981-82 compared with a Budget estimate of $129m for that year. As the Treasurer has also announced, pending the outcome of the review, the scheme will be amended to subsidise freight costs in excess of Ic per litre, instead of the 0.44c per litre which previously applied. Although this will mean a slight rise in the freight component paid by consumers, the scheme will continue to make a significant contribution to reducing freight differentials. I present the following paper:
Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy SchemeMinisterial Statement, 17 August 1982.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
UPDATED BUILDING BUDGET FOR NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Ministerial Statement
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-by leave-For the information of honourable members. I wish to announce that the updated building budget for the design and construction of the new Parliament House is $370.4m at March 1982 prices. It is the Government's intention to report periodically to Parliament on the updated budget for the new building, and honourable members will recall that in September 1981, when this House approved the latest declared stage, the building budget was $303.9m atJune 1981 prices.
In accordance with the Government's determination to contain costs on the project, the Parliament House Construction Authority has succeeded in containing the increase in budget figures between June 1981 and March 1982 to the inflationary effects of movements in the cost of labour and materials. I, therefore, wish to stress that the budget originally approved by Parliament, plus approved variations amounting to only 2.9 per cent, is being maintained in real terms. I present the following paper:
Updated Building Budget for New Parliament HouseMinisterial Statement, 17 August 1982.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
TARIFF PROPOSALS
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the ~apital Territory and Minister Assisting the MinIster for Industry and Commerce) (10.44)- On

behalf of the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) I move:
Customs Tariff Proposals No. 18 (1982) and Excise Tariff Proposals No.2 (1982).
Excise Tariff Proposals No.2 and Customs Tariff Proposals No. 18 which I have just tabled introduce certain tariff changes foreshadowed by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his Budget Speech this evening. The Proposals increase the duties of excise and customs on beer, certain manufactured tobacco products and certain refined petroleum products. The increases operate from 8 o'clock this evening. A summary of these alterations is being circulated to honourable members. I commend the Proposals to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
House adjourned at 10.46 p.m.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 17 August 1982, pursuant to statute:
Aboriginal Councils and Associations ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 146.
Air Force Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos \04, \09.
Atomic Energy Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 158.
Audit Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 148.
Australian Antarctic Territory ActOrdinance1982No. I-Migratory Birds (Amendment).
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 113.
Australian Citizenship Act-RegulationStatutory Rules 1982, No. 118.
Australian National University Act-StatutesNo. 152-Vice-Chancellorship Amendment No. 4. No. 153-Deputy Vice-Chancellorship Amendment No.4. No. 154Membership of the Council Amendment No.3. No. ISS-Admission to Status (The Faculties) Amendment No. I.
Banking Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 144.
Bounty (Agricultural Tractors) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 134.
Bounty (Injection-moulding Equipment) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 176.
Bounty (Paper) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 141.
Bounty (Penicillin) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 116.
Bounty (Ships) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 192.
Canberra College of Advanced Education ActStatute-No. 47-Courses and Awards Amendment 1982.
Canned Fruits Marketing Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 177.

Papers

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 455

Christmas Island Act-OrdinancesI982No.5-Associations Incorporation (Amendment) . No.6-Phosphate Mining Company of Christmas Island Limited Provident Fund. No.7-Medical Practitioners Ordinance.
Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act-OrdinancesI982-
No.4-Local Government (Amendment). No.5-Local Government (Amendment) (No.
2). Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and
Retirement) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos. 106, 126. Commonwealth Teaching Service ActDeterminations-1982Nos. 1,2, 3. Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 103. Companies Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos. 120,121. Companies (Acquisition of Shares) ActRegulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 130. Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) ActRegulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 131. Companies (Fees) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 129. Companies (Transitional Provisions) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 122. Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 117. Conciliation and Arbitration ActAustralian Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission-Orders accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with the law-
1981C Nos. 1799 and 5588-Royal Australian Nursing Federation and another. C No. 5564-A.C.T. Teachers' Federation.
1982-C No. 492-A.C.T. Teachers'
Federation. t
(tNot accompanied by statement) Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos. lOS,
108. Customs Act - Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982.
Nos. 102, 140, 169, 170, 171. Customs Act and Commerce (Trade Descriptions)
Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982. No. 114. Customs Tariff Act-OrdersDeveloping Country-Nos. 4, 5,6 (1982). Dairy Industry Stabilization Levy ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 159. Dairying Industry Research and Promotion Levy Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos. 135,160. Defence ActDeterminations-1982-
No. 20-Solomon Islands Allowance. No. 21-Expense Allowance Payable on Pur-
chase or Sale of a Dwelling. No. 22-Recreation Leave. No. 23-Special Allowance for Medical
Officers and Dental Officers. No. 24Higher Duties and Other Allowance. No. 25-Solomon Islands Allowances. No. 26-Uniform Maintenance Allowance
(Amendment). No. 27 - Flying Allowance. No. 28-Entertainment Allowance.

Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. I 10, 190. Defence Act, Naval Defence Act and Air Force
Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 133. Defence Amendment Act-Interim Determinations-Statutory Rules 1982. Nos. 165, 166. 172, 173, 174, 182, 183. 184, 185, 186. Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos. 188,189. Defence (Re-establishment) Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982, No. 112. Distillation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 139. Excise Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 138. Export Expansion Grants Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982. No. 143. Fisheries ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982. No. 127. Health Insurance Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982. Nos. 156.157. 191. Heard Island and McDonald Islands ActOrdinance-1982-No. I-Migratory Birds (Amendment) . Income Tax Assessment Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982. Nos. 115. 128. International Organisations (Privileges and Immunities) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982. Nos. III. 136.150.151.152.153.154.155. Judiciary Act-Rules of Court-Statutory Rules 1982. Nos. 119. 164. Lands Acquisition ActLand acquired for-
Australian Atomic Energy Commission purposes-Lucas Heights. N.S.W.
Defence purposesHolesworthy. N.S.W. Woolloomoolo. N.S.W.
Telecommunication purposesJika Jika. Vic. Moyston. Vic.
Statements (14) of lands. etc.- acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (I).
Live-stock Export Charge Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982. No. 162.
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982. No. 161.
Maternity Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982. No. 163.
National Companies and Securities Commission Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982. Nos. 123.168.
National Health Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982. No. 179.
Naval Defence Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982. Nos. 132. 175.
Navigation Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982. No. 180.
Postal Services ActAustralian Postal Commission-By-LawsPostal-I 982-Amendment No.2 Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982. No. 147.
Public Service ActAppointments-Department of Employment and Industrial RelationsL. J. Coe. K.J. Khan. Y. Maymuru. Determinations-1982-Nos. 2. 3. 4.5.6.7.8,9.

456 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982
Public Service Arbitration ActAustralian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission - Determinations accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with the law-1982No. 151 - Customs Officers Association of Australia, Fourth Division (C No. 1367/81). No. 155-- Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers) (C No. 1574/81). No.3 17 -Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service (CNos. 1541/81, 1542/8 I). Public Service Arbitrator-Determinations accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with the law-1981 Nos. 150 and 204-Australasian Society of Engineers and ot hers. t No. 350-Administrative and Clerical Officers Association, Commonwealth
Public Service and others. t
1982-Nos. 108 and 109-- Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers). No. I 10Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service. No. I I I-Association of Professional Engineers, Australia. No. I 12Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service. No. I 13-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers). No. I 14Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of Australia. No. I 15-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers). No. 116-Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others. No. I 18-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association. No. I 19Electrical Trades Union of Australia. No. 120Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia. No. 121 -Commonwealth Medical Officers Association. No. I 22-Australian Journalists Association. No. 123Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service. No. 124-Administrative and Clerical Officers Association, Commonwealth Public Service and others. No. 125Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers). No. 126Printing and Kindred Industries Union. No. 127Association of Professional Engineers, Australia. No. 128 - Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service. No. 129-Administrative and Clerical Officers Association, Commonwealth Public Service. No. 130-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association. No. 131 - Telecommunication Technical Officers Association.

Papers
No. I 32-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
Nos. 133 and 134Hospital Employees Federation of Australia.
No. 135-CSIRO Officers Association and Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization Technical Association.
No. I 36-Printing and Kindred Industries Union.
No. I 37-Australian Government Lawyers Association.
No. I 38-Federal Firefighters Union. No. l39-Federated Miscellaneous
Workers Union. No. 140-Administrative and Clerical
Officers Association, Commonwealth Public Service and others. t No. l4l-Australian Telecommunications Employees Association. No. 142-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association. Nos. 143 and l44-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and others. No. l45-Commonwealth Works Supervisors Association. No. l46-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers). No. I47-Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others. No. l48-Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia. No. l49-Federated Clerks Union of Australia. No. 150-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees. No. 152-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).t No. l53-Australian Journalists Association. No. 154-Transport Workers Union of Australia. No. 156-Royal Australian Nursing Federation. No. 157-Australian Journalists Association. Nos. 158 and 159-Association of Professional Engineers, Australia and others. No. l60-Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service and another. No. 161 - Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service. No. 162-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and others. No. 163Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service and another. No. I 64-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and others. Nos. 165 and 166Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service. No. 167-Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service and another. No. I 68-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and others.

Papers

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 457

No. 169Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service.
Nos. 170 and 171-CSIRO Officers Association and another.
No. I72-CSIRO Officers Association. No. I73-Association of Professional En-
gineers, Australia and another. No. 174-Amalgamated Metal Workers
and Shipwrights Union and others. No. I75--Australian Public Service As-
sociation (Fourth Division Officers). No. 176-Merchant Service Guild of
Australia. No. I 77-Association of Draughting,
Supervisory and Technical Employees. No. 178-Australian Public Service As-
sociation (Fourth Division Officers). No. I79-Australian Workers Union. Nos. 180 and 181-Australian Public Ser-
vice Association (Fourth Division Officers). No. 182-Royal Australian Nursing Federation. No. I83-Australian Workers Union. Nos. 184 and I85-Hospital Employees Federation of Australia. No. 186-Professional Para-medical Officers Association (Commonwealth Public Service).
No. 187Professional Officers Association. Australian Public Service and others.
No. 188Australian Broadcasting Commission Senior Officers Association and another.
No. 189-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 190-Hospital Employees Federation of Australia.
Nos. 191 and 192Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service.
Nos. 193 and 194-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
Nos. 195 and I96-- Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 197-Australian Journalists Association.
Nos. 198 and 199-- Professional Radio and Electronics Insitute of Australasia.
No. 200-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 20 I-Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia.
No. 202--Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees.
Nos. 203 and 204--Hospital Employees Federation of Australia.
No. 205-Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 206-Australian Public Service Artisans' Association.
No. 207-Australian Capital Territory Medical Officers Association and others.t
No. 208-Merchant Service Guild of Australia and others.
No. 209-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association.
No. 210-Australian Journalists Association.

No. 21 I-Australian Government Lawyers Association.
Nos. 212 and 213-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 214-Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization Technical Association.
Nos. 215 and 216-Printing and Kindred Industries Union.
No. 217-Australian Journalists Association.
No. 218-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
Nos. 219 to 222Hospital Employees Federation of Australia.
No. 223-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 224-Civil Air Operations Officers Association of Australia.
No. 225-Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australiasia.
No. 226Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service.
No. 227-Hospital Employees Federation of Australia.
No. 228-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 229-Federated Storeman and Packers Union of Australia.
No. 230-Commonwealth Medical Officers Association.
No. 231-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 232-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees.
No. 233Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service.
No. 234-Printing and Kindred Industries Union.
No. 235-Association of Professional Engineers, Australia.
Nos. 236 and 237-Royal Australian Nursing Federation.
No. 238-Civil Air Operations Officers Association of Australia.
No. 239Transport Workers Union of Australia.
No. 240-Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of Australia.
No. 241-Repatriation Department Medical Officers Association.
Nos. 242 to 244-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 245-Australian Broadcasting Commission Senior Officers Association and another.
No. 246-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 247-Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service.
No. 248-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 249-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees.
No. 250-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 251-External Plant Officers Association.
No. 252-Customs Officers Association of Australia, Fourth Division.

458 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982
No. 253~Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 254~Australian Public Service Artisans Association.
No. 255~Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia.
No. 256~Hospital Employees Federation of Australia.
No. 257~Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia.
No. 258~Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and another.
No. 259~Electrical Trades Union of Australia.
No. 260~Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and another.
No. 261~Australian Public Service Artisans' Association.
No. 262~Australian Workers Union. No. 263~ Vehicle Builders Employees
Federation of Australia. No. 264~Federated Storemen and
Packers Union of Australia. No. 265~Amalgamated Metal Workers
and Shipwrights Union and others. No. 266~ Professional Para-Medical
Officers Association (Commonwealth Public Service). No. 267~Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia. No. 268~Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia and another. No. 269~Hospital Employees Federation of Australia. No. 270~Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia. No. 271~Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union of Australia. No. 272~Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia. No. 273~Federated Furnishing Trade Society of Australasia. No. 274~Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners of Australia and others. No. 275~Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others. No. 276~Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia. No. 277~Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees. No. 278~Amalgamated Society of Carpenters and Joiners of Australia and others. No. 279~Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and another. No. 280~Australian Workers Union. No. 281 ~Amalganiated Society of Carpenters and Joiners of Australia. Nos. 282 and 283~ Electrical Trades Union of Australia. No. 284~Australian Workers Union. Nos. 285 and 286~Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others. No. 287~Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers). No. 288~Commonwealth Foremen's Association of Australia (Australian Public Service).

Papers
No. 289~Australian Building Construction Employees and Builders Labourers Federation.
No. 290~Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service.
No. 291~Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 292~Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association.
Nos. 293 to 295~Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 296~Federated Clerks Union of Australia.
Nos. 297 and 298~Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
Nos. 299 and 300~Federated Liquor and Allied Industries Employees Union of Australia.
No. 301~Australian Institute of Marine and Power Engineers.
No. 302~Australian Public Service Artisans Association and another.
No. 303~Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees.
Nos. 304 to 310~Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 311~Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 312~Federated Firefighters' Union. Nos. 313 to 316~Amalgamated Metal
Workers and Shipwrights Union and others. No. 318~Administrative and Clerical Officers Association, Commonwealth Public Service. No. 319~Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association. No. 320~Civil Air Operations Officers Association. No. 321~Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers). No. 322~Royal Australian Nursing Federation. No. 323 and 324-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers). No. 325-Federated Liquor and Allied Industries Employees Union of Australia. No. 326-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association. No. 327~Transport Workers Union of Australia. No. 328-Federated Storemen and Packers Union of Australia. No. 329~Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association. No. 330-Australian Theatrical and Amusement Employees Association. No. 331~Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others. No. 332-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service and others. No. 333-Civil Air Operation Officers Association of Australia. No. 334-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees and others.

Papers

17 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 459

No. 335-Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 336-Australian Journalists Association.
No. 337-Administrative and Clerical Officers Association, Commonwealth Public Service and others.
No. 338-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association.
Nos. 339 and 340-Royal Australian Nursing Federation.
Nos. 341 to 343-Hospital Employees Federation of Australia.
No. 344-Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australia.
No. 345-Clothing and Allied Trades Union of Australia.
No. 346-- Printing and Kindred Industries Union.
No. 347-Administrative and Clerical Officers Association, Commonwealth Public Service.
Nos. 348 to 352-Australian Public Service Artisans Association.
No. 353-- Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australia.
No. 354-Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 355-Clothing and Allied Trades Union of Australia.
No. 356-Professional Officers Association, Australian Public Service and another.
No. 357 -Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association.
No. 358-Hospital Employees Federation of Australia.
Nos. 359 to 362-Australian Public Service Association (Fourth Division Officers).
No. 363--Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others.
No. 364Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia.
No. 365-Administrative and Clerical Officers Association, Commonwealth Public Service and others.
No. 366-Amalgamated Metal Workers' and Shipwrights Union and others.
Nos. 367 and 368-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and Technical Employees.
No. 369-Clothing and Allied Trades Union of Australia.
No. 370-Australian Licensed Aircraft Engineers Association.
Nos. 371 to 373-Australian Journalists Association. t
No. 374-Association of Professional Engineers, Australia.
No. 375-CSIRO Laboratory Craftsmen Association.
No. 376-Federated Clerks Union of Australia.
No. 377-Administrative and Clerical Officers' Association, Commonwealth Public Service.
No. 378-Australian Broadcasting Commission Staff Association.
(tNot accompanied by statement)

Quarantine Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 178.
Remuneration Tribunals ActRegulation-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos 101, 187. Remuneration Tribunal-Determinations1982/3-General Manager of the Australian National Railways Commission and holders of public offices on other bodies. 1982/4-Holders of public offices in the First Division of the Australian Public Service and other bodies. I982/5-Holders of public offices in the Legislative Assembly of Norfolk Island.
Sales Tax Assessment Acts (Nos I to 9)Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 167.
Seat of Government (Administration) ActOrdinances-1982No. 14-Remuneration (Amendment). No. I5-Scaffolding and Lifts (Amendment). No. 16-Games, Wagers and Betting-houses. No. 17-Lotteries (Amendment). No. 18-Pool Betting (Amendment). No. 19Remand Centres (Amendment). No. 20-Australian Mutual Provident Society (Repeal). No. 21-Fire Brigade (Administration) (Amendment) . No. 22-Nature Conservation (Amendment). No. 23-Egg Industry (Amendment). No. 24-Seat of Government (Administration) (Amendment). No. 25-Water Rates (Amendment). No. 26-Cigarette Containers (Labelling) (Amendment) . No. 27-Trustee (Amendment). No. 28-lnterpretation (Amendment). No. 29-Dentists Registration (Amendment). No. 30-Medical Practitioners Registration (Amendment) . No. 31-0ptometrists (Amendment). No. 32-Pharmacy (Amendment). No. 33-Veterinary Surgeons Registration (Amendment). No. 34-Seat of Government (Administration) (Amendment) (No.2). No. 35-Companies Auditors and Liquidators Disciplinary Board. No. 36-Foreign Judgments (Reciprocal Enforcement) (Amendment). No. 37-National Exhibition Centre Trust. No. 38-0rdinances Revision (Companies Amendment) . No. 39-Health Commission (Amendment). No. 40-Dentists Registration (Amendment) (No.2). No. 41Medical Practitioners Registration (Amendment) (No.2). No. 42-Nurses Registration (Amendment). No. 43-0ptometrists (Amendment) (No.2). No. 44-Pharmacy (Amendment) (No.2). No. 45-Physiotherapists Registration (Amendment). No. 46-Poisons and Dangerous Drugs (Amendment) . No. 47-Poisons and Narcotic Drugs (Amendment). No. 48Veterinary Surgeons Registration (Amendment) (No.2). No. 49-Motor Traffic (Amendment) (No.2). No. 50-Motor Traffic (Amendment) (No.3). No. 51-Unclaimed Moneys (Amendment).

460 REPRESENTATIVES 17 August 1982

Papers

No. 52Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Amendment).
No. 53-Money Lenders (Amendment). No. 54-Court of Petty Sessions (Civil
Jurisdiction). No. 55-Small Claims (Amendment). No. 56-City Area Leases (Amendment). No. 57-Child Welfare (Amendment).
Regulations-1982No.7 (Health Commission Ordinance). No.8 (House of Assembly Ordinance). No.9 (Health Commission Ordinance). No. 10 (Building and Services Ordinance). No. 11 (Nature Conservation Ordinance). No. 12 (Rabbit Destruction Ordinance). No. 13 (Egg Industry Ordinance). No. 14 (Public Baths and Public Bathing Ordinance) . No. 15 (Surveyors Ordinance). No. 16 (Business Names Ordinance). No. 17 (Associations Incorporation Ordinance) . No. 18 (Building and Services Ordinance). No. 19 (Dentists Registration Ordinance). No. 20 (Optometrists Ordinance). No. 21 (Pharmacy Ordinance). Nos 22 and 23 (Medical Practitioners Registration Ordinance). Nos 24 and 25 (Veterinary Surgeons Registration Ordinance). Nos 26, 27 and 28 (Public Health Ordinance). No. 29 (Cemeteries Ordinance). Nos. 30 and 3I (Court of Petty Sessions (Civil Jurisdiction) Ordinance). No. 32 (Workmen's Compensation Ordinance) .
Securities Industry Act-Regualtions-Statutory Rules 1982, Nos 124, 125.
Shipping Registration Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 181.
Spirits Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 137.

States Grants (Petroleum Products) ActAmendment of the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Victoria and Western Australia, dated 29 May 1982. South Australia, Victoria and Western Australia, dated 25 June 1982. New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia, dated 12 July 1982. '
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act-Statement of particulars of direction given by Minister under sub-section 15 (2).
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 145.
Telecommunications Act-Australian Telecommunications CommissionBy-lawsTelecommunications (Charging Zones and Charging Districts)-Amendments Nos 21, 22,23,24. Telecommunications (Community Calls)Amendments Nos. 18, 19.
Territory Authorities (Financial Provisions) ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 149.
Trade Commissioners Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982, No. 107.
War Graves Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982,No.142.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Departments
Mr Milton to ask Mr Speaker-
When can I expect an answer to my Request for Detailed Information concerning the recommendations of the Presiding Officers' Accommodation Advisory Committees, asked on 2 June 1981.


