House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 129, 1982 Thursday, 14 October 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Notices ofMotion

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2029

Thursday, 14 October 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers.
GOVERNMENT AIRCRAFT FACTORIES Notice of Motion
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
(I) That the following matters be referred to the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence for examination and report as a matter of urgency by its sub-committee on Defence:
The Government's decision to award contracts for supply of autoclaves to the Government Aircraft Factories to a company based in the United States of America rather than to a competitive Australian company, and, in particular, whether-
(a) the tender accepted met tender specification, or contained items of a lower standard than specified;
(b) the Australian tenderer was asked for an alternative tender based on similar specifications;
(c) the estimator for the Australian company was told that the lower standard control system, included in the US. tender, would not be accepted, and
(d) the US. tenderer was advantaged in any way.
(2) That contracts for the supply of autoclaves to the Government Aircraft Factories be suspended until the committee has reported to the Parliament.
1982 NOBEL PEACE PRIZE Notice of Motion
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House notes that the 1982 Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded to Mrs Alva Myrdal of Sweden and Mr Adolfo Garcia Robles of Mexico for their work in promoting nuclear disarmament and for securing agreements that Northern Europe and Latin America, respectively, should be regarded as nuclear weapon free zones, congratulates the recipients and pledges its support for the cause they have espoused.
EMPLOYMENT
Notice of Motion Mr MILDREN (Ballarat)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House, noting the concerns of organisations trying to plan employment projects in regional areas, calls upon the Government to require the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations to re-instate the collection and publication of detailed unemployment figures on a regional basis.
EDUCATION Notice of Motion Mr MAHER (Lowe)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) condemns the Government's failure to allocate adequate capital funds and recurrent grants to state,

Catholic and non-systemic schools within the electorate of Lowe so as to provide proper facilities and sufficient teachers for the education of the pupils enrolled therein, many of whom are from families in which English is a second language, and
(2) calls upon the Government to allot funds fairly to the New South Wales Government, and the Schools Commission, to end discrimination against these needy schools.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAX EVASION LEGISLATION
Mr HOWE-I direct my question to the Treasurer. In Parliament yesterday the Treasurer criticised the Leader of the Opposition for allegedly 'trying to create the impression that in some way Mr Reid had been associated with that kind of tax avoidance activity that was being outlawed by our legislation'. Was not the deal set up between Mr Reid, other directors and the Maher organisation in fact a dry Slutzkin? Did the Treasurer in his statement of 27 June 1982 say that the Part IVA amendments to the Income Tax Assessment Act introduced in May 1981 had the effect that 'persons who stand to profit most by company stripping activities-the vendor shareholders-also stand to pay heavily for any involvement in such activities'? Did the Treasurer continue: 'That proposition applies to both bottom-of-the-harbour strips and strips of taxed company profits,' that is, dry Slutzkins and wet Slutzkins?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Batman has quoted enough. He should now conclude his question.
Mr HOWE-I shall come to the question, Mr Speaker. Since the Part IVA legislation in 1981 made no difference between the vendor shareholders in both types of transactions, why is the Government treating Mr Horgan in one way and Mr Reid in another?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member's question so far is in order. The honourable gentleman is now suggesting the answer and is providing argument in the question. So far as it has gone, the question is in order. If he wishes to proceed further I will have to rule it out of order.
Mr HOWARD-There will be ample opportunities during the debate on the legislation for lengthy explanations of why the Government takes, in terms of recoupment, a different view in respect of what the honourable member described as a dry Slutzkin arrangement and what his Leader and others have described as a wet Slutzkin arrangement. One simple difference is that in the case of the latter arrangement there

2030 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Questions without Notice

has been, at the end of the chain of transactions, an illegal evasion of tax. In the case of the former arrangement that has not occurred. I can state quite unequivocally that I believe both Mr Reid and Mr Horgan have been the subject of shameful smear and abuse of parliamentary privilege by the Opposition.
URANIUM ENRICHMENT
Mr WHITE-My question is directed to the Minister for Trade and Resources. What is the situation regarding the establishment of a uranium enrichment industry in Australia?
Mr ANTHONY-I answered a question on this matter yesterday. I said that UEGA-the Uranium Enrichment Group of Australia-made recommendations that a certain type of technology be accepted and that a feasibility study be carried out on the commercial practicability of it. Two locations were suggested; one near Brisbane and the other in South Australia. I pointed out that enormous benefits could be gained both by way of the increased value of our exports and by more job opportunities. I note that the Australian Labor Party is violently opposed to any further development of the uranium industry in Australia. Indeed it wants to close down the existing mining operations in Australia. It once had a policy of encouraging enrichment in Australia, but that seems to have changed. No doubt this will be a principal facet of the South Australian election debate. If the Labor Party were to be elected in South Australia-heaven forbid-there would certainly be no chance of South Australia being selected as a site for a uranium enrichment industry, and in that case, by default, I imagine the industry would go to Queensland. It means that the South Australian people would be deprived of a massive amount of investment and, of course, thousands of jobs.
TAX AVOIDANCE AND EVASION
Mr MILTON-Has the Treasurer's attention been drawn to reports that six companies of which the Chairman of the Australian Film Commission was a director were sold to tax scheme promoter Brian Maher? Has the Treasurer established an inquiry into these transactions, or has Sir James been treated differently from Mr Denis Horgan?
Mr HOWARD-I understand that Sir James, who has given very distinguished service to this Government and to the country as Chairman of the Australian Film Commission, stood aside from those positions. I think I can say, as I think can also be said in relation to other people who have been mentioned in this House this morning,

that the question is the latest in a long pattern of conduct on the part of the Opposition. It has more than a smell of persecution and abuse of parliamentary privilege about it. I say again to the honourable gentleman, as I have said before in respect of other practices and other activities, that the Government has decided to introduce special legislation to recover tax that was evaded in certain circumstances. That legislation will fall where it may. Irrespective of who is liable, they will be obliged to pay under that legislation. But that legislation does not of itself connote any particular offence or the creation of any offence; it merely imposes a taxation liability. I believe that many of the things that have been said in this place and outside this place about the conduct of people who may in one way or another have been involved in those transactions have gone beyond the bounds of reasonableness.
VISITORS AND PROHIBITED IMMIGRANTS: ILLEGAL WORK
Mr DRUMMOND-Can the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs advise whether his Department is achieving any success with his announced crackdown on visitors and prohibited immigrants who are working illegally in Australia?
Mr HODGES-Since I announced the crackdown some two months ago I have been greatly encouraged by the support of the community at large and, in particular, the business community. Indeed, there have been very few criticisms of the program that has been undertaken by my Department. I might say that even members of the Opposition have been very supportive of the program. I emphasise that no person who is in this country legally has anything to fear as a result of the crackdown that is being undertaken by my officers. Prohibited immigrants detected to date include people from all countries-from the United Kingdom, the United States of America, Canada, all European countries, Asian countries and the Pacific region. So in that respect the crackdown is non-discriminatory. I point out to the House that I believe my Department is doing an excellent job with limited staff. I have made application to the Public Service Board for increased staff. Some increases have been approved and recruitment will take place in the near future.
During the month of September 207 employers were visited. I point out to the House that the program revolves around visits to employers as from time to time we receive information from various members of the public. Tens of thousands of employers are to be visited. Those that we have

Questions without Notice

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2031

visited have been extremely helpful. Some 216 prohibited immigrants were apprehended during the month of September; 85 departed under supervision; 66 prohibited immigrants were deported; and 90 overstayers departed voluntarily. I point out to honourable members that this is an increase in excess of 100 per cent on the number usually detected in a normal month's activities. I say to overstayed visitors who in effect, become prohibited immigrants, that they should feel free to purchase an airline ticket and depart of their own free will. They will not be apprehended or harassed at the airports by officers of my Department, the Bureau of Customs or the Australian Federal Police, or by any other detection agency officers.
I am pleased to report that the program is proceeding smoothly and successfully. In conclusion I say that basically it has been instituted not only because it is an upholding of the law but also to protect, as far as possible, our existing migration program.
FOREIGN INVESTMENT REVIEW BOARD: NEW MERCHANT BANK
Mr HOLDING-I direct my question to the Treasurer. I hope he will not think I am persecuting anybody if I ask him whether it is a fact that the Foreign Investment Review Board has approved the establishment of a new merchant bank-the Indosuez Bank-and that the Chairman of the new bank is to be Sir William Pettingell who, by a stroke of singular good fortune, also happens to be the Deputy Chairman of the Foreign Investment Review Board. Does he acknowledge the extraordinary conflict of interest which arises in circumstances like these, even if the person concerned were to stand aside for the particular inquiry in which he had a personal interest? If not, does it mean that the Treasurer would accept the proposition that a serving trade union official could reasonably sit on the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to determine pay and industrial issues provided the unions appearing before the Commission did not include the union which the official currently represented? If the Treasurer does not accept that analogous position, why does he make such an extraordinary distinction in favour of corporate sector personal interests?
Mr HOWARD-It is true that, I think last night, I approved the establishment of a new merchant bank under the name mentioned by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports. I will accept that it is true, if the honourable gentleman says so-I am sure he would have checked out that part of his question-that Sir William

Pettingell is the Chairman of that bank. He is the Deputy Chairman of the Foreign Investment Review Board. He has been the Deputy Chairman of the Foreign Investment Review Board since 1976 and, apart from a mild excursion by the Leader of the Opposition, this is the first time that anybody has sought to raise in any way the unsuitability of Sir William Pettingell to be the Deputy Chairman of the Foreign Investment Review Board.
Mr Holding-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I did not raise the question of Sir William Pettingell's unsuitability; I did raise the very serious question of conflict of interest and the Treasurer's failure to discharge his obligations to the Parliament.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne Ports will resume his seat. There is no point of order.
Mr HOWARD-To continue my answer, it is true that Sir William Pettingell is the Deputy Chairman of the Foreign Investment Review Board. Since the Foreign Investment Review Board was established there have been long standing arrangements that, in circumstances in which private sector members of the Board may be connected in some way with proposals that come before the Board, those people do not participate in the decision-making process of the Foreign Investment Review Board. I say this quite strongly because I believe it is important: If this Government or any other government in Australia is to have the benefit of people with business experience and acumen, the sort of narrow-minded, suspicious attitude evinced by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports ought not to be present--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-The Treasurer will resume his seat. Members on the Opposition benches continue to interject. I ask them to be silent. In particular, I ask the honourable member for Shortland and the honourable member for La Trobe to cease interjecting.
Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for Melbourne Ports talked about a conflict of interest.
Mr Holding-There is a conflict of interest and you know it.
Mr HOWARD-Is he therefore suggesting that the Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia should never extend a loan to a trade union organisation, because Mr Dolan is a member of the Board of the Commonwealth Trading Bank?
Mr Holding-Oh, come on!

2032 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Questions without Notice

Mr HOWARD-That is the absurdity of the analogy that has been advanced by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports.
Mr Holding-No wonder half your mates are at the bottom of the harbour, if you think like that.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne Ports will remain silent.
Mr HOWARD-The fact of the matter is that the foreign investment policy of this country has been a remarkable success and no small measure of that success is due to the quality of the private sector people who have sat on the Foreign Investment Review Board.
Mr HoldingYou should not be treasurer of a piggybank.
Mr SPEAKER-The Treasurer will resume his seat. I indicate to the honourable member for Melbourne Ports that he asked his question and he is now being given an answer. The fact that he disagrees with the answer is no reason for his continual interjection. I ask him to remain silent.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. There is a vast difference between the Commonwealth Trading Bank Board, which does not preside over loans--
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Hayden-And self-interested people sitting on the Foreign Investment Review Board when they stand to gain some advantage.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition knows that I give him much greater freedom than I give any other member in the House. I ask him not to abuse that by continuing to speak when I ask him to resume his seat.
Mr HOWARD-Is the Opposition suggesting that the Board of the Reserve Bank of Australia should never have a person with rural interests on it because the Reserve Bank has a rural credits department? The sorts of analogies advanced by the honourable gentleman are absolutely absurd. I do not believe that there is a conflict of interest. I do not believe that the analogy advanced by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports is appropriate. I believe that both Sir William Pettingell and Sir Bede Callaghan have given first class service to this country in the jobs that they have discharged as members of the Foreign Investment Review Board.
FILM INVESTMENT ARRANGEMENTS
Mr COLEMAN-My question, which is directed to the Treasurer, refers to his recent statement that he is examining the increasing use

of section 51 (I) of the Income Tax Assessment Act by investors in film productions in the light of film industry complaints that it was attracting investment from Division IOBA arrangements. Is the Treasurer in a position to advise the House whether he has yet reached a decision on this matter and also on the related representations to extend the 12-month rule in Division IOBA ?
Mr HOWARD-It is not in the first instance for me to reach a decision regarding the section 51 (I) scheme. The Commissioner of Taxation has told me that he believes there could well be a situation in which Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Act applies to those arrangements. If he finally reaches that conclusion, it will mean that arrangements that people have entered into since 27 May 1981 when Part IVA came into force will be affected by that decision. I indicated in my statement the other day that, if it is determined that Part IVA does not apply, I would give consideration to some specific legislative action regarding that practice.
The Government is desirous of providing proper incentives to the film industry. There have been representations regarding the operation of Division lOB. I have discussed those representations with my colleague the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, who has immediate responsibility for matters relating to the film industry. We want to see the concession working to the benefit of genuine investors and genuine participants in the Australian film industry. I will give consideration to those representations. I do not want to commit myself at this stage on the outcome of those considerations, but the guiding principle will be an incentive that works to the benefit of local investors and the local film industry and equally is fair to other taxpayers in Australia.
MR DENIS HORGAN
Mr DUFFY-I direct my question to the Treasurer. I refer to a joint statement of the Treasurer and Mr Denis Horgan issued on the Treasurer's letterhead on 23 September which states inter alia:
Initially it was suggested that Royal Commissioner Costigan may undertake the inquiry but it has now been determined that he is not available.
I also refer the Treasurer to a report in the National Times of 26 September to 2 October which claims that Mr Costigan definitely agreed to do the investigation. I ask the Treasurer: Was there any consultation with Mr Costigan and did the Treasurer or Mr Horgan determine that Mr Costigan was not available for the investigation? If the information was provided in writing, will

Questions without Notice

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2033

the Treasurer table all correspondence? If it was oral, on which date was such information conveyed and to whom?
Mr HOWARD~To my recollection, the
discussion~~
Mr Uren~'To my recollection '.
Mr HOWARD~Sometimes one's recollections can be faulty. To my recollection, the discussion occurred between either the Minister for Administrative Services or Sir Peter Lawler or another senior officer of his Department and the Royal Commissioner. The situation very simply was that Commissioner Costigan was not available to do the type of inquiry the Government wanted because he was willing to do it only in his capacity as the Royal Commissioner inquiring into the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union's activities. The Government quite properly in my view took the attitude that having an inquiry by a Commissioner acting in that capacity in respect of the circumstances surrounding the allegations against Mr Horgan that have been made in this place was quite inappropriate.
SUPERANNUATION FUNDS
Mr CONNOLLY~Does the Treasurer recall that the Commissioner of Taxation announced in mid-May that he would promulgate new guidelines for superannuation funds in July 1982? In view of the importance of this matter to the industry, can the Treasurer advise the House when the guidelines will be announced? Furthermore, will they contain provisions to remove the possiblity for some non-contributory schemes to be used as a means of minimising pre-tax income?
Mr HOWARD~I thank the honourable member for Bradfield for that question. There has been considerable interest amongst the small business community regarding these new guidelines. I hope that they will be available from the Taxation Office in the very near future. I assure the honourable gentleman of two things: The guidelines are designed to prevent abuse but equally they are designed to give a fair superannuation deal to small business people in Australia. I think in the superannuation area considerable gaps still remain. The self-employed in particular fare less well in the superannuation area than many others in the community. In the Government's desire to prevent any suggestion of tax avoidance or abuse it will also ensure that the new superannuation guidelines are fair and equitable to small business people, particularly the self-employed.
TAX AVOIDANCE
Dr THEOPHANOUS~My question is directed to the Acting Prime Minister. What

action has the Government taken to ensure that all appointees to government bodies named in the McCabe-Lafranchi report as being associated with companies sold to the Brian Maher group of tax promoters are treated equally as far as investigations of their personal tax liabilities are concerned? In particular, has the Government sought to have Mr Hugh Morgan, a member of the Board of the Reserve Bank of Australia, and Mrs Yolande Klempfner, a member of the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs, treated in the same way as Mr Denis Horgan?
Mr ANTHONY~This seems another case when certain members of the Australian Labor Party use the privilege of this Parliament to drop names casually to lay a smear across people. It almost seems a deliberate policy that people of standing in the community will be labelled by the Labor Party merely because their names might come up in a report. If the McCabe-Lafranchi report is of such concern to the Labor Party what is the Labor Government in Victoria doing about it? The Commonwealth has already announced that there will be a task force and a special prosecutor will be put in charge of looking at the circumstances of promoters who have been involved with bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. We have introduced legislation into the Parliament to recoup unpaid taxes. That is the means by which we are going about the matter. We will not individually investigate every name that comes up.
FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE VIRUS
Mr O'KEEFE~ls the Minister for Primary Industry aware of concern being expressed by primary producers about proposed imports of foot and mouth disease virus? Can he advise what the Government's attitude is to such imports?
Mr NIXON~I am very much aware of the concern expressed throughout the farming and grazing community about the prospect of foot and mouth disease virus being imported for use in the Australian National Animal Health Laboratory. Some weeks ago I opened for the National Farmers Federation a seminar at which both points of view were able to be expressed on the question of the importation and use of foot and mouth disease virus in that laboratory. I think the several hundred leading farmers and graziers who attended that seminar went away much better informed on the issue than they were prior to the seminar. The National Farmers Federation ought to be congratulated for putting it on.
Nevertheless, a great deal of concern is still being expressed throughout the grazing community about the prospect. I have made it clear

2034 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Questions without Notice

that from the Government's standpoint no decision will be taken for at least a couple of years. That is the first point. The second point is that an assessment group has been set up at the laboratory to make a judgment on this matter and to advise the Government about it. On that assessment group is a representative of the National Farmers Federation. The Government will take into consideration very seriously the views put forward by that assessment group after it has completed its work and made a report to the Government.
ACTING PRIME MINISTER: HOUSING LOAN
Mrs CHILD-My question is directed to the Acting Prime Minister. I refer to the Prime Minister's address to the nation on 28 September in which he stressed his Government's overwhelming obligation to be fair. I ask: Is it fair that the Acting Prime Minister has a Government loan repayable at 4t per cent for one of his three houses while most Australians pay 13 per cent to 16 per cent on a loan for their only house? If not, what does he propose to do about it?
Mr ANTHONY-Back in about 1964 when I was appointed Minister for the Interior in Canberra one of the things that I was asked was whether I would come and live in Canberra so as to take a personal interest in the management and the development of this city.
Mr Leo McLeay-Who asked you that?
Mr ANTHONY-The Prime Minister of the day, who happened to be Sir Robert Menzies. I did so. I believe that it was a very wise and sensible thing to do so that I could relate to the people of Canberra. I think honourable members who represent the Australian Capital Territory would also agree that it is a very good thing for a Minister to have a close relationship with the activities of Canberra. At any rate, to enable me to bring my family here I was allowed the privilege which 6,000 other people who transferred to Canberra were allowed, that is, to obtain a loan to buy a government built house.
Mr Hayden-Cut it out. You were not in the same boat as public servants on level 3 or level 4.
Mr SPEAKERThe Leader of the Opposition will remain silent.
Mr Nixon-Are you saying--
Mr HaydenYou can't confuse a wealthy pig farmer from northern New South Wales with those public servants.
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that he really must cease interjecting.

He is obstructing the business of the House by interfering with the reply of the Minister. The Acting Prime Minister is entitled to reply in silence. I ask all honourable members on the Opposition benches to cease their interjections.
Mr ANTHONY-Mr Speaker, I was rightfully entitled to a loan which 6,000 other people, including a number of members of the Australian Labor Party, obtained in the same period. I have accepted my obligations relating to that loan. I continue to accept them. If I thought that I had an immunity against loss of position in the Parliament I would be very happy to pay the loan back but I may not always remain a Minister.
MULTICULTURAL TELEVISION
Mr BIRNEY-Is the Minister for Communications aware of regular complaints that large areas of Sydney do not receive a clear picture from Channel 0-28 television operated by the Special Broadcasting Service? Is anything being done to rectify this problem? When can viewers in Sydney expect to receive this channel clearly?
Mr N. A. BROWN-The Government has a commitment to multicultural television. I am glad that the honourable member and his constituents are sufficiently aware of and interested in the services of the Special Broadcasting Service as to encourage an inquiry of that sort. It has been a matter of very great concern that in quite substantial areas of Sydney the signal from multicultural television has not been received at all and in some places is not received very wel\. The Government, in conjunction with the Special Broadcasting Service, has embarked upon a program to improve the transmission facilities of the Special Broadcasting Service in Sydney. If my recollection serves me correctly the antenna of the SBS has been moved higher up the mast of the ABN tower. I think it is now at about 93 metres. I recall that I was advised by the Executive Director of the Special Broadcasting Service some days ago that its engineers had carried out survey tests in Sydney to see whether moving the antenna to the 93 metre mark had resulted in any improvement in television reception provided by the SBS. Indeed, the engineers reported a very substantial improvement in the viewing of the station as a result of that work. The plan is to move the antenna to the top of the tower. I have no doubt that when that is done in the reasonably near future the service provided by the SBS in Sydney will be extremely good and will result in a very large increase in the number of people in Sydney able to view multicultural television and to get the advantages of that station. It is only a matter of regret for me that at the last Labor Party conference there was

Questions without Notice

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2035

a move to abolish the Special Broadcasting Service.
Dr Theophanous-Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The Minister misrepresents the events of the Labor Party conference.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. There is no point of order.
Mr N. A. BROWN-Mr Speaker, the honourable member has misrepresented me, because there was such a move--
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. There was no point of order and therefore there was no reason for the Minister to make any explanation.
IMPORTATION OF AIRCRAFT
Mr CUNNINGHAM-My question is addressed to the Minister for Aviation. Under what specific circumstances are officers of his Department permitted to travel abroad in association with the importation of an aircraft at the direct expense of the importer concerned? What audit checks are made in such cases of the amounts paid to or on behalf of the officers by the importer concerned? How did officers of his Department come to certify the CASA 212 aircraft imported from Spain in June 1981 to be a new aircraft when it was readily apparent at the time that the aircraft was severeal years old because such information was in the possession of the importer?
Mr FIFE-In answer to the question raised by the honourable member for McMillan, I need to remind him and the House that there are well established procedures that are followed by my Department in respect of importation of aircraft into Australia. Those procedures require that there be provided to the Department of Aviation an export certificate of airworthiness from the country of origin and also the log book of each aircraft, whether the aircraft is considered to be new or whether it is considered to be second hand. Insofar as the particular aircraft to which the honourable member refers is concerned, I am advised by my Department that both those requirements were met. The log book was made available to the Department of Aviation and it shows that some 600 hours of flying had occurred during the life of the aircraft. It also indicates that the aircraft did not change ownership from the time it was manufactured until it was sold to a group in Australia. In other words, it was held within the ownership of the manufacturer.
It is not the responsibility of the Department of Aviation to determine whether an aircraft is new

or second hand. It is the responsibility of the Department of Aviation to determine the airworthiness of a particular aircraft. In this case and, as I am advised, in all other cases, this very strict procedure is followed. In relation to the first part of the honourable member's question, I am also advised that it is necessary on occasions for officers of the Department to travel overseas to inspect an aircraft and sometimes only to inspect documents relating to an aircraft. Certainly at times there is a need for officers of the Department to travel overseas for that purpose. This is an estalished practice that has existed for some time. It is generally in the interests of the airworthiness of the aircraft that come into Australia.
DIESEL EXCISE: REBATES
Mr TUCKEYI refer the Minister for Industry and Commerce to Bills relating to diesel excise which passed through this House yesterday. Can the Minister advise when the rebates referred to in this legislation will commence flowing to eligible persons who have already paid this tax on fuel purchases made since the Budget announcement?
Mr PEACOCK-As the honourable member indicated, the legislation passed through this House last night. Claim forms cannot be distributed until the legislation has been passed by the Senate. It is expected that they will be available within a few days of that date. I have been advised that arrangements have been made for the forms to be distributed by oil company agents and fuel distributors. They will also be available at AustralianCustoms Service offices throughout Australia. I think honourable members are aware that the completed application forms, together with the relevant invoices, should be lodged with the diesel fuel rebate section of the Australian Customs Service at the capital city in the applicant's State of residence. The whole rebate program will be controlled through the Customs Service's computer network. I have been discussing this matter with officers in the last day or so. Since the scheme was announced on Budget night the Customs Service has been faced--
Mr Cohen-How long have you been the Minister?
Mr PEACOCK-For 68t hours and I am progressing well at the moment. Since the scheme was announced on Budget night the Customs Service has been faced with--
Mr Barry Jones-It is 72t.
Mr PEACOCK-The honourable member is even ahead of himself on this occasion. Since the

2036 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Questions without Notice

scheme was announced on Budget night the Customs Service has been faced with the very considerable task of purchasing hardware, developing and testing the program and recruiting and training data processing officers. This very considerable task is now nearing completion and my Department is confident that it will be ready to commence processing when the Bill receives royal assent. Naturally there will be a very heavy work load in the initial stages. However, once this is over and applicants are claiming on pre-printed personalised forms, I am advised that processing times would not be expected to exceed two weeks.
UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT PAYMENTS AND BENEFICIARIES
Mr HAWKE-I remind the Treasurer of the Budget estimate prepared by his Department of unemployment benefit payments for the financial year 1982-83 of $1 ,567m, an estimate which he will recall was based on an average number of unemployment beneficiaries for 1982-83 of 395,000. That is a figure which the Treasurer will recall I questioned immediately. As the number of unemployment beneficiaries in July was already 405,000 and in August was 422,000 and as the number will rise much further during the financial year, will the Treasurer admit that the Budget estimate was unrealistic, is now blatantly untenable and will be exceeded by at least $300m this financial year? Will the Treasurer request his Department, if he has not already done so, to review immediately the estimates of beneficiaries and payments and inform the House of the revised estimates as soon as they become available?
Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for Wills raises an important question. In answer to the last part of it, I can inform him that I have already raised the matter with my Department. As he has asked the question, I will take the opportunity of providing a detailed answer to it. The Budget estimates did provide for expenditure on unemployment benefits of $1,567m. That estimate was based upon Treasury forecasts of average unemployment beneficiaries of 395,000 people in 1982-83 compared with 332,000 in 1981-82 and Department of Social Security forecasts of average rates of benefit payments. Since those estimates were prepared the unemployment situation has deteriorated rather more quickly than anticipated. More importantly, the rise in unemployment has been concentrated among adult males who, on the basis of recent experience, are more likely than females to claim unemployment benefits. In fact the available statistics-this is the information with which I

have been supplied by my Department and perhaps honourable members and others may find this an interesting statement-indicate that presently more males are receiving unemployment benefit than are classified as unemployed in the Commonwealth Statistician's unemployment data. Primarily because of that latter factor the Treasury has revised its forecast.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I ask honourable members on the Opposition benches to be silent so that the answer can be heard by the questioner.
Mr HOWARD-Do honourable members opposite want the information or not? I think the honourable member for Wills does but I do not think the rest of them do. Primarily because of that latter factor the Department of the Treasury has revised its forecast of the average number of unemployment beneficiaries in 1982-83 from 395,000 to 460,000. The forecast change in the composition of the unemployed also has implications for the average rate of unemployment benefit payment. Allowing for that factor, it is presently estimated that unemployment benefit payments could be of the order of $300m above the Budget estimate. It should be stressed that these forecasts are surrounded by considerable uncertainty and, hence, should be regarded as highly tentative.
I would like to add to that answer simply by saying that the figures that were supplied to the Government and included in the Budget Papers were the figures compiled by departments. They were not the subject of any kind of ministerial decision. They were supplied in good faith. I hope in that answer I have explained the reason that the estimate has now been revised by my Department. I underline the fact that these revised estimates, as indeed is the case with other estimates supplied at the time of the Budget by departments, can be the subject of very considerable uncertainty and fluctuation throughout the year.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY
Mr FALCONER-My question is directed to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment in his capacity as parliamentary guru of the arts. Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the article in this morning's Australian Financial Review concerning gaps in the colonial collection at the Australian National Gallery? Is the Minister aware of the colonial collection? Can the Minister tell the House whether in fact there are gaps in the colonial collection? If so, how will this situation be overcome?

Questions without Notice

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2037

Mr McVEIGH~I did have my attention drawn to the article in the Australian Financial Review. The Director of the Australian National Gallery, James Mollison, has agreed that there are gaps in the colonial collection. One of the most pleasing things about the Gallery has been the general agreement on the fine work that has been done by James Mollison in drawing together a collection of which not only present Australians but also future Australians can be very proud. Honourable members will recall that at the opening on Tuesday night the Prime Minister announced that the Government will give $27m over the next five years. That is a firm commitment which will allow the Director and the Council of the Gallery to plan, secure in the knowledge that when overseas and local pieces of art come on to the market they will be able to purchase them. That amount will be added, of course, to the $36m made available previously.
I add that it is expected, following the Government's decision to have an entry charge of $2 a head, that $600,000 will be available to assist each year with the allocation previously announced. I point out that yesterday, realising that there was a charge of $2 a head, a number of people, estimated at 2,651, passed through the Gallery. I take the opportunity to correct some mischievous information that has been circulating in the community. Unfortunately, it has come from members of the Opposition. The $2 charge does not apply to people in receipt of social security benefits, to children, to members of the Gallery or to tertiary students. Quite obviously, the $2 charge does not apply to everyone. Additionally, I should like to advise you, Mr Speaker, that for 18 Thursday nights, commencing on 4 November, from 5 p.m. to 8 p.m., through the efforts of the Council, Esso Australia Ltd~~
Mr Leo McLeay~Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I draw your attention to Standing Order 145. There is no way, shape or form that the Minister can purport that this answer is at all relevant to the colonial collection in the Gallery.
Mr SPEAKER~I uphold the point of order. The honourable member for Grayndler is correct. I ask the Minister to remain relevant to the question and to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr McVEIGH~In conclusion, Esso will make available the funds necessary to allow people to attend the Gallery free of charge and see the colonial collection for those 18 nights between 5 p.m. and 8 p.m.
Mr SPEAKER~ The Minister will resume his seat. He is not being relevant to the question.

AUSTRALIAN DAIRY RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland~Minister for Primary Industry)--Pursuant to section 16 of the Dairying Research Act 1972, I present the annual report of the Australian Dairy Research Committee for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN EGG BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland~Minister for Primary Industry)~For the information of honourable members. I present an interim annual report of the Australian Egg Board for 1981-82.
COMMONWEALTH TEACHING SERVICE
Mr FIFE (Farrer~Minister for Aviation)~ Pursuant to section 52 of the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, I present the annual report of the Commonwealth Teaching Service for 1981.
AUSTRALIAN ELECTORAL OFFICE
Mr NEWMAN (Bass~Minister for Administrative Services) ~For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Australian Electoral Office for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley~ Minister for Communications)~Pursuant to section 99 of the Telecommunications Act 1975, I present the annual report of the Australian Telecommunications Commission for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley ~Minister for Communications)~Pursuant to section 78 of the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, I present the annual report of the Australian Broadcasting Commission for 1981-82.
POLICY DISCUSSION PAPER ON EXTRINSIC AIDS TO STATUTORY
INTERPRETATION
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley~ Minister for Communications and Acting Attorney-General)~On behalf of the Attorney General, Senator Durack, I table a policy discussion paper on extrinsic aids to statutory interpretation. I seek leave to make a statement concerning that report.
Leave granted.

2038 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Statutory Interpretation-Extrinsic Aids

Mr N. A. BROWN-The paper examines the extent to which, in interpreting Acts of Parliament, regard can properly and usefully be had to reports, explanatory memoranda and other materials that do not themselves form part of the Act. For this purpose the paper examines the
extent to which the courts already use such extrinsic materials. It goes on to consider whether the range of such extrinsic materials needs to be broadened, and how that could be brought about in a way that would be satisfactory and acceptable from the point of view of the courts and of the
audience to which the Act is directed. Finally, the paper sets forth for consideration and discussion a possible procedure and program for the use of specially prepared explanatory memoranda limited, initially at least, to selected Acts considered by their sponsors to be appropriate for this purpose.
The discussion paper arises out of an initiative announced by the Attorney-General in 1981 at the time he introduced the Bill to insert section 15AA in the Acts Interpretation Act. The Attorney-General stated that an examination would be undertaken of the topic, with a view to developing proposals that would be brought into the Parliament for further consideration. There has also been considerable interest in the exercise by groups outside parliament and indeed overseas as well, and it is hoped and expected that the paper will produce a vigorous and fruitful debate. My only regret is that Senator Durack is not personally able to open that debate, as the exercise is very much his own personal initiative. No official examination of this kind has taken place since Federation in 190 I, although, as the paper indicated, there have been some distinguished precursors. The paper is also timely in view of the quite remarkable way in which the problems of statutory interpretation have engaged the attention of both our highest courts and the wider Australian community in recent times.
One thing that clearly emerges from the paper is that the courts already can refer to extrinsic materials in certain cases under the existing rules of interpretation. Legislation is not made in a vacuum and each Act must be read in its context. Courts may, and on occasion do, look at reports and other materials leading to the legislation in question. Recently, individual judges of the High Court have gone to the extent of looking at Hansard to identify the problem the Act addresses or even to ascertain directly what was the parliamentary intent. These judicial developments are of great significance. However, other judges take a more restricted view, and this in itself raises a problem. There are other problems.

Often these materials will not be readily accessible to the ordinary users of statutes. They are not necessarily self-explanatory and often require a difficult exercise of evaluation. Finally, as the paper notes, overall there has been much greater reluctance to use parliamentary materials than to use other materials, such as reports, that in fact are more remote from the law-making process than Hansard.
In these circumstances, the paper proposes for consideration the use in selected cases of a specially prepared explanatory memorandum or statement that would be submitted to parliament along with the legislation in question. The memorandum when approved would be made as accessible to the users of the legislation as the legislation itself. One of the most interesting points that emerges from the paper is that the idea of such a special explanatory statement has received wide interest or support over a considerable period. The paper cites Professor C. K. Allen, in his time one of the most distinguished commentators on the English legal system which we have inherited in Australia. Reference is also made to the detailed study of this proposal by the 1969 report of the English and Scottish Law Commissions, presided over, I should add, by Lord Scarman, one of the most distinguished of the English law lords. Sir Stanley Burbury spoke in favour of the idea on his retirement from the Tasmanian Supreme Court, and associated the idea with proposals along these lines made by the eminent American jurist, Dean Roscoe Pound.
I therefore commend the paper and look forward to the constructive debate that I believe its analysis of the topic and the proposals it makes deserves.
Statutory interpretation is a matter that directly concerns all those whose activities are affected by Acts of Parliament. In modern society, that means everyone. However, members of this Parliament have a particular concern in ensuring so far as possible that Acts passed by them give effect to their understanding and expectations of what Acts mean. In our time there have been a number of developments. One is the increasing use of objects clauses to set forth the object or purpose of Acts. Another was the enactment last year of section 15AA of the Acts Interpretation Act directing courts to prefer that interpretation which promotes the object or purpose of an Act to one that would not. The paper points the way to a further possible development, and at the same time draws attention to judicial developments of considerable significance.

Statutory Interpretation-Extrinsic Aids

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2039

The intention is that time should be allowed for the paper to be studied and debated, inside and outside the Parliament, before any decision is taken on whether its specific proposals should be proceeded with. Clearly the kind of special explanatory memoranda it envisages would require the devising of appropriate procedures for each House, and both Houses jointly, for dealing with the approval and possible amendment of such memoranda. The nature of these procedures is of course a matter for the Houses to consider and decide. The paper notes that one of the vital factors in the success of the proposal would be the spirit in which the courts accepted such aids to interpretation. It could equally be said that success would also depend on the spirit in which this Parliament received the proposals and implemented
them.
On the machinery aspects, consideration, and amendment, of a memorandum in conjunction with the consideration of the Bill to which it relates may turn out to be incompatible with the existing practices of the two Houses. However, a motion of approval of a memorandum, quite separate from the consideration of the Bill, could be an acceptable alternative. This could be achieved by the motion being agreed to in the House in which the Bill originated and transmitted to the other House for its concurrence; or the motion being moved separately in both Houses and agreed to. It is proposed that a symposium will be held early in the New Year involving parliamentarians, eminent judges and other lawyers, as well as other interested groups. The purpose will be to further the discussion and also to help bring an early resolution of the issues so that decisions can be made as soon as possible on the proposals in the paper. I would like to commend officers of the Attorney-General's Department, in particular Mr Brazil, a Deputy Secretary of the Department, and Mr Kolts, First Parliamentary Counsel, for the valuable work done by them in the preparation of this paper. I simply add that this is very much indeed Senator Durack's project and he deserves all of the credit for stimulating and encouraging it. It is unfortunate that he has not been able to launch the discussion paper himself. I commend the paper to the consideration of the Parliament.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)- by leave-The matter that the Acting Attorney General (Mr N. A. Brown) has brought to the attention of Parliament is very significant indeed. Speaking on behalf of the Opposition, I hope that this matter comes to a satisfactory and speedy resolution. We recognise the work done by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) and that at

this stage he is somewhat temporarily indisposed. I think it is essential that we resolve this issue in view of the remarks that have just been made by the Acting Attorney-General on what democracy is about in this country. Many people are very concerned that we pass Bills which become Acts of Parliament which contain a lot of legal jargon and nobody seems to be able to understand what is the intention of the legislation or, more importantly, what is the defect that the legislation is trying to remedy. It is of significance that the Acts Interpretation Act was amended in the way in which it was in section 15AA.
We are aware also that the courts are now be-
ginning, at least in part, to advert to what might be deemed to be an explanatory memorandum that would be of assistance in interpreting the intention of Parliament in introducing legislation. I think that it will be of some assistance also that the memorandums are to be available to members of Parliament and people outside the Parliament. Personally, I think there is a great need for a standing committee of this Parliament to examine the rights of people affected by legislation. In other words, there should be a continuing input from people on how they feel legislation may have been intended to operate and, perhaps, on how it is not working as intended in the sense that it could well be working to their detriment. I think we have tried to overcome that by, quite fairly, allowing administrative review or judicial review of administrative decisions. At times it has been quite difficult for the public to understand why the administration of an Act seems to have been completely different from the intention of that Act as announced by the Government; that is, there seems to have been a difference between the intention recorded in Hansard and the ultimate interpretation.
I think, though, that the most serious thing that is happening in our community at present is that
legislation is being passed in a clear rndeavour to ensure that citizens comply with a law, yet a number of people are able to obtain some sort of legal or other professional advice on how, virtually, to circumvent the clear intention of the Parliament. Unfortunately there is then a High Court decision that their interpretation was right. Of course, as a result the effect on the community, particularly from the point of view of revenue collection, is disastrous. So it is important that courts start to look at what democracy really means. If a government brings in legislation to collect tax on income, for example, it should be given the highest consideration and not the lowest consideration whereby the income, perhaps by some sleight of hand, is transformed into capital and

2040 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Statutory Interpretation-Extrinsic Aids

therefore exempt from tax. It has not been in the interests of the High Court for there to have been
a very restrictive interpretation of certain provisions.
I refer to the gap in revenue as a result of a very flexible interpretation by the High Court against the interests of the Government. In what was called the Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation case, relating to section 136 and transfer pricing, there was a very simple mechanism whereby bauxite was sold by somebody in Australia to what one could call a phoney operation in Hong Kong, where the price was then marked up. In the process tax gathering in Australia did not get the benefit of the price because that was deemed to be another operation and it was deemed that the company did not come within the concept of a foreign-owned and controlled company. The evidence was clear to any lay person, to all people in Australia, that a device had been used to guarantee that tax would not be paid in Australia because of a legal fiction that there had been a transaction in Hong Kong whereas the bauxite never went there but went somewhere else. It was merely a tax haven device.
The Slutzkin case has caused a number of debates in this Parliament. Let us make the position very clear, as Costigan did. How in the name of fortune can we expect the public of Australia to accept that the taxable profits of a company can be transformed-as I say, by sleight of hand-into capital, thus guaranteeing that no tax will be paid? We can see that the intention of section 260 of the Act was always that profits would bear the burden of tax, as every wage earner in Australia has to do. A fanciful device was adopted in this case whereby assets of the company were converted into cash and the cash was advanced to the purchaser of the company. In other words, the company loaned money to somebody else to get it back, to convert it into capital, so that it could then say: 'I am not going to pay tax'. Of course, the nation lost the benefit of the tax being paid on the distribution of the dividend. That was an indictment of the High Court because it brought it into disrepute. It seems that it is now much more favourably involved in corporate strategy than in a partnership.
It would be very simple for this Government in future to say: 'We will not take any notice of corporate structures. We will deem them all to be partnerships'. That would solve that particular issue. It might also be appropriate for the Government to alter section 25 of the Income Tax Assessment Act and in future say that all money collected shall be deemed to be income and taxed accordingly. If that happened, capital accretion

over a period would legitimately be called income whereas it normally is not. We have been saddled
with a legal fiction because of a High Court interpretation, misinterpretation or strict interpretation. It has brought the country to its knees from the point of view of the ability of a person to act with probity and integrity in any capacity in public life if, because of greed or avarice, that person exploited a decision of the High Court to guarantee that money which obviously everybody in the community knew was income be deemed to be capital so that that person could get more wealth and avoid and evade tax.
It is not to the credit of the High Court that it has been saddled with the Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation case or the Slutzkin case. It would be much more to its credit if it looked at how public opinion has forced it to recognise that it would be advantageous to its integrity and credibility in future to guarantee a more rational interpretation of the law. This came about in the case of Cooper Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v. the Commissioner of Taxation. It was said by the High Court, by a majority of four to one, that the purpose of a taxation statute needed to be looked at. That is what the Minister said today. There has to be an attempt to look at the interpretation. It is elementary, is it not, if we are to have a clear understanding of what democracy is all about, particularly when legislation for revenue collection is usually passed unanimously, that legislation should not be downgraded, eroded or destroyed by a very unusual strict judicial interpretation.
We are mindful of the fact that the intelligence of the law is no greater than the minds of the judges. They vary from time to time. The interpretation of our Constitution over the years has been completely reversed. The interpretation of the Constitution in the Engineers case in 1918 is an example. The intelligence of the judges worked to the advancement of the national interest in the off-shore legislation which dealt with the ability to control the territorial seas. Unfortunately, for political purposes, that interpretation was eroded by giving back to the States the right to legislate in that area even though the Commonwealth has responsibility. Perhaps the High Court is now improving its interpretation, whether by experience or because of the change in the judiciary. In the case of the Commissioner of Taxation v. Whitfords Beach, Justice Mason clearly said that the Court should take note of what a parliament wants to do when it talks about remedying a mischief. It ought to look at the mischief and where it is clear that people engaged in enterprise and activity for commercial gain and continual profit

Statutory Interpretation-Extrinsic Aids

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2041

that profit can, by no stretch of the imagination, In my view the real damage resulted from indi- '.

be deemed to be capital and therefore exempt. viduals in the High Court not doing their duty.

There would be cogent evidence of what such Let us look at the interpretation of Walsh, 1. in

transactions involved.

previous decisions. He said that it was not left to

the election of the taxpayer himself or herself to

I hope that in future we can get a much more determine whether a matter was capital or in-

active, effective and modern method of come. That has obviously eroded the intention of

interprepation of legislation. We are not back in the legislation. It is a pity that that sort of legal

the days of the last century when judicial inrationale was not adhered to. It is because of that

terpretation seemed to be limited to a judgment that we now have to extend not only the strict in-

hand written with a quill or a feather. We are terpretation as it appears before the judiciary but

dealing with international trade. Forty per cent of also the explanatory aspects. I welcome this

world trade is now intra-corporate. We are dealmeasure. I think it will do a power of good for the

ing with the most modern and complex techfuture support of judicial interpretation. It should

nology. The advantage of trade is of course enordo a power of good for people who are discussing

mous but revenue has to be collected by matters in the Parliament in that at least they will

government. Prior to recent changes, the High be able to get an explanatory memorandum. We

Court in recent years had a very sorry record should bear in mind that every Cabinet Minister

indeed. It is very clear what the intention of the gets an explanatory memorandum about every

income tax legislation has been. We have talked section of a proposed Act. I do not think it would

about the Commonwealth Aluminium Corporbe giving too much away if the information given

ation case, the Slutzkin case and all the others. to the Cabinet in its legislation committee were

The inability of the High Court to understand the also given to the Parliament. It would materially

intention of the legislation has been a tragedy for assist people in understanding the intention of the

our nation. The legislation establishing the Special Government and it would certainly help the Par-

Prosecutor will quite fairly try to bring to justice liament in discussing legislation. I welcome the in-

people who in their cunning, clever and avaricious itiatives. I think they will be of real value. I can

ways have decided to use the loopholes that the assure the House of the support of the Opposition.

High Court virtually opened up for them, particu-

larly in the Slutzkin era.

PARLIAMENT HOUSE CONSTRUCTION

AUTHORITY

It is important that if democracy is to last in this nation people who are elected to parliament should have the utmost integrity. There has to be a guarantee that they will disclose their interests. By the same token, when it comes to judicial interpretation, judges have to be mindful of their responsibilties and aware of the damage that will be done if they make decisions which are so narrow, cribbed and confined that they allow operators, manipulators and downright thieves to exploit those decisions. This has happened. The Parliament is now bedevilled with such cases and

Ministerial Statement
Mr HODGMAN (Dennison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-In accordance with the provisions of section 1 of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979 regulations have been prepared to enable the Parliament House Construction Authority to undertake the coordination and provision of non-building items. These regulations were deemed to have been tabled last evening. I seek leave to make a short statement.

the nation is sinking in a sea of allegations of corruption because people have evaded and avoided tax, relying on the claim that perhaps the Parliament did not have an intention to collect it. That has never been the case and it never will be the case. Memoranda of intention should be admitted by way of judicial interpretation. I hope the High Court takes notice of this in future interpret-

Leave granted.
Mr HODGMAN-I thank the House. The regulations have been formulated to extend the responsibilities of the Parliament House Construction Authority to include the provision of a range of facilities termed 'non-building items', which comprise:

ations. We cannot have the nation clogged down in trying to recover money that should have been paid in the first place. We cannot continue with what is now a virtually impossible situation in that we are suggesting to the courts of the land that

Communications facilities and computer cabling: Including telephones, telex and facsimile instruments; central telephone exchange, PABX and main switchboards.

they may be able to prosecute thousands of people

Security equipment: Including a compu-

who have evaded their responsibilities.

terised central supervisory system and satellite

2042 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982 Committee on the Australian Capital Territory

stations, baggage and goods screening equipment, closed circuit TV and electronic detection and access control systems.
Sound and vision systems: Including interconnected electronic systems such as public address and paging systems; division bells, lights and clocks; and facilities for radio and television coverage of chambers, committee rooms, press conference area, ceremonial and reception areas.
Furniture and fittings: All new furniture is planned for the building.
Artworks: A range of artworks is to be provided primarily in the major public and ceremonial spaces.
Movement systems: Including computerised tracked document movement, pneumatic tube, waste disposal and mechanical goods movement system from the unloading dock.
Refreshment services: All new equipment for kitchen, refreshment and bar areas.
High voltage power: Including switch gear, substations and transformers to provide a higher reliability system and a reduction in tariff charges.
The non-building items were not included in the competition document or the budget for the building because they are normally provided by separate Government agencies. However, the size and complexity of the new Parliament House, together with the tight completion schedule, make it desirable and more efficient to place the responsibility for providing and co-ordinating the non-building items with the Construction Authority. The Government has identified a separate budget of $92.3m at March 1982 prices for the provision of these additional facilities. It was foreshadowed in Parliament in September 1981 that non-building items costing $82m at June 1981 prices would be required for the building. There has been a slight reduction in real costs since that time and, of course, inflation has required an updated estimate to $92.3m. The Parliament House Construction Authority will develop detailed user statements and, following discussions with the Joint Standing Committee on the new Parliament House, will seek its approval to the user statements. I present the following paper:
Parliament House Construction Authority~Ministerial Statement, 14 October 1982.

JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Report
Mrs KELLY (Canberra)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory, I present the Committee's reports on proposals for variations of the plan of lay-out of the City of Canberra and its environs-( I) 76th Series (Item 2) and 77th Series, and (2) 78th Series-together with the minutes of proceedings.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mrs KELLY-by leave-The report on the 77th Series of Variations covers II variations to the city plan and recommends the approval of works valued at over $3.5m. The Committee, in considering these proposed variations, noted the third report of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly Standing Committee on Development and Planning and took evidence from several private citizens during the public hearing held on 27 September 1982. The Committee has decided to withhold the approval of one variation and has approved the remaining ten. It has also decided to approve one item deferred from the 76th Series. The Committee is withholding approval on a proposal to degazette part of an existing paved area in Garema Place, Civic. The proposal involves the demolition of the existing toilet block and the development of the site as a restaurant or cafe. The Committee requires further information from the National Capital Development Commission and the Department of the Capital Territory on arrangements to ensure pedestrian access and visual continuity between City Walk and Garema Place and what is intended for the future development of Garema Place to ensure that its present character, as an important place for public activities and assembly, is maintained.
The Committee has also approved Item 2 of the 76th Series, the deletion and realignment of a length of cycleway between Haydon Drive and College Street, Bruce. The Committee received a letter from the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman), dated 16 September 1982, providing the additional information sought on the necessity of the variation. A copy of the letter is included in the report. The 78th Series proposes the addition to the city plan of several roads to provide access to the new Parliament House. The Committee is concerned that the number of modifications and proposals contained in this Series has been presented as one variation. It believes that these modifications should have been presented as separate and distinct items in the Series, particularly since the total estimated cost for the

Committee on the Australian Capital Territory 14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2043

Series is $20.9m. The Committee, in its report, has itemised the modifications contained in the Series. Most of the modifications proposed in the Series have not attracted criticism but the Committee has received conflicting evidence concerning the proposed Commonwealth Avenue and Kings Avenue ramps. As a consequence, the Committee has reservations about the proposed ramps and, in light of the National Capital Development Commission's evidence that work on the proposed ramps would not commence until the 1984-85 financial year, does not at this time approve these parts of the variation that include these ramps. The Committee also defers approval of the associated proposed works at the Kings AvenueState Circle intersection and the Canberra Avenue-State Circle intersecion. It approves the remaining works.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-by leave-I congratulate the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) and members of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory on the work that they have done. In case it comes as somewhat of a surprise, I indicate, as I have on another occasion, my total enthusiasm about the demolition of the toilet in Garema Place-that being the subject of some considerable unhappiness in the city of Canberra, particularly on the occasion of a recent royal walk by a royal visitor. I will be studying very carefully the reports and the recommendations and I will certainly facilitate the Committee in providing additional information which it is seeking in respect of the provision of the ramps for both Commonwealth Avenue and Kings Avenue. I thank the Committee for doing its job very well.
FOREIGN INVESTMENT REVIEW BOARD: NEW MERCHANT BANK
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek your indulgence to add to an answer I gave the House this morning.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr HOWARD-For the sake of completeness I inform the House that, subsequent to the question asked of me by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), Sir William Pettingell has confirmed to the Foreign Investment Division of the Department of the Treasury that he did not see or participate in the Foreign Investment Review Board discussions on the Indosuez Australia proposal which, of course, was in conformity with the FIRB practice. I understand that Sir William Pettingell has been invited by Indosuez to consider taking the position of Chairman of Indosuez Australia. However, the

company is yet to be formed and Howard Smiththat is, the Australian partner-has not yet considered who will represent it on the board of Indosuez Australia.
STATES (WORKS AND HOUSING) ASSISTANCE BILL 1982
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
THE ECONOMY
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Treasurer's complacency about rapid economic deterioration.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (11.26)-It is remarkable that at a time when there is almost daily additional evidence of a rapidly declining economic situation in this country the Governmentespecially the Treasurer (Mr Howard)-is continuing to proclaim that the Government's economic policy is on the right track. Only today in Question Time the Treasurer calmly announced that the average number of unemployment benefit recipients this financial year will be 16t per cent or 65,000 more than was estimated in the Budget. Yet only six days ago he issued a Press statement denying the need for any change in his economic strategy. This remarkable complacency in the face of developing economic disaster in this country is almost beyond belief.
Let me look in more detail at the indication of rapid economic deterioration in this country. The Budget forecasts, as honourable members will be well aware, were grim enough. The Budget forecast no growth in non-farm gross domestic product; a decline in farm production mainly because of the drought and, therefore, a slight fall in the total production of goods and services; no growth in employment this year; a marked increase in recorded unemployment, which the Treasurer later explained at the National Press Club meant a rise to over 8 per cent; and inflation in the order of lOt per cent. That was a pretty grim scenario to outline in the Budget. However, this catalogue of gloom is not the end of the story. There is good reason to believe that that was a rather optimistic

2044 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

The Economy

scenario. Since the Budget was introduced the economy has clearly deteriorated markedly. Not only is there no growth but also there is more and more evidence of marked economic decline.
For instance, retail sales, seasonally adjusted, are down for the last two months in money terms and in real terms are down even further. Building approvals in August of this year were 34 per cent below the levels of August of the previous year. Factory production is falling. The ANZ index of factory production for July was 5 per cent below the level of January. Motor vehicle sales are estimated by the Nissan Motor Co. (Aust) Pty Ltd-that is, total motor sales and not just those of Nissan-to have declined by IO per cent to 15 per cent in the month of September. All of this would seem to indicate that output is likely to be falling at present and to go on falling. Of course, the employment situation is looking very bad indeed. The latest figures for July show that in the 12 months to July this year employment opportunities grew by only 3,000. That is the last 12 months for which figures are available. This occurred in a year when non-farm gross domestic product grew by 2.3. per cent. That is in marked contrast with what the Budget forecast, let alone what might in fact happen.
What will happen to employment in 1982-83 when, according to the Budget, there. will be no growth in non-farm production? Developments since the Budget indicate a strong likelihood of there being a significant decline in non-farm production. If there was virtually no growth in employment in 1981-82 when non-farm growth was 2.3 per cent, there must be a substantial fall in employment in 1982-83, even on the highly optimistic Budget forecast of no growth. It is quite unbelievable to argue that there would be no growth in output associated with no growth in employment. If there is no growth in output we must expect a decline in unemployment because of some increase in productivity.
On the more realistic assessment of declining output of goods and services, a substantial fall in employment levels is even more certain to occur. This assumption, of course, is confirmed by the rash of retrenchments of which everyone in this House is only too painfully aware. We have seen massive layoffs in the iron and steel industry, the manufacturing industry generally and in the construction industry. It is quite clear that we are not going to have a year of stable employment; we are going to have a year of substantially declining employment. That, of course, has significant implications for the level of unemployment.

Unemployment is likely to rise to much higher levels than the Government has admitted. If employment did not rise we would still have to expect that unemployment would rise to 8 per cent in the course of this year simply because of the increase in the work force. We started off this year with an unemployment rate of about 6.7 per cent, with an increase in the work force of about 1.5 per cent and no growth in employment. All that adds to unemployment. We will be looking at a total unemployment rate of more than 8 per cent. Of course, as I have been saying, it is highly
likely that the employment level will decline by at least one per cent or more, in which case we could be looking at a 9 per cent or 10 per cent rate of unemployment in the course of this financial year. That is not alarmist talk; it is a realistic assessment of the situation which faces this country. It is a very grim situation but a realistic assessment of what is happening and a situation about which this Government should be enormously concerned.
The economic situation is indisputably the worst since the 1930s. The economy is deeply recessed, deteriorating rapidly and shows no sign of any improvement in the foreseeable future. The Government's complacency in the face of all this is absolutely remarkable. It simply is washing
its hands of any responsibility. It says that it is not really to blame for this situation, that it really cannot do anything about it and that other factors must be pointed to as the cause of this situation. This attitude contrasts markedly with the attitude demonstrated in Japan just a couple of days ago. The Prime Minister of Japan resigned after the economic forecast showed a drop in growth this year from 5.2 per cent to 3.4 per cent. On the face of those figures the Prime Minister of Japan resigned his position. In this country we do not have 3.4 per cent growth but, on the Budget forecast, we have a slight decline in growth. In reality, we have the prospect of a quite substantial decline in output this year. In that situation we should see much greater demonstration of concern by this Government than we have seen to the present time. The contrast with Japan is remarkable indeed.
On 8 October, only six days ago, the Treasurer issued a Press statement entitled 'A reversal of Economic Policy is Not The Answer'. In this Press statement the Treasurer washed his hands of Government responsibility for our present level of unemployment. He said that it was the fault of the international recession and of excessive wage increases. There was no acceptance of the relevance of his Government's economic policy to the intensifying recession, despite the fact that the recent

The Economy

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2045

Budget is designed to further contract economic
activity in Australia at a time of the worst economic recession in 50 years. The Budget is indisputably a contractionary Budget, a Budget which is based on a continuing domestic surplus. That is the strategy. Whether in reality it comes to that, of course, is a different issue but the strategy of
the Budget is one of a domestic surplus. That strategy is designed, therefore, to take more out of the Australian economy than it puts into it. In other words, the Government is not seeking in this Budget to give any stimulus or to promote any increased economic activity. Through this Budget it is aiming to reduce slightly the level of impetus to growth in the economy. Of course, there was virtually no impetus to growth preceding the Budget.
The Government is acting overall to reduce the level of economic activity. That is what this Budget is basically about. It is almost unbelievable that such a Budget could be brought in at such a time of economic recession. Even more remarkable is that, having introduced such a Budget, the Government claims that that Budget has nothing to do with the current level of unemployment, which is what this Treasurer is continually
proclaiming. The fact is that not only is the Budget not doing anything to encourage or promote increased economic activity and employment but also this Government is in fact acting to reduce the level of economic activity and employment. It is apparently so besotted with its ideological belief in the wonders of monetarist economics that it is not really concerned about what those policies are doing to the economy and to the hopes and aspirations of the Australian people. Doubtless the Treasurer will protest that he really does care, that deep in his heart he is concerned and
hurt by all that is happening. But the proof of his concern or lack of it is in his actions. There is precious little to lead us to believe that he is really concerned. His attempts to dredge up scapegoats in the form of the international recession and excessive wage increases simply will not wash.
I should like to say something about both of these excuses. In respect of the international recession I would like to make two points: First, of course we acknowledge that Australia, along with all other countries, is affected by the international recession. But having acknowledged that point, there still is a great difference in the performance of the various nations in the Western developed world. Some countries are doing markedly better than Australia. That factor, of course, demonstrates that what individual countries do in respect of their own economic policies has enormous relevance to what happens within those

countries even when there is an international recession. We see such countries as Japan, Austria and France all showing relatively substantial growth at present while Australia is showing
economic decline. I believe this factor is important in one's consideration of the international recession. It affects all of those countries but some of them are able to produce economic growth and to maintain employment despite the international recession. This Government simply cannot do that. Secondly, we should note that in blaming the international recession it is relevant to bear in mind what is causing that recession. There are various factors involved but I do not have time to go into all of them. A major factor is the pursuit of damaging contractionary monetarist policies in major countries, particularly the United States of America and the United Kingdom. These countries, which together form a large part of the Western economy, have pursued policies under the Reagan and Thatcher governments which have been disastrous not only for these countries-by producing spiralling unemployment, stagnant growth or a declining rate of growth and record high interest rates-but they
have also depressed the whole world because of their impact on world trade. This could be described as a sort of beggar thy neighbour deflationary policy which not only beggars thyself but also, because of the impact on the world economy, beggars other countries as well. That kind of policy is extraordinarily damaging, therefore, not just to those countries but to countries like Australia, and the rest of the world.
Rather than accepting the international recession as being-which the Treasurer doessomething that cannot be influenced, the Australian Government should be protesting vehemently against such policies being pursued in major countries. This Government should be urging those countries to adopt more expansionary policies. But, of course, this Government is doing the opposite. This Government supports those kinds of policies. It thinks that the policies of the Reagan Government and the Thatcher Government are, in general, on the right tram. This Government was a little critical of the Reagan Government; it thought the Reagan Government was being too expansionary. In general terms this Government basically supports those kinds of policies-policies which are proving disastrous for those countries and for the rest of the world, including Australia. The international recession is no excuse for doing nothing about what is happening in Australia.
Likewise, the scapegoating of wages does not excuse this Government, particularly because this

2046 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

The Economy

Government just cannot wash its hands of what happens in regard to wages. What happens in this area is heavily influenced by government action. This Government acted in a way which opened the door to a wages take-off in the last financial year. Over several years it attacked and weakened the indexation system and, finally, destroyed it altogether. Wages were then left to be determined by market influences-the great market was going to decide what was to happen to wages, which was what the Government wanted to see happen. What was the result? The result was a substantial real wage rise in 1981-82. If the Government now considers this to be a major factor in unemployment it has only itself to blame because it created the situation in which the wages take-off could occur. This, of course, typifies what is hoplessly wrong with this Government. It has a faith in market solutions that is utterly unrealistic and belies all the evidence of the past decade. The fact is that the ability of governments to influence economic behaviour by traditional economic tools of budgetary and monetary policies is growing weaker and weaker. I do not have time to go into the reasons for that, but that is the undeniable fact. The enormous change in the unemployment/inflation relationship in the last decade or two demonstrates that proposition. It now takes far more unemployment to keep inflation at any given level than was the case 10 or 20 years ago. Therefore, policies that rely on unemployment for inflation control-that is, policies which contract the economy to the point at which inflation is bearable-condemn us to a contractionary recession and ever-increasing unemployment.
If there is to be any hope of recovery we must, as some eminent economists such as Professor Galbraith, for instance, have been stressing for years now, have more interventionist policies by government to control inflation. The evidence that such policies provide a much better outcome than the conservative market oriented policies is demonstrated by what has happened internationally in the past decade. In particular, if one looks at a country such as Austria which has pursued such a policy of intervention in respect of income and price determination over the past 13 years, one will see that the result is remarkable. Austria is a success story of Europe and the Western developed world in the last 13 years. It has achieved this not by pursuing monetarist policies but by spurning such policies and pursuing policies which have reliance on direct government intervention and not on indirect influences via the market place. Such considerations demonstrate the poverty of the Treasurer's claim that

Australia does not need a reversal of economic policy. This is exactly what Australia needs. It needs a totally different economic policy if we are to overcome the tremendous economic problems that now face us.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong Treasurer) (11.41)-As I listened to the concluding portion of the speech of the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) and his very glowing references to the economic policy in Austria I reflected that, as far as the socialist viewpoint was concerned 10 years ago the great idol was Sweden and now, apparently, it is Austria. This sort of debate poses three questions: Firstly, where is the economy at present? Secondly, why is the economy where it is at present? Thirdly, should fundamentally different policies be followed? Apart from his declaration in the last 30 seconds of his speech that we need a completely different policy, the honourable member for Gellibrand did not give us the benefit of his wisdom as to what that different policy ought to be. He presumed to take apart the economic policies of the present Government.
No one on either side of this House would deny for a moment that Australia is not being significantly affected by the economic recession which has afflicted the entire industrialised world and large parts of the developing world over the last year or two. There can be no doubt that that recession is hitting Australia very hard. There can equally be no doubt that matters have been made worse in Australia by domestic developments. Some of those domestic developments are beyond the wit and control of any government. Those domestic developments of course include the disastrous effects of the drought which is probably the worst drought that this country has had for the last 30 or 40 years.
The second undeniable contribution that we have made to our present domestic economic situation is in fact the extent to which until very recently our wages grew beyond our capacity to pay them. Wages growth in Australia over the past year or two, whatever the honourable member for Gellibrand said, has made a very big contribution to making this country uncompetitive and destroying the profitability of Australian firms, thus robbing them of the capacity to invest for productive purposes and to employ more people or to retain their existing staff. The honourable

The Economy

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2047

member said nothing which disputed the proposition. It cannot be disputed that if it is not profitable for the private sector to invest it will disemploy people. If it is not profitable for firms in Australia to invest in the future they will not have the economic capacity to employ people.
The honourable member for Gellibrand talked as though unemployment is something that Australia alone has and that it is out of step with the rest of the world. That is the impression he gave, but in reality the reverse is the case. Unemployment in the United Kingdom is now in the order of 13 per cent; in the United States it is over 10 per cent; in West Germany it is almost 8 per cent; in Canada it is over 12 per cent; and in France it is around 9 per cent. Does that indicate that Australia is alone or that in some way what is happening here is totally unrelated to what is happening in other parts of the world? No, Mr Deputy Speaker, the reverse is the case. We are, of course, affected by what is happening in other parts of the world. We have to ask ourselves these questions: Why is it that the rest of the world has gone into a state of recession? Why is it that we have compounded that international condition by our own domestic shortcomings? The fact is that the Western industrialised world has lived through the longest period of sustained high inflation~certainly for this century and perhaps for an even longer period.
Nothing that the honourable member for Gellibrand and the critics of the present economic policies of the Government can say alters the fact that the major contribution towards the present world recession and the staggered economic growth must be traced back to the sustained high levels of inflation that the Western industrialised world has had over the last 10 or 15 years. It is only if we are prepared to tackle those problems, to see the distance, and to persevere and not stop and go with anti-inflationary policies that we will ultimately have a hope of returning to conditions of sustained economic growth. Anybody who believes that those realities can be put aside and that we can indulge ourselves in the luxury of some expansion and monetary and fiscal laxity in policy and not see the consequences has not read the economic history of the Western world over the last 10 or 15 years. It is only because countries such as the United States are now showing a willingness to persevere with those policies that I believe in the long run there are prospects for a return to sustainable growth in our kind of economies and in our kind of world. I could not think of anything more likely to condemn the industrialised world to a feeling of hopelessness

and despair than a major reversal of economic policy in the major economies.
The honourable member Gellibrand talked about Japan and Austria. He did not, of course, tell us that the Japanese Government, as part of its most recent fiscal announcement, has given itself a target of reducing its Budget deficit. Japan has a savings ratio of 20 per cent, compared with a savings ratio of about 13 per cent in this country and about 6 per cent in the United States. In other words, it is a country with a greater capacity than other countries, because of that savings ratio, to fund a large Budget deficit. Yet even in Japan where real interest rates have reached levels of 5 per cent or 6 per cent there is concern about the size of the Budget deficit. In other words, there is a recognition that firmer monetary policies are necessary. To suggest, as the honourable member for Gellibrand did, that Japan has a more expansionary fiscal and monetary policy is completely to misunderstand what in fact is happining in Japan. The honourable member knows that. To state that a country that has a savings ratio of 20 per cent is not concerned about a large Budget deficit is completely to misunderstand the relationship between the two.
The developments that have occurred in the world economy over the past six months, I believe, give some cause for optimism in a number of areas. There can be no doubt that levels of growth are stagnant and, in many areas, negative, but equally there can be no doubt that many countries have done a great deal to bring down their inflation rates. The average rate of inflation in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries is 7.8 per cent. The inflation rate has fallen to under 8 per cent for the first time since May 1978. It is no accident that over the past couple of years, the OECD area has experienced a major slow down of economic activity as a consequence of the rise in inflation that has occurred since 1978. There is a link between slow growth, stagnation and unemployment on the one hand and sustained high levels of inflation on the other. It is a link that cannot be denied; it is a link that will never be broken; and it is a link that ought not to be ignored by this Government, or indeed any other government.
The rate of inflation of our major trading partners is now 6t per cent. The United States inflation rate has fallen from 14.7 per cent to just under 6 per cent. Yet the honourable member for Gellibrand says that those policies are a failure. He criticises the policies of the Reagan Administration. He says that they ought to be reversed. Yet in this very short period the United States inflation rate has fallen from 14.7 per cent to just

2048 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

The Economy

under 6 per cent. In the last 18 months the United Kingdom's inflation rate has fallen from almost 22 per cent to about 8 per cent. Yet the honourable member for Gellibrand comes into this House and says that the anti-inflationary policies of the Thatcher Government are also a failure. The Japanese inflation rate has come down to around 2 per cent.
When we look at those figures-at the United States with an inflation rate under 6 per cent, the United Kingdom with an inflation rate of 8 per cent and Japan's inflation rate at around 2 per cent-we see two real messages. The first message is that the anti-inflationary policies of those governments that the honourable member for Gellibrand has so severely criticised are working. The basis is being laid by the success that is being achieved in those anti-inflationary policies for conditions of sustained growth. The other message we see in those figures is for us, that unless we get our rate of inflation down to more competitive levels, and unless we get back to the situation that we had two or three years ago when our rate of inflation was below that of our major trading partners, we will not get back to conditions of sustainable growth; unless we can get back to those
conditions, unless we can bring down that inflation rate and unless we can provide economic conditions where business will start to invest again-because it is profitable to invest again and because one can make money if one invests again-we will not see any sizeable dent being made in the unemployment levels in this country; until we get back to conditions of growth and prospects of growth so far as the private sector is concerned we will not see a situation where employment commences to grow again.
The idea has been put forward that, in some way, that economic imperative and the laws of arithmetic can be ignored by the Opposition and in some way, according to some vague philosophy of greater government intervention in the area of prices and incomes, there can be a replacement for the creation of market conditions in which business will find it more profitable to invest and the natural momentum of economic growth will create more jobs. The idea has been put forward that that reality can be replaced by some false commitment to vague notions of government intervention and the development of prices and incomes policies which sound very attractive but, in reality, are simplistic solutions to an economic situation. Where indeed is the evidence that, in the Australian situation, a formal prices and incomes policy could conceivably work? Attempts that have been made in the past to bring about a degree of wage restraint in a voluntary way have

not been successful. The honourable member for Gellibrand knows this. Prices and incomes policies have had very short lives in other parts of the world when they have been tried.
Of course, I have to say again that perhaps the most outrageous aspect of the attacks that are made upon the Government's economic policies by the Opposition is the suggestion that in some way, because we have a different and, I believe, a more realistic way of bringing about a lasting reduction in unemployment, we are indifferent to the fact that now 7t per cent of people in Australia are out of work; that in some way the Government, unlike the Opposition, does not care about this; that in some way those on the other side of the House who hold socialist policies have some kind of monopoly of concern about the situation of the unemployed in this community. I remind the honourable member for Gellibrand that the last Budget, within the confines of what we believe was a very responsible monetary and fiscal outcome, provided an increase of 21 per cent in training programs for the year 1982-83. It maintained a significant expansion within the expenditure side of the Budget with the emphasis on capital works programs. In a number of other areas, where benefits and incentives are provided to young people to remain in tertiary institutions and for less well off parents to maintain their children in those institutions or in secondary schools, the Budget provided for a considerable expansion of those benefits. If honourable members go through a number of other areas in the Budget and add those to the ones I have just mentioned they will find a situation where, within the basic economic beliefs that we have, within the confines of the Budget which addresses realistically the economic situation at the present time, there has been a very significant attempt by the Government to mitigate the effects of unemployment on large sectors of those in the community who are less fortunate in having jobs.
I simply conclude by saying that, once again, the Opposition has squibbed the link between inflation and unemployment and economic growth. Once again the Opposition has talked about an alternative economic policy but has failed dismally to provide any evidence that an alternative economic policy is either required or, if required, would be likely to work.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Acting Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:

Petitions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2049

Vietnam Veterans
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That US, Australian and allied forces used huge amounts of toxic chemicals for military purposes, such as Agents Orange, Blue and White, in Vietnam during the war there;
(2) Many of these chemicals were, and are, known to be highly dangerous to human health;
(3) Australia's Vietnam veterans and their families are suffering many severe problems which may be due to their exposure to these chemicals; and
(4) The Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia has been seeking a Royal Commission for well over two years to ensure an independent investigation of these matters.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament of Australia will:
(a) express its support for the Royal Commission; and
(b) urge the Federal Government to establish the Royal Commission immediately.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Retirement Benefits: Private Enterprise
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth our concern that:
I. The Income Tax Assessment Act (the Act) and its administration is inadequate in providing retirement benefits for employees in private enterprise;
2. The Commissioner of Taxation (Commissioner) denies deductions necessary to index retirement pensions;
3. Deductions for the self-employed and employed are inadequate;
4. The Commissioner has exercised his discretion improperly by negating a choice the Act allows on investment in Government Securities;
5. The Commissioner's constant alterations to guidelines and lack of communication has created great uncertainty;
6. The Commissioner is acting arbitrarily, and without proper notice in restricting trustee's investments with employers;
7. The Commissioner seeks to apply new actuarial guidelines retrospectively to July 1981.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, take action to remedy these inadequacies and in particular we pray that action be taken:
(i) To ensure that the Commissioner exercises his discretion only with proper regard to legal principles;
(ii) To ensure that the Commissioner does not delegate to auditors part of his function of administering the Act;
(iii) To enact legislation allowing proper levels of retirement benefits to be provided;
(iv) To ensure that retirement benefits are regulated by a Department with a primarily social welfare function.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr N. A. Brown.

Petition received.
Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian postal service meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any reduction in Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward will destroy the concept of the national postal service and result in:
Increased rates for mail carried outside the capital cities; a reduction in mail delivery and collection frequencies in non-profitable areas; the closure of post offices.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Telegram Sen-ices
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Berowra respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin.
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicily, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Edwards.
Petition received.
Telegram Sen-ices
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Richmond respectfully showeth:

2050 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Petitions

That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
1. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin.
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the serVice,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicily, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Anthony.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We tpe undersigned citizens of the electorate of Fisher respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin.
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicily, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann.
Petition received.

Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Lowe respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
1. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin.
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicily, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Maher.
Petition received.
Slaughter of Marine Mammals
To the Honourable the speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
l. Since the Australian Whaling Protection Act, 1980, provides for the banning of imporation into Australia of all whale by-products, and
2. The Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the International Banning of Whaling.
3. Then consistent with (1) and (2), this Government should immediatley legislate to ban the imporation of all marine mammal by-products, including the harp seal of Canada, and
4. Through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly, the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an International ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that: Consistent with Legislation on whaling, this Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products, and support an International ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

Petitions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2051

That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subject to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(1) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and scource should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(a) the shipment of live animals for slaughter overseas and
(b)" the shipment of live horses to Japan sentences such animals to cruel and inhumane treatment in the export process and at the hands of foreign importers.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ban the export of live animals for food and allow only carcass trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Telephone Service for Pensioners
To the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the indiscriminate denial of the telephone rental concession to pensioners who share accommodation with others whose weekly income is greater than $104.15 is causing many needy pensioners unnecessary hardship.
The vast majority of pensioners who share accommodation do so out of necessity, i.e. to help in defraying household expenses or to provide a home for their children. They do not derive significant financial gain through sharing accommodation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will devise a Household Income Test which will reflect the true financial position of such pensioners and will direct Telecom Australia to extend the telephone rental concession to all pensioners not deriving significant financial gains through sharing accommodation with others.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Interest Rates
To the honourable Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by the Government's failure to act to relieve the plight of many Australians who are being financially crippled by high mortgage repayments.
That we protest on behalf of all those seriously affected by the current crisis in rising mortage repayments and those facing the near impossibility of obtaining housing loans.
That your Government's policies are forcing a downward trend in the percentage of Australians striving to achieve the "Great Australian Dream" of home ownership.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:
Resolve to demand immediate Government action to institute policies which recognise our grave problem and will preserve and maintain the "Great Australian Dream" of home ownership rather than continue to destroy that dream.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) The Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose; and
(b) The National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
In Vitro Fertilisation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned show that as the treatment, in Vitro Fertilisation and Embryo Transfer (commonly referred to as the test tube baby program) is bringing new hope to infertile couples, and leads the world in this

2052 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Petitions

method, we therefore wish to voice our support for the IYF and ET program.
Your petitioners therefore pray that this supplication is accepted and that no action to restrict or ban the IYF and ET program, both at this time and in the future, will be taken until a National Referendum is held on the "Test Tube Baby" Program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrLloyd.
Petition received.
OYerseas Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We the undersigned petitioners respectfully request the Federal Government to implement the United Nations call of 1971 inviting Australia to contribute 0.7 per cent of our Gross National Product as official development assistance to Overseas Aid.
That Australian Aid reached a new low of 0.45 per cent of our Gross National Product in 1981 and that Australian Aid has fallen faster than that of any donor country in the last six years is most regrettable and embarrassing.
We pray our Government to rectify that position and to implement the United Nations target of 0.7 per cent of Gross National Product by 1985.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd.
Petition received.
Foreign MHitary and Intelligence Facilities in Australia
To the Honourable Speaker of the House and Members of the House of Representatives, of the Australian Parliament. The petition of the undersigned Australian citizens showeth that:
I. Life on the Australian continent and regions nearby is threatened with a nuclear attack on the joint AustraliaUnited States facilities at Pine Gap, Nurrungar and NorthWest Cape.
2. That Australian control over these foreign bases is so ineffective, that at least on one occasion a foreign base has put on 'red alert' without the knowledge of the Australian government.
3. That through the presence of foreign bases on our soil, Australia is aligned with a super power and therefore involved in any escalation of tension and competition between superpowers.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
The Australian Government take note of the Parliamentary Joint-Committee of Foreign Affairs and Defence report that found Australia is a likely nuclear target, and make arrangements for an immediate top-level meeting between the governments of the USA and Australia to re-negotiate the relevant treaties, with a view to the early cancellation and removal of all foreign military and intelligence facilities from Australian soil.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.

Aboriginal Land Rights
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders are angry. The Queensland Government plans to abolish reserves and give 50 year leases of land to the Aboriginal Communities instead. The Communities do not want this to happen. They want proper ownership of the land so that it cannot be taken away. This means freehold title.
With regard to the Aborigines Act. Even with the Act abolished, the people still want special legislation to allow community councils, elected by the people, to be in control of the management of communities. This can be done without any complications, and at no disadvantage to any Queenslanders.
Your Petitions therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government use their constitutional power to ensure that Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders are given freehold title to the reserves on which they live, and that they pass special legislation to give self-management to the people.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
AdYertising of Alcohol
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the citizens of Queensland respectfully show:
Last year, over 3,300 people died on Australian roads;
alcohol is a factor in 50 per cent of road deaths;
alcohol advertisements do not show the perils of driving after drinking alcohol;
alcohol advertisements are glamorous and increase their effect on teenagers, indicating drinking alcohol as the social pastime;
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will legislate to ban the advertising of alcohol from commercial television and radio.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dean.
Petition received.
TeleYision Reception in Hillwood, Tasmania
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain electors of the Division of Bass respectfully showeth:
That they receive inadequate television reception in Hillwood, Tasmania.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Television reception in Hillwood and adjacent areas be improved.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Newman.
Petition received.

Parliamentary Delegation to Africa

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2053

AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO AFRICA
Report
Mr MOORE (Ryan)-by leave-I present the official report of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to Africa. I take this opportunity to say a few words about the visit. It was a unique opportunity to join with the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen), the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) and the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher), together with Senator Young, Senator Sibraa and Senator Hill, to visit a series of countries which I do not think that as a whole an Australian parliamentary delegation has been to. One of the significant feelings I, as a visitor to those countries, had was the high standing that Australia was held in with all the countries we visited, the general appreciation felt of the role played by the Prime Minister of Australia (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in the affairs of Zimbabwe and his general high standing in all the countries we visited.
In a continent plagued by East-West competition-evidence of that is always present, no matter which country one visits-one cannot help but notice the plight of the domestic economies of those countries. These economies are based on commodity prices and have taken an enormous pounding in, recent times. They are almost entirely dependent upon imported oil and are greatly affected by price rises in oil. Those economies have to bear the cost of substantial borrowed funds and, therefore, their balance of payments position is made up of deteriorating commodity prices, rising oil prices and a significant contribution towards interest payments. In one or two of the countries visited, those sorts of payments alone add up to 80 or 90 per cent of their total foreign earnings. As a consequence, their currencies are non-convertible and, as a consequence of that, supplies of parts and other forms of equipment that are so necessary to those nations are just not available. When we add to that the relatively poor management base from which those countries operate and the almost stark neglect of repairs and maintenance, we can see that the domestic economies of the countries we visited do have significant problems.
Against that background, it is my view that the type of aid offered in Africa ought to be directed more towards areas that would best help the local population; in other words, it should not be in the form of armaments, cash hand-outs or sophisticated machinery but rather should be in the form of food and practical help such as providing windmills and silos and, in particular, assisting in farm

management, which is so necessary in those areas as their food production levels deteriorate and their population goes up significantly. The rate of growth in population in Africa is higher than it is in any other continent. In 10 to 20 years, the problems resulting from demand for food will have to be met. It is in that area that I believe Australia can make a very significant contribution in terms of our expertise in farm management. We can make a contribution also in providing simple farm machinery, windmills, silos, ploughs and the like. It was a great privilege to travel with the party to that part of the world. It is something which I will always remember.
Mr COHEN (Robertson)-by leave-I was privileged to be part of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to Africa. Unfortunately, we were on our way there and we were recalled concerning another attempt--
Mr Hayden-For the sake of old friends.
Mr COHEN-We were called back to support some friends. It is to be regretted that their choice of time for their dispute forced us to miss the Nigerian and Somalian parts of the trip. That was very inconsiderate! If I have some comments to make on the trip, they would be to the effect that it was too rigorous. I think it is a mistake for us to try to visit seven countries in the space of three weeks. There is a problem with travel in Africa, when one is zipped from one side of the continent to another and has to stay in certain places overnight just to pick up a connection. That meant that, probably of our three weeks away, five or six days were spent in travel. I take the view that, whilst I think trips of that nature are vitally important to Australia, we should concentrate on particular areas. We should perhaps have concentrated on East Africa on that trip and should have made another trip at another time to West Africa. A lot of time is wasted travelling. When one is able to spend only one and a half days in Mauritius, two days in Ethiopia and three days in Somalia, it means that one does not get a reasonably good impression of what is going on in those countries.
Not only was the trip too rigorous but also at times was it too dangerous. In Zimbabwe, we had only just arrived at a hotel when we were informed that the receptionist had been shot and robbed of $5,000. Later that morning, 10 hostages were taken down the road and six of them, two of them Australians, still have not been found or released. We got back to Harare later that day to find that 10 or 11 planes had been blown up at the airport at Gweru. We were fortunate later to go to Zambia and then to Kenya, where we got

2054 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Parliamentary Delegation to Africa

caught up in the middle of a coup! As a matter of fact, people were becoming very concerned that other countries we visited might suffer an earthquake or something of that nature. Fortunately, we got out of Africa in time for the continent to survive.
Let me add my comments to the comments made by the previous speaker on this matter, the honourable member for Ryan (Mr Moore). He said that Australia's standing in Africa is very high. That is absolutely true. That high standing started when the previous Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, cut ties with South Africa and supported independence for Zimbabwe. That has been followed up by the present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). Although we may disagree with him on almost everything else, we totally support his stand in Africa. He has done an excellent job. Frankly, his standing is higher in Africa than it is in Australia. I think we probably could send him over there and find a country where he would make a better job of Prime Minister than he does here.
Let me pay tribute also to the work being done-it was commenced by the Labor Government-on the aid project in Magarini, where some $23m is being spent to provide farms for thousands of Kenyans. I congratulate the many Australians who have worked on that project. I make special mention of the excellent aid program that our Prime Minister instituted in Zimbabwe, where some 160, I believe soon to be raised to 250, Australian school teachers are doing a magnificent job. Wherever we went in Zimbabwe, we were told of the wonderful job that the Australian school teachers were doing, how popular they were and how well received they were by black and white Zimbabweans. I make special mention also of the work done there by Jeremy and Kay Hearder our High Commissioner and his wife. We were well received and looked after by people in our high commissions and embassies throughout Africa, but I make particular mention of Jeremy Hearder, who did an absolutely superb job. I think Australia is very lucky to have a high commissioner of his calibre there.
I make just one or two further comments before I wind up. President Moi, whom we were fortunate enough to meet before the attempted coup, mentioned how impressed he was, when he was here to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, by the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology. Something which I think the previous speaker indicated and which certainly was evident to all of us there was that, if the Africans need anything, it is help in the area of basic technology. I would think that, if Australia

is looking for ways of helping Africa, we should provide assistance either by having institutes of technology started in Africa or by bringing people over here to study in our institutes. I would prefer the form~r.
I would like to add to what the honourable member for Ryan said when he talked about the problem of family planning. It really is terrifying. The population growth rates in Zimbabwe and Kenya are of the order of 3.6 per cent and 3.8 per cent. I have not checked my figures, but I recall that it is estimated that the present population of Kenya is about 17 million. Someone said that, if there is no slowdown in the growth rate, by the year 2050 the population will be 250 million. Unless these problems of population growth rate are tackled in Africa, all the aid and all the assistance are absolutely worthless.
I think the Africans themselves have to do something about the way in which they treat women. The role of women in African society is frankly horrifying. We were present during a debate in the Kenyan Parliament. One of the three women members of the Kenyan Parliament rose in the House to talk about the responsibility of men who sired children out of wedlock. She was greeted with mockery, scorn and abuse by almost all the males in the Parliament. It is just terrifying to see the way in which women in Africa are treated. They seem to do all the hard work. They carry enormous loads on their backs and work in the fields. I think the Africans have to look to solving that problem.
I think Australia should do what it can to continue to give aid in Africa, particularly to Zimbabwe which, with the exception of the Ivory Coast and Senegal, is the only country in Africa which is still a democracy. I was very impressed, as most of the delegation was, at our meeting with Prime Minister Mugabe. But I am concerned that he wants to see Zimbabwe become a one-party state. The history of Africa with regard to democracy is depressing. One by one the states of Africa, after starting as democracies, have become oneparty states, giving as rationalisation and excuses that they have not had experience, that they have different tribal problems and so on. Not all of them are totalitarian and not all of them are completely undemocratic. Nevertheless, the tendency for Africans to use their tribal situations as an excuse to turn their countries into one-party states is to be deplored. I think this country needs to give as much assistance as it possibly can to a country such as Zimbabwe and encourage it to continue to be a multi-party state and genuine democracy.

Parliamentary Delegation to Africa

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2055

Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler)-by leave-I was one of those members of this House who were fortunate enough to be part of that delegation to Africa earlier this year. I found it one of the most educative processes of my life. I echo the comments of the previous speakers about the high calibre of representation that Australia has in Africa, with one notable exception which I will refer to later. The people representing us in aid programs in agriculture and as teachers in Zimbabwe do our country great credit. The work they do in those countries is a great credit to them. That is the kind of aid that Australia should be providing around the world. Australia is thought of extremely highly because of the low profile that our representatives take and because of their genuine desire to be of assistance to the people they go there to work with. Australia's involvement in the aid program is very much a partnership-not Australian telling Africans what they should do but Australians providing assistance when they are asked for it. I think that is a very good example to other countries of the method by which we should accept the moral responsibility those of us in the developed world have to those in the developing world.
I would like to see, as I know many of my colleagues would, an increase in our aid program for those countries which, in a sense, share common boundaries with us in the Pacific and on the Indian Ocean rim of Africa. As the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) has said, the funding by Australia of an institute of technology in East Africa would probably be one of the best ways to help the developing countries there. We saw some of the remarkable programs that other well-intentioned but less well thought-out nations had done. When we were in Somalia we saw a well system in which a diesel generator generated electricity to run an electric motor that pulled water out of the ground. It was apparent to a number of our colleagues who had worked on the land in Australia that windmill technology would have been a lot more simple and a lot more appropriate for the people in the area. We saw on a farm in Ethiopia a tractor graveyard. Of some 30 or 40 tractors only five were working. The country which gave that aid to Ethiopia probably thought it was very sensible. But what Australia did in Kenya was to buy 100 oxen. Oxen do not wear out, do not break down and provide the type of assistance that farmers on small plots need to cultivate their land. It is that type of low technology that we should be specialising in and should be providing to the developing countries in the region in which we live.

The honourable member for Robertson touched on democracy in Africa. I suppose that as we look to Africa from this part of the world, where we have a successful and flourishing democracy, we may look askance at what is happening in a number of African countries. Those who read the rather biased news reports that come from Africa to the Australian Press would probably be very concerned. But I think we have to take into account that it is unfortunate for Australia that most of the news emanating from Africa in our newspapers comes from journalists based in the Republic of South Africa who do not have an interest in seeing that countries to the north of South Africa enjoy favourable comment in the rest of the world. I must say that when I first went to Kenya and Zimbabwe I was rather concerned that Kenya was a one-party state and that it seemed that the Prime Minster of Zimbabwe was talking about moving towards a one-party state. After looking at the system in Kenya, which is probably the most stable country in Africa--
Mr Cohen-It didn't look too stable in the last couple of days we were there.
Mr LEO McLEAY-I disagree with the honourable member for Robertson. Which other country could put down an attempted coup without the army, the police and all the politicians becoming involved in it? The coup in Kenya has been misrepresented very badly in the Australian Press. The coup was caused by a small number of people in the Air Force and by a small number of people at the University of Nairobi, and they were unsuccessful. None of the hierarchy was involved in it. None of the politicians was involved in it. None of the leaders of any of the armed forces was involved in it. When I came back to Australia. I found that my parents had thought that I was dead. They read the newspapers and thought that a rather horrendous thing had occurred. Really what had occurred was instability for four days in the city. That was written up in Australia as a tremendous military upheaval. It was not.
The one-party state that operates in Kenya through the Kanu Party probably has more diversity in it than there is in this Parliament. Although it is a one-party state, the party does not run one candidate in elections as happens in the Soviet Union and many Eastern Bloc countries. There are no party pre-selections. All one has to do is to be in the party and one can be of one point of view or another. A great diversity of candidates run in elections. I think that is very important.
I raised with the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) privately yesterday the question of Australia

2056 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Parliamentary Delt!gation to Africa

flying to Zimbabwe, in particular through Mauritius. I have in my electorate a very large Mauritian community whose members are concerned that the only way they can go home to Mauritius is to fly South African Airways. Under the new arrangements that Qantas Airways Ltd is entering into with Zimbabwe, Australia will not be flying to Mauritius. I think that is quite wrong. The Mauritian Government indicated to both the honourable member for Robertson and me that it was willing to take whatever steps were necessary to see that Qantas was given the right to fly in to Mauritius. It said that it would, if necessary, take legislative action to see that the obstruction being placed in the way of Qantas by Air Mauritius, which is owned by South African interests, is removed. It is keen to see Qantas bring Australian tourists and Australians of Mauritian descent living in Australia back to Mauritius.
Mr Cohen-They want to cut themselves off from dependence on South Africa.
Mr LEO McLEAYThat is right. As the honourable member for Robertson most properly said, the Mauritian Government does not want South African Airways to be the only lifeline into its country. I am sorry to see that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), in his keenness to get Qantas flying to Zimbabwe, has forgotten about Mauritius. It is a country that needs as much tourism and foreign aid as it can get. Many tourists from Australia would be happy to go to Mauritius but they do not want to fly with South African Airways. South African Airways does not encour-
age people to go to Mauritius; it encourages them to fly straight through to South Africa.
In concluding, I will mention one matter which disturbed me. It relates to the so-called coup which occurred in Kenya. The diplomatic representation that Australia has in southern Africa is of the highest calibre but the acting High Commissioner in Nairobi, Mr Luck, showed a lack of judgment in my view. The High Commissioner in Nairobi was at the Organisation of African Unity meeting in Tripoli. He was represented in Nairobi by Mr Luck, the First Secretary. Many Australians were in Nairobi in the three days when there was uncertainty in the city. Many tourists were there. The acting Australian High Commissioner decided that his response to that uncertainty would be to close the High Commission and to allow all the staff to go home. I find that deplorable. Mr Luck said to me that that was part of the standing orders of the Department of Foreign Affairs. If that is so, it is doubly deplorable. Whilst Australians overseas do not normally have any need whatsoever for diplomatic representation, in times of uncertainty, as occurred in Nairobi, they

need such representation. The Government of Kenya had a curfew on the city from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. People were being arrested for breaking the curfew. I thought it imperative that the Australian High Commission staff should have been manningthe telephone.
It was quite wrong that the acting High Commissioner decided that the safety of the High Commission staff was more iITIPortant than representing the interests of Australian citizens. Such decisions were not made by the American Government, the Canadian Government or the Japanese Government, whose staff made a point of going to all the hotels in the city to see whether any of their nationals were registered and, if so, keeping them up to date on what was happening. The acting High Commissioner at the Australian High Commission made a serious mistake in judgment. If, as he said, such action is laid down in the standing orders of the Department of Foreign Affairs, the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) ought to re-examine carefully those standing orders. I for one would not like to see other Australian citizens put in the situation in which my wife and I and the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher) and his wife were put. On that note I thank the House for its time. I commend to the Government the programs we have in Africa and suggest that they be expanded. We should continue the contact we have had with the people in the countries of eastern and southern Africa to ensure that the good name that this country has there is enhanced even further.
SIR ANDREW GRIMWADE
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek the indulgence of the House to read a telex I received this morning from Sir Andrew Grimwade and to table that telex.
Opposition members interjecting--
Mr ANTHONY-If honourable members opposite want to be cynical let them go ahead. The telex is addressed to me as Acting Prime Minister. It reads:
Dear Minister,
Thank you for sending me a copy of your comments in Parliament yesterday. I appreciate your loyalty and support. In the light of malicious and unfounded allegations about tax avoidance, I should be pleased if you could inform Parliament and/ or the Press:
I. My business involvement in Charter Jet Planes is perfectly proper and has no connection whatsoever with tax avoidance.
2. I strongly resent any such reflection upon my character and reputation.

Commonwealth Games

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2057

3. I have offered to assist fully in any government or other inquiries to clear my good name. I am completely confident in the outcome.
4. My retirement on Tuesday 12 October, the day prior to yesterday's smear in Parliament was caused by the pressure of increasing business workload, and I have been seeking a release for some months.
5. I have retired from all government appointments involving interstate travel but not from any based in Victoria.
6. It will be a sad day for Australia when public spirited citizens fear to serve the community, mostly in an honorary capacity and at a cost to their time and family life, in return for the risk of unfounded comments made under the privilege of Parliament.
Kind regards
Andrew Grimwade
COMMONWEALTH GAMES
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister) (12.27)-1 move:
That this House-
(I) expresses its appreciation to all members of the Australian Commonwealth Games Team, the Commonwealth Games Committee and organisers, the Australian Broadcasting Commission, the Australian Sports Institute, Federal and State Governments, and the Brisbane City Council;
(2) highly commends the conduct, personal dedication and performance of all Australian competitors and team members who, by their sportsmanship, have brought great credit to the nation;
(3) pays tribute to the success of all medalists, and
(4) requests the Speaker to convey the terms of this resolution to those concerned.
Australians are proud of their sporting record. It is a long and, 1 think, distinguished one especially when one considers our relatively small population and our distance from the venues of world competition in sport. 1 think Australians can take special pride in the recently completed XII Commonwealth Games in Brisbane. From the beginning of the opening ceremony to the end of the last event, these Games provided some of the most memorable moments in our sporting history and the sporting history of the Commonwealth. 1 emphasise that although these Games were held in Brisbane they involved all the people of the Commonwealth. Although they were held in Australia and, naturally, Australians gave their support to Australian athletes, their hearts went out also to people from around the world who came here to compete with their fellow Commonwealth citizens. 1 believe that these Games were more than a source of pride for Australians; they were a source of pride for all the Commonwealth and for those who share the ideals of the Commonwealth.
It should never be forgotten that it was these ideals that made the Games possible. Without the Commonwealth-all the Commonwealth, small

nations and large-there could be no Commonwealth Games. Under the wing of the Commonwealth Games all competing nations, no matter what their size or sporting tradition, could come together in a true spirit of companionship and friendship. That is a very special achievement. It is an achievement that tends to fade into the background when the media list the medal tallies and we see Australia, England and Canada dominating the winners' podium and the medal ceremonies. It is an achievement, however, that provides the foundation for the Games. It is repeated nowhere else except when the Olympic Games are held. The XII Commonwealth Games in Brisbane gave Australians their opportunity to contribute to this unique sporting tradition. It was an opportunity they grasped with eagerness and enthusiasm and fulfilled in a way which the nation as a whole can be proud of. 1 take the opportunity today to express the nation's thanks to all those involved with the Games.
It is the athletes on whom our attention naturally focuses. However, 1 think our thanks should go out also to the officials, the Games organisers, the people of Brisbane who really put friendship into this great event, and the Australian Broadcasting Commission for its magnificent coverage which took these Games live to so many people around the world. 1 thank all those team officials from every competing country and all those who worked to send sportsmen and sportswomen to compete in Brisbane: Les Martyn, his association and the national sporting associations on the preparation and performance of our teams. Sir Edward Williams, Dan Whitehead, the staff of the Commonwealth Games Foundation and the thousands of volunteers and helpers who epitomised the true Australian spirit of mateship and friendliness. 1 thank the Queensland Government, which did outstanding work in making the Games such a success, the athletes from all countries who gave us so much enjoyment over 10 days, everyone in Brisbane for the warm welcome, the Brisbane City Council and the ABC for a gold medal performance.
1 have spoken of the importance of the Commonwealth and all its members in the success of these Games. There is no doubt, though, that Australians can be proud-very proud-of the achievements of the Australian team. It was our best Commonwealth Games Medal winning performance. With 39 gold medals, 39 silver medals and 29 bronze medals our athletes led the field in swimming, shooting, weight lifting and cycling and performed outstandingly in all sports. Let me deal now with those sports individually. The Chandler swimming complex was magnificent

2058 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Commonwealth Games

and the atmosphere created by the swimmers and the thousands of spectators there matched it completely for emotion and excitement. Australians had the satisfaction of seeing their nation re-established as a leading swimming country in the Commonwealth. Thirteen gold, 13 silver and 8 bronze medals underlined that. Those responsible for this achievement include Lisa Curry, who won three gold medals and one bronze medal; Tracey Wickham, who won two gold medals and one silver medal; Michele Ford, who fought through a first and a second; and Lisa Forrest, who took first place twice. I also mention Cindy-Lou Fitzpatrick particularly for her galant relay swim. In men's swimming, Neil Brooks and Max Metzker showed that they are world class swimmers. Swimming, of course, is not always an individual sport, and team work in it was highlighted when our three winning relay teams defeated others which were regarded as much stronger.
Shooting is a sport that many Australians knew little about before the Games. Few Australians knew of our ability in this sport. Seven gold, three silver and three bronze medals, however, established Australian as number one in the Commonwealth in shooting. When that is compared with the 1978 result of two bronze medals it is clear that administrators, coaches and participants in the Australian shooting must be congratulated on outstanding improvement. Phillip Adams, John Tremelling, Geoff Ayling, Keith Affleck, Peter Heuke, Alex Taransky, Jim Ellis, Terry Runbel, Greg Colbert, Noel Ryan and Alan Smith were individual, pairs and team gold medal winners. Another sport with which many Australians were not familiar before the Games is weight lifting. After the superb television coverage, the intense competition and the success of the Australian team, I expect that weight lifting, together with shooting, will enjoy a well-deserved growth in popularity in Australia. We led the Commonwealth in weight lifting at Edmonton and we retained this crown in Brisbane. With three gold medals and a total of nine medals from 10 events, the quality of our weightlifting team is above dispute. Nick Voukelatos had the honour of winning our first gold medal at the Games. He set an example which was followed by 38 other individuals and teams during the subsequent events. Robert Kabbas, a gold medal winner in Edmonton, again proved his superiority with another gold medal in Brisbane, and Dene Lukin from South Australia also stood out.
The Chandler velodrome, as good a cycling arena as any in the world, was the scene of several more Australian triumphs. The Australian team,

with an international reputation in cycling to uphold, did not let us down. Four gold medals, three silver medals and a bronze medal kept us on top of the Commonwealth cycling table. No one will forget Mich(!el Turtur's great win in the individual pursuit or the record-breaking efforts of our pursuit team, and the gold medals won by Kevin Nichols and Kendrick Tucker underline the superiority they had established in Edmonton four
years earlier.
However, it was not only youth, speed and strength which won gold medals at the Commonwealth Games. This was shown in the lawn bowls in which Australia won its first gold medal in the men's fours. The hundreds of thousands of bowlers throughout our country must all have felt
great pride then and later when Rob Parella was edged into the silver medal place by the brilliant Scottish bowler, Willie Wood. Bowls will receive a great stimulus from these performances, as will badminton, the other sport in which we won our first medal. All our badminton players can be pleased at the way in which they competed against their much more experienced rivals. Though our tally of badminton medals was only one bronze, the point has been made: Australia is on the way.
We also performed well in boxing and archery. One silver medal and four bronze medals in boxing was a great improvement on our efforts in Edmonton. Michael Coen's bronze in archery-a new event in the Games-was pleasing to us all. I think when archery events are discussed, however, Australians would want me to pay tribute to another country, New Zealand, and its dedicated young archer, Neroli Fairhall, for her win in the women's archery final. Diving also brought us new champions, with gold medals going to Valerie Beddoe and Jenny Donnett. Stephen Foley fought through very tough competition to get two silver medals. These were truly meritorious performances.
I have deliberately left track and field events to the last. The Queen Elizabeth II Stadium was the scene of some of the most emotional moments in the Games. The huge crowd, the salutes to established champions, the recognition of new leaders in sport and the farewells to others made for an unforgettable experience. Raelene Boyle proved to everyone's delight that she remains a champion. She also epitomised the true sporting nature of Australia in her acceptance of what could have been a bitter defeat in the final leg of the 4x400 metres relay. It was her last race and she failed by a whisker, but she immediately congratulated the winner. Glynis Nunn became one of our new champions with her win in the heptathlon. On the

Commonwealth Games

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2059

second last day, Robert de Castella took the gold medal for the marathon in a way that set a fine example to all Australians. Gold medals to Peter Bourke, Garry Brown, Ray Boyd, Debbie Flintoff and Sue Howland were other highlights of our resurgence in track and field events.
I have named many of the medal winners on the Australian team. I also want to pay a tribute-a tribute which I believe is shared by all Australians-to all those members of the Australian team who competed willingly and with total dedication without being fortunate enough to win an award. Of course, many are young people who will be champions of tomorrow. All of them deserve our warmest thanks and our admiration for their spirit and their courage.
I also place on record today the contribution of the Commonwealth Government to the Brisbane Commonwealth Games and to this country's sporting efforts generally. Following the Montreal Olympic Games in 1976, where the Australian team had not won a single gold medal, it was clear that intensive coaching and training and a scientific approach to sport in other countries had resulted in our athletes being left behind. The Government responded to that situation with a number of initiatives, probably the foremost amongst them being the establishment of the Australian Institute of Sport. The Institute which has so far cost $34m to build and equip made a significant contribution to the Australian team's success in Brisbane. In the three sports in which the Institute is involved-swimming, track and field and weight lifting-26 of the 70 medals awarded to Australians went to athletes involved with the Institute.
We have offered further assistance to athletes under the National Athlete Award Scheme. Thirty members of the Australian Commonwealth Games team who won a total of 38 medals have received some assistance under this scheme. We are supporting the biennial Australian games. In addition the Sports Development Program provides grants to national sporting bodies to send national teams overseas to major world competition. The 1982-83 allocation for this program is $3.2m. The Australian Government also provides direct funding for Australian participation in the Commonwealth Games. We gave the Commonwealth Games Association $445,000 for the Brisbane Games. That was what that organisation sought. We agreed to give the Australian Olympic Federation what it sought-a total of $1.4m-for the 1984 Olympics. These decisions have been vital for Australian sport, particularly for its future.

The Commonwealth Games brought together the whole Australian nation. The performances of our athletes and the back-up efforts of all involved in these Games deserve the highest praise. The Games also brought together the whole Commonwealth of which we are only a part. The Games are to be remembered for that also. I hope all honourable members will be able to join together in recognising these achievements. I commend this motion to the House.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (12.43)-
It is my pleasure to respond to the motion of the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) regarding the XII Commonwealth Games which were held in Brisbane. I say at the outset that whenever the Acting Prime Minister was speaking about the achievements of the athletes at the Games, not only Australia's athletes but also all the other athletes of the Commonwealth, we supported him fully. In fact, I extend to some of those people the particular thanks of the Australian Labor Party for the great performance that was put on. This was the performance not only of the Brisbane City Council, the Queensland Government and the athletes but also the thousands of volunteer officials who entranced everybody with their spectacular, almost military-like precision, of their movements around the field. There is no doubt that ,the Commonwealth Games brought a great credit to Australia and highlighted the great importance of sport as a means of fostering goodwill and peace in this world.
I pay tribute to the Brisbane City Council, particularly Alderman Brian Walsh who was the Lord Mayor in 1974 at the time when Brisbane first sought these Games. He went to Christchurch, with the blessing of the then Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, and appealed to the Commonwealth Games Association to give Brisbane the Games. Of course, in the last two weeks Brian
Walsh saw that dream come to fruition. I think anybody who saw the opening ceremony in Brisbane could not but be touched by the magnificent effort of those 6,000 Australian children who staged what is probably the most spectacular opening to any similar games that the world has ever seen. I think Australia should be truly proud of these kids and their efforts.
I think there were some touching moments in those Games, as the Acting Prime Minister alluded to. I particularly remember seeing a swimmer from St Helena struggling in the 200 metres race two laps behind the leading swimmers and thinking to myself that he was going to drown before he got there. But he did not. The Acting Prime Minister also alluded to Neroli Fairhall, the paraplegic archer from New Zealand, who

2060 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Commonwealth Games

pleased everybody by winning a gold medal. There is no doubt that Australia's athletes are our greatest ambassadors. The Acting Prime Minister mentioned the names of athletes such as Tracey Wickham, Lisa Curry, Lisa Forrest, Raelene Boyle and the cyclists and the shooters. All of those people who competed will be household names long after we politicians have been forgotten.
Mr Anthony-And the weight lifters.
Mr JOHN BROWN-The Acting Prime Minister mentioned those ethnic weightlifters who brought such achievement to Australia. In making all those comments, there is one sad thing that should be remembered; an Australian cyclist, Gary Hammond, who won a silver medal, is now struggling for his life, having been involved in an accident on the cycling track since the Games were completed. I think all of us will probably say a silent prayer for Gary Hammond that he will be spared to cycle again for Australia.
I do not wish to appear mean-minded or ungracious on behalf of the Opposition when I respond to this motion but I think something should be said to the effect that the Acting Prime Minister, and certainly the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), sought great political gain from our achievements at the Brisbane Games. I think that, if the Government attempts to do that, it is fair enough for me to trace the efforts of the Prime Minister and this Government in sport since they came to power in 1975. I think we will then find the real attitude of this Government to our sportsmen and sportswomen.
The Government's first 'achievement' when it came to power in 1975-1 put that in inverted commas-was to disband the Department of Recreation and Tourism which the late and much loved Frank Stewart had set up. This was the Department that first gave governmental support to sport in Australia. The Government's second move was to take away the $100,000 that Frank Stewart in 1975 had given to the Montreal Commonwealth Games team to prepare for those Games in 1978. That $100,000 for pre-Games training was removed. Of course, the next thing we saw was the Prime Minister at that time, Mr Malcolm Fraser, chartering a special plane from New York to fly to Montreal for those Gameshaving given nothing to help the Games prepare-in the hope of seeing young Stephen Holland win a gold medal in the 1500 metres, which, of course, he did not win. After the spectacular lack of success by Australia in the 1978 Games-last week on television Raelene Boyle particularly alluded to the gratuitous insult that

was offered to our unsuccessful athletes-this Government, that had done nothing to help the athletes, decided there would be a special inquiry into our failure at Montreal. Having given the athletes no support at all, the inquiry should have been into the Government's failure to support them, not the athletes failure to win.
However, as time went on, the Budgets of 1976, 1977, 1978 and 1979 came out with a real reduction in real terms on the Labor Party's budget for sport in 1975. We then came to the 1980 Olympics in Moscow. I think it is worth recalling the attitudes of this Government to the Australian team's attempts to go to Moscow.
Mr Cadman-Do you object to that?
Mr JOHN BROWN-Of course I object to the fact that sportsmen should have been Australia's lone sacrificial victim in protest against the Russians move into Afghanistan. Our trade quadrupled. The Prime Minister's wool finished up in Stalingrad. Our athletes were branded as being traitors if they wanted to go and perform, as they did with great honour in Moscow, on Australia's behalf. I notice that in the Acting Prime Minister's statement he talked about the great achievements of sport as a means of promoting peace and goodwill. All the Government was wanting to do was stop these athletes from performing, no matter how hard they trained, no matter how much of their lives they had put into the preparation to go. All the Government wanted to do was stop them. In order to stop them, the Government took away $500,000 of the $800,000 the athletes had been granted. That was the Government's effort. The athletes succeeded in raising the revenue from other sources. They went to Moscow and they performed brilliantly-with no help from the Government. In fact, the gratuitous insult came in the New Year's Honours of 1981 when the high officials of equestrian, hockey, and yachting teams-the teams that withdrew from that Olympic Games-were rewarded in the New Year's Honours. Where were the gold medal winnersMichele Ford, Neil Brooks, and Mark Tonnelli? They were completely ignored when it was traditional for gold medal winners to get a mention in those honours. So the Government should not tell us about its great contribution to Moscow.
I just mentioned that the Government took $500,000 of the $800,000 contribution for our Olympic Games team in Moscow and left the team with a lousy $300,000 to get there, but it managed to do so. In the last week or two it has been revealed that this Government has paid something like $3m in compensation to all sorts of

Commonwealth Games

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2061

commercial firms around Australia for damages they suffered because of the Government's abortive boycott of the Moscow Olympics. Channel 7 has received over $2m. Palanga, the official Russian tourist agency, has received compensation because people did not go to Moscow. You paid about $3m in compensation to firms for losses attributed to your boycott of the Moscow Olympic games. Yet you can find only $300,000 to send our team there. That is the measure of your real support for sport.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member will address the House through the Chair.
Mr Anthony-It sounds like a defence of Russia's intrusion into Afghanistan.
Mr JOHN BROWN-No, it is not a defence of Russia's intrusion at all. I am quite happy to remind the House of the Prime Minister's statement at that time that there would be a world war within three weeks. He said that if our athletes went to Russia they would be, in fact, giving some glorification to the Russians' move into Afghanistan. Those remarks were made about our young sportsmen. Tracey Wickham was telephoned by the Prime Minister and told that if she went to Moscow she would, in fact, be an Australian traitor. Raelene Boyle--
Mr Hodges-Do you agree with the Russian invasion of Afghanistan?
Mr Cohen-You obviously agreed. You traded with them for months afterwards. You hypocrite!
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I remind the Minister and the honourable member for Robertson that the Standing Orders determine the nature of proceedings in this House. I ask them to recognise them. The honourable member for Robertson, in his impetuosity, offended against Standing Orders. I ask him to withdraw the remark he made.
Mr Cohen-I withdraw.
Mr JOHN BROWN-It is a fact, and it is on the record, that the Prime Minister branded athletes who were going to Moscow as being almost national traitors. He said that they were letting down the national cause and supporting Russia's move into Afghanistan, which was an abrogation of the real spirit of sport, the spirit that was fully exemplified in Brisbane last week when all the nations of the Commonwealth, black and white, competed in peace and harmony and did something to promote some goodwill in the world. That sort of goodwill eventually resulted from the Moscow Olympics despite the Government's best

efforts to frustrate it. I think Australia's efforts in Moscow were of the highest order.
After the Moscow Olympics, in order to paper over the cracks that appeared in the Government's relations with sports, the Australian Institute of Sport was formed. It was a Labor tradition of 1973-Frank Stewart's dream. The Government eventually got round to starting it. It was probably a fortuitous accident that Bob Ellicott, who had resigned from the ministry, was then the Minister in charge of sport as he was a man of great influence in the Cabinet. I think it is a great tribute to Bob Ellicott that the Australian Institute of Sport got off the deck. I pay the Government full tribute for its effort to build up the Institute to the extent it has. The Institute will have a great influence on Australian sport in the future. But let it not be forgotten why it was formed. It was formed only because of the revulsion the Australian people had towards the Government's attitude in Moscow.
Whilst the Government is giving $34m to the AIS-the Labor Party applauds that-let us look at the balance of funding for sport. The sports development grant gives $3.2m to over 100 grassroots sporting organisations. That is a lousy pittance when one considers that the four million people who are attached to those particular sports will contribute $90m in sales tax to the Government in this financial year from the sale of sporting goods. Every mum and dad who are out buying a cricket bat or a football for their kids to get off their butts and do something active are contributing part of that $90m to the Government's coffers. Yet the Government gave a lousy $3.2m to promote those sports.
It is no good having an AIS in Canberra, which is there to prepare our elite sportsmen for their great achievements in international competition, unless there is some encouragement for children at the grass-roots level of sport to gain some advantage also. The honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman), who is sitting on the other side, would know as well as I do that any kid in the western suburbs of Sydney who has some talent and a desire to play sport almost has to be a spartan and have a touch of the primitive to put up with the absolute lack of facilities provided. This is where the Government should be spending some money. It has a health bill of $11,OOOm this year and its contribution to amateur sport is $3.2m at the base level. Can the Government see the disparity? Can the Government see that if it encouraged kids to get off their butts and do something practical to try to emulate the achievements of their heroes and heroines of this world, such as

2062 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Commonwealth Games

the Rae1ene Boyles, it would be achieving something in sport? As it is all members of the Government did in Brisbane was to parade around, particularly the Prime Minister. Every time a television camera appeared he had his head in front of it.
Mr KerinKissing athletes.
Mr JOHN BROWN-In fact, he had the indecency, almost the obscenity, to kiss Tracey Wickham when she won a gold medal, even though he had personally deprived her of a chance to win a gold medal in Moscow. The efforts he put into stopping Tracey Wickham from going to Moscow were unbelievable. They were pressures that a 16-year old kid could not cope with. She regrets to this day that she missed her opportunity to win a gold medal at Moscow. The same goes for Rae1ene Boyle, and she did not forget to tell the nation on Nationwide either. So the Government should not be fooled into thinking that the public thinks it is a great contributor to sport. Members of the public in Australia have a memory. They can remember what the Government did in regard to Moscow. They can remember how mean-minded the Government has been to sport since it came to power in 1975. The public values that against the efforts of the Prime Minister to win a gold medal for cynicism in Brisbane. In fact, in the Bulletin yesterday Mike Gibson, a very popular writer, said:
Another great performer was the Prime Minister. Representing a government that is internationally notorious for the miserly attitude it adopts towards its greatest advertisement-our sportsmen and women-Malcolm Fraser seemed to bob up at the Games whenever a television camera presented itself. He took the gold medal for cynicism. No wonder most competitors to whom I spoke merely grinned wryly and shook their heads at the mention of his name.
That is a real measure of the sportmen's belief in this Government. Now that the Games are over and this Government is on the way out the people of Australia will have a government-comprised of the honourable members sitting behind mewhich really believes in sport and sports people and which will emulate the good deeds of Frank Stewart in the years from 1972 to 1975. We will properly fund sport in Australia, not so that it becomes an extension of government policy-
Mr Bourchier-How much?
Mr JOHN BROWN-With a lot more than the Government is giving. We would give a much greafer percentage of that $90m the Government is getting in sales tax. Let me remind the Government that if someone drew up a list of the 10 most popular Australians, living or dead, the Government would find on it Don Bradman, Raelene

Boyle, Betty Cuthbert, Dawn Fraser-not Malcolm Fraser-and Phariap, a dead horse. The Government would find no Doug Anthony, no Prime Minister Fraser and no Bob Menzies. That is what the Government would find.
Mr Hodges-What are you proving?
Mr JOHN BROWN-I am proving to the Government that Australia's real heroes and heroines are our sportsmen and women. It is high time the Government did something really to appreciate their efforts and their great contributions to Australia's reputation overseas and did something more for sport than trying to get some lousy political gain from their success.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Motion (by Mr McLean) agreed to.
That the question be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Sitting suspended from 12.59 to 2 p.m.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I call the Treasurer.
Mr Hawke-Mr Deputy Speaker--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for Wills.
Mr Hawke-I move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Wills moving the following motion--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Before the honourable member for Wills proceeds I point out that the Chair had called the Treasurer. I assumed that the honourable member for Wills wished to intercede on that matter. Having called the Treasurer, the Chair is bound to adhere to that call unless the Treasurer is amenable to deferring.
Mr Hawke-You have got the call. What are you going to do? Are you allowing me to speak?
Mr Howard-No. I want to introduce these Bills.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL (No.5) 1982 Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2.1 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

Income Tax Amendment Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2063

This Bill will amend the income tax law in a number of respects, primarily to give effect to a number of the Government's Budget proposals. Included in the Bill are the measures necessary to allow a rebate of tax on up to $1,000 of certain dividends, to increase the sole parent rebate and the rebate for a spouse, daughter-housekeeper or housekeeper where there is a dependent child or student and to introduce a rebate of tax for those in receipt of taxable Australian social security and repatriation pensions. The Bill will also reflect the announced reduction in the standard rate of personal tax from 32 per cent to 30 per cent from 1 November 1982 by making consequential adjustments such as to the rate used to calculate various rebates.
Other Budget measures given effect by the Bill include a new rebate of tax for home buyers for the top slice of their interest payments on home loans of up to $60,000, together with a further easing of the dividend distribution requirements for private companies. It also contains provisions to exempt from tax the rehabilitiation allowance payable from 1 March 1983 to persons under treatment or training with the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service and to authorise income tax deductions for gifts of $2 or more made to certain public funds and organisations. The calculation of provisional tax for the 1982-83 year of income is also provided for.
Dependant Rebates
As announced in the Budget Speech, the rebate for a dependent spouse and the rebate available for a daughter-housekeeper or a housekeeper are to be increased by $200-that is from $830 to $1,030-where there are dependent, including student, children. The increased rebate will be available to a taxpayer who would have been entitled to a dependant rebate in respect of a child under 16 years of age or a student less than 25 years of age but for the replacement of such rebates by family allowances.
The sole parent rebate will also be increased by $200 from $580 to $780. Because the increased rebates are to apply from 1 November 1982, the increases for the 1982-83 income year will be $133, representing two-thirds of the full year increase of $200. As zone rebates are partly based on dependant rebates, entitlement to an increased dependant rebate will mean a higher zone rebate. These measures will provide additional help to single income families with dependent children, particularly when combined with other personal income tax reductions which I will mention shortly.

Rebate for Pensioners
Another Budget decision to be implemented by this Bill is the introduction of a special pensioner rebate for income tax purposes. The rebate, together with the increase in the tax-free threshold to $4,595, to be effected by the Income Tax (Rates) Bill 1982 that will be introduced shortly, will ensure that persons wholly or mainly dependent on a taxable social security or repatriation pension do not bear tax.
More specifically, the maximum rebate of $167 for 1982-83-reflecting a 1 November 1982 commencement date for this concession-and $250 in subsequent years will mean that no tax will be payable on taxable incomes of up to $5,007 for 1982-83 and up to $5,429 in subsequent years. The rebate will shade out above these income levels, but the shading arrangements will result in some rebate being available where taxable income exceeds the above levels but is less than $6,343 in 1982-83 and $7,429 in subsequent years.
Home Loan Interest Rebate
Honourable members will recall that on 18 March 1982 I made a statement in this House following a detailed review by the Government of Housing Policy. In that statement. I made it clear that the Government is committed to preserving the highest practicable level of private home ownership in Australia and I announced a tax rebate for home loan interest to alleviate the Burden of housing mortgage payments. The rebate is available from 1 July 1982 to individuals in the first five years of owner-occupancy of a sole or principal residence in Australia. As further evidence of the Government's concern I announced in my Budget Speech an alternative rebate of tax for interest payments made on or after 1 July 1982. The existing rebate will continue to be available and can be used by eligible taxpayers where it offers a larger rebate than the new scheme does in a particular year of income.
The new rebate, which is authorised by this Bill, is to be available to an individual taxpayer resident in Australia in respect of interest paid in a year of income that is attributable to such part of the interest rate as exceeds 10 per cent per annum, calculated on a reducing balance basis, in respect of the first $60,000 of a loan or loans on a dwelling. Unlike the existing rebate scheme the new rebate will not be restricted to the first years of home ownership or by specified upper limits of rebate. The rebate will be at the standard rate of tax and will not exceed the tax otherwise payable on assessment. The rebate is to be allowed on interest paid to the extent to which the interest exceeds 10 per cent per annum of the average balance of a

2064 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Income Tax Amendment Bill

home loan in a year of income. Adjustments may be made to the amount calculated as the average loan balance to account for unusual or additional repayments during a year or for increases in the balance of the loan at a particular time in the year. The proposal to limit the rebate to the first $60,000 of a loan or loans on a dwelling will result in the amount otherwise subject to rebate in a year of income being reduced proportionately if the balance of the moneys owing on the home exceeds $60,000 at the end of the year of income.
Interest will be within the scheme if it is paid on moneys lent to a taxpayer and applied for certain specified purposes connected with a dwelling used by the taxpayer as his or her sole or principal residence. Those purposes include the acquisition of land on which a dwelling is subsequently constructed, the construction of a dwelling or the acquisition of land on which there is already a dwelling. Interest on moneys used to extend a dwelling may also qualify. Where moneys are borrowed partly for the purpose of acquiring or constructing a dwelling and partly for other purposes, so much of the interest as is attributable to only the part of the moneys applied to acquire or construct the dwelling will qualify for the rebate. Moneys borrowed on the security of a dwelling will not qualify unless they are expended for a qualifying purpose. Interest payments that attract income tax deductions under ordinary rules will continue to be deductible and will not attract the rebate. A taxpayer who is entitled to a rebate under either the new scheme or the existing home loan interest rebate scheme will be able to elect to transfer that benefit to his or her spouse. The rebate is to be incorporated in the pay-as-you-earn tax instalment deduction scheme as from 1 November 1982. Taxpayers taking advantage of the rebate by this method will be required to complete a declaration form and lodge it with their employers.
Dividend Rebate
In my Budget Speech I announced that the Government had decided to allow a rebate at the standard rate of tax on up to $1,000 of dividends, included in taxable income, that are received by resident individuals from resident companies. The rebate will not apply to dividends paid by cooperative companies that are accorded special income tax treatment, dividends that are taxed at special higher rates of tax and certain amounts that are deemed to be dividends for income tax purposes.
Since the earlier announcement, it has been decided that the rebate should be extended to dividends paid by the limited number of foreign companies that are listed on Australian stock

exchanges. This Bill will give effect to these decisions. The new rebate will first apply in income tax assessments for the 1982-83 year of income. This measure will provide some relief from what some see as the double taxation of dividend income, while at the same time giving encouragement to small investors.
Retention Allowance of Pril'ate Companies
The Bill also gives effect to the Budget proposal to ease further the dividend distribution requirements for private companies under Division 7 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. It is proposed to increase-from 70 per cent to 80 per cent-the proportion of after-tax business income that a company may retain without becoming liable to pay the undistributed profits tax. This measure will further assist small businesses in maintaining adequate working capital and mean that this Government has increased the retention allowance from 50 per cent to 80 per cent since it came to office. Private companies will benefit from the increased retention allowance in respect of income of the 1981-82 and subsequent income years. It is not proposed to vary the 10 per cent retention allowance for property income or the rule that dividends received by one private company from another must be distributed in full if undistributed profits tax is to be avoided.
Gifts
The gift provisions of the income tax law allow deductions for gifts of the value of $2 or more to specified funds, authorities and institutions. Details of each of the proposed extensions of this concession have been the subject of previous statements and I need mention them only briefly now. One extension will authorise deductions for gifts made during the 1981-82 and 1982-83 financial years to a public fund established and maintained exclusively for the relief of civilian victims of the conflict in Lebanon. Another will authorise deductions for gifts made after 17 August 1982 to the United Nations Association of Australia Decade of Trees Greening Australia and to a range of conservation organisations. Details of this particular proposal, including the names of the eligible organisations, were announced in my statement of 17 August 1982.
Since that announcement the Government has decided that the concession should extend to a further conservation body-the National Parks Foundation of South Australia. The final amendment to the gift provisions proposed by the Bill will authorise deductions for gifts made after 26 August 1982 to the Centre for Independent Studies, the Playford Memorial Trust, the Boy

Income Tax Amendment Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2065

Scouts and Girl Guides Associations in Australia and Amnesty International in Australia.
Rehabilitation Allowance
Mr Deputy Speaker, honourable members will recall my announcement on Budget night that, from the first pension payday in March 1983, persons undergoing treatment or training with the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service who would otherwise be eligible for a social security pension or benefit will be eligible to receive a nontaxable rehabilitation. allowance. The allowance will be equivalent to the invalid pension and subject to the same income test conditions of eligibility as the invalid pension. Legislation providing for the payment of the new allowance was introduced in to the Parliament on 23 September 1982. Under the existing income tax law, the tax treatment allowances received by persons undergoing treatment or training with the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service depends upon whether the pension or benefit to which the allowance relates is subject to tax.
This Bill, by ensuring that the new rehabilitation allowance and associated training and living away from home allowances are exempt from tax, will introduce uniformity of tax treatment for all persons under treatment or training with the Service. The Bill also makes a number of consequential amendments so that no taxpayer will be disadvantaged as a result of a person, who would otherwise be eligible to receive an invalid pension, becoming instead eligible to receive a rehabilitation allowance. The amendments will apply in relation to payments made on or after I March 1983.
Consequential Amendments
As a consequence of the reduction in the standard rate of tax from 32 per cent to 30 per cent from I November 1982, the Bill provides for the adjustment of the rate at which various rebates are allowable, the rate oftax on certain lump sum payments and the rate of withholding tax on mining payments made to Aboriginal groups. The rebates in question are the general concessional rebate, the health insurance rebate and the existing home loan interest rebate. These rebates will be allowed at the rate of 30.67 per cent for 1982-83 and 30 per cent in subsequent years.
The rate of tax on certain lump sum payments for accrued annual and/or long service leave made on retirement or termination of employment similarly will be limited to 30.67 per cent for 1982-83 and 30 per cent for subsequent years. The rate of withholding tax on mining payments made to Aboriginal groups on or after I November 1982

will be reduced from 6.4 per cent to 6 per centrepresenting tax at the new standard rate of 30 per cent on 20 per cent of the gross payments.
Provisional Tax
As provisional tax is part of the broad pay-asyou-earn system and is designed to collect tax on incomes consisting of or including non-salary or non-wage income within the year in which it is derived, it is generally accepted as reasonable that the amount charged should approximate as closely as practicable the amount of tax actually imposed for the year. This achieves a desirable measure of consistency with the treatment of salary or wage earners.
Incomes for 1982-83 are expected to be higher than for 1981-82 and, of course, due to the changes to the personal income tax rate scale, effective rates of tax for 1982-83 will be lower than for last year. Accordingly, as in past years, it is proposed to vary the basis of calculating provisional tax for 1982-83 to be notified in assessment notices to issue this year. The Bill thus provides for 1982-83 provisional tax to be calculated on the basis of 1981-82 taxable income as increased by 10 per cent and applying to the adjusted amount, the lower rates of tax to apply for 1982-83. Generally, rebates allowed in 1981-82 will be taken into account in the calculation. However, where it appears from the information available in the taxpayer's 1981-82 return of income that he or she will be entitled in 1982-83 to an increased spouse, daughter-housekeeper, housekeeper or sole parent rebate, the relevant rebates-including zone rebates where appropriate-allowable in 1981-82 will be increased accordingly.
The new dividend and pensioner rebates will also be taken into account in the 1982-83 provisional tax calculation where it appears, from the information available in the taxpayer's 1981-82 return of income, that he or she will be entitled to one or both of these rebates. It is of course, open to taxpayers who consider that their taxable income for 1982-83 will increase by less than the notional 10 per cent, or who consider that sufficient rebates have not been taken into account, to 'self-assess' and have the provisional tax for 1982-83 recalculated on the basis of their own estimates.
Formal Amendments
Finally, Mr Deputy Speaker, the Bill makes a number of formal amendments to the Income Tax Assessment Act necessitated by the change in title of, and other formal amendments to, the Social Services Act 1947 made recently by the Social

2066 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Unemployment

Services Legislation Amendment Act 1982. Mr Deputy Speaker, a memorandum explaining in some detail the technical aspects of this Bill will be made available to. honourable members. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hawke) adjourned.
UNEMPLOYMENT
Suspension of Standing Orders
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (2.19)-1 move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the member for Wills from moving the followingmotion:
This House deplores the fact that-
(a) While the Budget is still before the Parliament the Treasurer has been forced to admit, less than two months after delivering his Budget speech, that a fundamental element in the Government's economic analysis i.e. the estimated number of unemployment benefit recipients for 1982/83 was grossly understated at 395,000 and has now been increased by 16.5% to 460,000.
(b) The consequent blow-out of estimated expenditure on unemployment benefits by $300 million reveals a combination of incompetence, uncertainty and deception in economic management which destroys any credibility in the Budget or the capacity of the Government to protect the economic welfare of this country.
(c) The uncertainty raised by the Treasurer about the reliability of the Australian Bureau of Statistics sample survey of unemployment figures as an adequate measure of the actual levels of unemployment shows the total delinquency of this Government in the decision announced by the Prime Minister in his razor gang speech of 30 April when he said:
"The regular collection and publication of C.E.S. statistics of persons registered for unemployment and of unfilled vacancies will be terminated: more reliable information on unemployment levels will continue to be available through the Australian Bureau of statistics".
(d) The attempt by the Treasurer to evade blame and to impose responsibility upon his officials for what at the time was manifestly an untenable figure, an attempt which is directly contradicted by the statement on 26 May 1982 of Treasury Secretary John Stone to the Standing Committee on expenditure of this House when he said:
'( am simply making a flat and simple statement that the Budget papers tendered to the Parliament are tendered by the Treasurer. They are his responsibility: They are his papers. He has officials prepare them under his direction. Therefore the content of those papers is his decision, as it should be.'
Not only is it appropriate that the House should have the opportunity to debate this motion but also it is imperative, if we are properly and with integrity to discharge our duty of analysing the Budget legislation. We are entitled to ask: What were the criteria, the purposes, the motivation, in drawing up-
Motion by (Mr Bourchier) put:
That the honourable member be not further heard.
The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

58

Noes

39

Majority

19

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier.J. W. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr.M.A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton.J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean, A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles. G. O-H. Groom. R. J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jull,D. F. Katter, R.e. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. Mackenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore, J. e. Newman. K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair. I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson. D. S. Tuckey,e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. C.

NOES
Beazley, K. e. Blewett, N. Bowen. Lionel Brown, John Cass, M. H. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins. J. S. Duffy.M.J. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding. A. e. Howe. B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones. Barry

Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Maher,M.J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P. F. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis, L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Chapman, H. G. P. Dobie, J. D. M. Lynch. Sir Phillip Porter, J. R. Street. A. A.

Armitage, J. L. Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Everingham, D. N. Fry, K. L. Jacobi, R. Young, M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-Is the motion seconded?

Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (2.29)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I second the

Unemployment

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2067

motion, Faced with daily allegations of incompetence and corruption, this miserable contemptible Government's bastardry resorts to the gag,
Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:
That the honourable member be not further heard,

The House divided,

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr p, C. Millar)

Ayes

59

Noes

38

PAIRS

Porter,J. R. Street, A. A.

Jacobi, R. Young, M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Hawke's) be agreed to,

The House divided,

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr p, C. Millar)

Ayes

39

Noes

60

Majority

21

Majority

21

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Baume. M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier. J. W. Brown. N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron. Donald Cameron. Ewe" Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan. D. 8. Dean,A.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, p, D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles,G.O'H. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris.G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M, Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.
NOES
Beazley, K. e. Blewett. N. Bowen. Lionel Brown. John Cass, M. H. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins. 1. S. Duffy,M.J. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe. B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Jenkins. H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry

Hyde,J, M, Jull,D. F. Katter, R. e. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M, J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e. Newman. K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,l. McC. Spender,J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson. D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.
Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent. L. Kerin. J. C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon. Les Maher, M.J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris. P. F. Mountford,J.G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous. A. C. Uren. T. Wallis, L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

AYES
Beazley, K, e. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown. John Cass.M. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross, M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.l. Free, R. V. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry
NOES
Adermann. A. E. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Rouchier, J. W. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewe" Cameron. Ian Carlton,J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean,A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife, W. e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris. G. McD Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R.l. D.

Jones, Charles Keating. P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L Kerin,J. C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Maher, M.J. Mildren, J. B. Milton, P. Morris.P.F. Mountford, J. G. Scholes,G.G.D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren. T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.
Hyde,J. M. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen. Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J. e. Newman. K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair. I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling,G. E.J. Thomson. D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite. R. A. Chapman, H. G. P. Dobie, J. D. M. Lynch, Sir Phillip

PAIRS

Armitage. J. L Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Everingham. D. N. Fry, K. L.

Armitage. J. L. Campbell,G. Charles, D. E.
Everingham. D. N. Fry, K. L.

PAIRS

Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Chapman, H. G. P. Dobie,J. D. M. Lynch, Sir Phillip

2068 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Income Tax Legislation

PAIRS

Jacobi. R. Young. M. J. Street, A. A.

Porter,]. R.

Question so resolved in the negative.

INCOME TAX (RATES) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.

Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2.41 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will declare the rates of tax payable by individuals and trustees-other than trustees of corporate unit trusts and superannuation fundsfor the 1982-83 financial year and for the 1983-84 and subsequent financial years. In declaring these rates, the Bill will implement the Budget proposals to alter the personal income tax rate scale and to withdraw the benefit of the tax-free threshold from non-resident taxpayers generally.
Honourable members will recall that in my Budget Speech I announced that, with effect from I November 1982, the personal income tax burden would be substantially reduced by increasing the tax-free threshold from $4,195 to $4,595, by reducing the standard rate of tax from 32 to 30 per cent and by increasing the top of the standard rate step in the rate scale from $17,894 to $19,500. These measures will provide the largest proportionate tax reductions to persons on low to average incomes. When taken with other Budget decisions, they will be of particular significance to families and those wholly or mainly dependent on pensions.
The increase in the top of the standard rate step will provide incentive to earn additional income without fear of moving into a higher tax bracket. The changes will apply from 1 November 1982 and will be reflected in lower pay-as-you-earn deductions from that date. Also reflecting that commencement date, the rate scale for 1982-83 is to be an average of the 198 I-82 rate scale and that to apply from I November 1982-made up of fourtwelfths of the 198 I-82 scale and eight-twelfths of the new scale. Application of this average scale will mean that for 1982-83 tax will not be payable by resident individuals until taxable income exceeds $4,462. The corresponding taxable income level last year was $4,195.
The average scale will also mean that, up to a taxable income of $17,894 for 1982-83, the rate of tax payable will be 30.67 per cent-compared with 32 per cent last year-while for taxable incomes in the range of $ I7,894 to $19,500, the rates of tax applicable to the excess over $17,894 will

be 35.33 per cent, compared with 46 per cent last year. The rates of tax declared by the Bill for 1983-84 and subsequent years give full effect to the reduction of the standard rate to 30 per cent and increase in the top of the zero rate and standard rate steps to $4,595 and $I9,500 respectively. As also announced in the Budget Speech, the zero rate step in the rate scale-or tax-free threshold-is no longer to be available to nonresidents, other than those in receipt of taxable Australian social security and repatriation pensions. There is no tax-free amount available in respect of income such as dividends and interest received by non-residents-this income is subject to withholding tax-and the reasons for extending the threshold to residents are seldom relevant to non-residents. (Quorum formed).
The Bill will withdraw the threshold from nonresidents with effect from 17 August 1982Budget day-except in relation to those nonresidents who came to Australia on or before that date for a short working visit or who had made firm arrangements for such a visit by that date. Reflecting the date of effect of the withdrawal, a proportionate threshold of $585 will be available for 1982-83. Consistent with the withdrawal of the tax-free threshold, the minimum taxable income levels presently applying to accumulating income of some non-resident trust estates and to certain income of non-resident minor children are also to be withdrawn from 17 August 1982, with proportionate amounts applying for 1982-83. The provisions of the Bill are explained in detail in a memorandum that will be made available to honourable members. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
INCOME TAX (RATES) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2.49)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is complementary to the accompanying Income Tax (Rates) Bill 1982 which will declare the rates of tax payable by individuals and trustees generally for the 1982-83 and the 1983-84 and subsequent years. That being the case, the Bill will therefore amend the Income Tax (Rates) Act 1976-which presently declares the rates for 198 I-82 and subsequent years-so that it has no application beyond the 198 I-82 year. I commend the Bill to the House.

Income Tax Legis/ation

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2069

Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
INCOME TAX (INDIVIDUALS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2.50)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This is an annual measure which formally imposes personal income tax rates for the current financial year. The rates imposed by this Bill are those declared in the accompanying Income Tax (Rates) Bill 1982. As I explained in my second reading speech on that Bill, the rates for 1982-83 reflect the Budget decision to reduce substantially the personal income tax burden by changing the personal income tax rate scale with effect from 1 November 1982. The resulting tax reductions will benefit all resident individual taxpayers and these, together with increases in certain rebates for dependants and the new home loan interest rebate scheme, are to be reflected in lower pay-as-youearn deductions from I November 1982. The new weekly tax instalment schedule prepared to reflect these changes is being released today to enable employers to incorporate the new instalments in their payroll procedures before 1 November. The reductions in tax will be reflected in provisional tax payable for 1982-83 which is also formally imposed by this Bill. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
INCOME TAX (COMPANIES, CORPORATE UNIT TRUSTS AND SUPERANNUATION FUNDS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reat'ing
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2.52)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will formally impose income tax for 1982-83 on the 1981-82 taxable income of companies and unit trusts treated as companies for tax purposes, as well as on the taxable income of superannuation funds of the current year. The rates of tax are also declared by the Bill and are the same as for 1981-82. The provisions of the Bill follow the same lines as in other years and details of the various rates are set out in the explanatory memorandum that will be made available to honourable members. I commend the Bill to the House.

Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
INCOME TAX (MINING WITHHOLDING TAX) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2.53)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will amend the income tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979 which imposes tax on payments relating to the use of Aboriginal land for mining and exploration purposes. The rate of tax presently imposed is 6.4 per cent, representing, in effect, tax at the current standard rate of 32 per cent applied to one-fifth of the gross amount of the payments. As a consequence of the reduction in the standard rate of tax to 30 per cent with effect from 1 November 1982, the rate of tax on mining payments made or applied on or after that date is to be reduced to 6 per cent. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
LOAN BILL (No.2) 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2.54)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of the Bill is to make provision for the financing of part of the prospective 1982-83 Budget deficit. As is frequently the case, the prospective deficit gives rise to the probability that calls on the Consoiidated Revenue Fund will exceed moneys legally available to that Fund, even after use of various legislative provisions to charge certain expenditures to the Loan Fund rather than the Consolidated Revenue Fund. Honourable members will be aware that expenditure from the Consolidated Revenue Fund cannot validly exceed moneys available to that Fund. Thus, for many years, successive governments have introduced legislation in the form of a loan Bill of the type I am now presenting, for the purpose of funding defence expenditure out of the Loan Fund. In my Budget Speech for 1982-83 I announced that the prospective overall Budget deficit for this year was estimated to be $1 ,674m. At this stage of the financial year, there are two areas where the need for additional outlays has become apparent. One relates to expenditure on the new drought relief measures which, on the

2070 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Bank Account Debits Tax Bill

basis of present tentative estimates, could cost some $350m this financial year.
It has also become necessary to revise the Budget estimate of expenditure on unemployment benefit. Whilst there is a good deal of uncertainty surrounding such estimates, as I explained in the House earlier today, present indications are that expenditure could be some $300m greater than expected at Budget time. Particularly given these sizable additions to the Budget estimates of outlays and hence of the deficit it will be necessary for some defence expenditures to be financed from the Loan Fund. This Bill will therefore authorise borrowings for defence purposes-both under the Department of Defence and the Department of Defence Support-to enable defence expenditure, which would normally be met from the Consolidated Revenue Fund, to be met instead from the Loan Fund. (Quorum/ormed).
I should make it clear, however, that the Bill does not authorise any defence or other expenditures additional to those which have already been authorised by Parliament in Supply Act (No. I) 1982-83 or which will subsequently be authorised in Appropriation Acts for this financial year. In this regard I draw the attention of honourable members to clause 8 of Appropriation Bill (No. I) 1982-83, which makes that Bill subject to the provisions of the proposed Loan Act. The Bill includes a specific limit to the amount of any borrowings that may be undertaken. That limit is $1,500m which amount the Government considers reasonable to meet the prospective deficit in the Consolidated Revenue Fund. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
BANK ACCOUNT DEBITS TAX BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.0)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill formally imposes tax on debits to cheque accounts with banks and sets out the amount of tax payable by reference to the amount of a particular debt. The tax to be imposed by this Bill will range from 10 cents for debits of less than $100 up to $1.00 for $5,000 or more. The tax will generally be payable by the bank with which the account is held, subject to a right of recovery by the bank from its customer.

This Bill also imposes tax that, in special circumstances, will be payable by the customer of a bank. This would be the case, for example, where a person who is a resident of Australia shifts his banking business to an overseas bank for the purpose of avoiding the tax in respect of an Australian account. Tax would in that case be imposed on and payable by that person in respect of debits made to the overseas accounts. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
BANK ACCOUNT DEBITS TAX ADMINISTRATION BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.2)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to give effect to the decision by the Government to impose a new tax from 1 January 1983 on debits to cheque accounts kept with banks in Australia. This new tax should be recognised as being consistent with the Government's policy of seeking to place greater reliance on indirect taxes in order that some relief can be given in the income tax field. Indeed, this and the other Budget measures by which a modest broadening of the indirect tax base has been achieved contributed significantly to our ability to make responsibly a substantial reduction in the personal income tax burden as proposed in the Budget.
I turn now to the practical details of the new tax. Subject to specified exemptions, the tax will apply to all debits made to a bank account on which cheques may be drawn. Debits resulting from cheques drawn on an account, as well as other debits made to an account, such as for periodical transfer payments and for the charging of interest and bank fees, will be subject to the tax. Debits to current accounts held with trading banks will be the primary subject of the tax, although it will also apply to debits to accounts with cheque drawing facilities with other banks such as savings banks, special purpose banks, and certain accounts with the Reserve Bank of Australia.
The liability to pay tax imposed on a debit made to a cheque account will, except in special cases identified in the Bill, fall on the bank in the first instance. Banks with which cheque accounts are kept will be required to furnish to the Commissioner of Taxation monthly returns of taxable

Bank Account Debits Tax Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2071

debits and to pay the tax imposed on those debits. Payment of the tax will be required of the bank within 14 days after the end of the month to which the return and tax relate. Although the banks will be primarily responsible for payment of the tax, the scheme of the tax is that the incidence of it will effectively fall on bank customers rather than on the banks. The Bill therefore proposes that the banks be given a statutory right to recover from their customers the tax payable on debits made to customers' accounts. This may be by direct charge at the time of the debit entry or by some other periodical charge arrangement.
Exemption from the tax will be provided for a range of institutions and some persons. These include public benevolent and religious bodies, hospitals, schools, government departments and instrumentalities, other than for government business undertakings, foreign diplomatic and consular personnel and international organisations for which Australia traditionally grants tax exemptions of this kind in recognition of our treaty obligations. A person or body entitled to exemption from the tax will be able to apply to the Commissioner of Taxation for a certificate of exemption. Banks will be freed from liability to pay tax
in respect of debits to any account for which a certificate of exemption is in force. Certain other classes of debits will also be exempt from the tax irrespective of whether a certificate of exemption is in force in respect of the account concerned. These are debits made to an account to recover from the bank's customer the tax payable by the bank, debits made to reverse a prior credit entry and any debits which are subsequently reversed. Where a bank has paid tax in relation to an entry but is unable to recover from its customer, the bank will be entitled to claim from the Commissioner of Taxation a refund of that tax.
A large portion of the Bill is concerned with the machinery provisions of the kind commonly found in taxation Acts which are necessary for the efficient administration and collection of a tax. Honourable members will note that new tax will not apply to instruments known as bank cheques, since the scheme of the tax is that it will apply only to debits to customers' accounts. Bank cheques are a convenient formal payment instrument for people in the community who do not maintain cheque accounts. I also point out that exemption from the tax is to be provided for debits made to an account held by other banks with the Reserve Bank of Australia or with any other bank. This exemption is intended to ensure that, as far as possible, the tax will fall on customers of banks and not on the banks themselves. This will ensure that the tax can effectively fall

only once on particular transactions. In drawing attention to these two features of the Bill I sound a warning to any who might attempt to exploit them as a means of avoiding the tax.
Let me say that the Government will not stand for any abuse of these exemptions and any move in that direction could well result in their withdrawal. The Bill as a whole, along with its associated Bills, is explained in an explanatory memorandum being made available to honourable members and I think that I need say no more at this introductory stage. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS (JUDICIAL REVIEW) AMENDMENT
BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.7)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This third Bill in the package associated with the new tax on bank account debits proposes an amendment, consequential upon the two Bills I have already introduced, to the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act. Decisions under certain Acts are precluded from review through the system of review provided for by that Act. Decisions connected with the new bank debits tax are also to be excluded from the purview of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act, consistent with the position that prevails in relation to decisions under -various other Commonwealth taxation laws.
However, a bank or other person liable to pay an amount of bank account debits tax and who is dissatisfied with a prescribed decision or assessment by the Commissioner of Taxation in relation to the tax will have available full rights of objection and appeal to a taxation board of review or a supreme court and ultimately, if the matter warrants it, to the Federal and High Courts. Other taxation laws administered by the Commissioner of Taxation that provide similar rights to contest liability, as I have said, are also excluded from review under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act. I also commend this Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.

2072 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

A.C. T. Tax Amendment Bill

AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY TAX (VEHICLE REGISTRATION) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (3.9)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is part of a package of four Bills. Together the Bills will correct some deficiencies in the existing machinery and liability provisions of the law relating to stamp duties and taxes imposed in the Australian Capital Territory, including Jervis Bay. The changes proposed are generally in line with existing arrangements in the States and the Northern Territory. The proposed amendments will extend the exemptions granted in respect of new and transferred registrations of motor vehicles and trailers in the Territory.
The first of the amendments was foreshadowed in statement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) of 7 June 1982. It will exempt from registration tax a transfer, in the course of winding up the affairs of a deceased person, of a motor vehicle formerly owned by that person. The exemption will aply to transfers to executors or administrators of an estate and to a person who is beneficially entitled to the vehicle under a will or by virtue of the law of intestacy. Transfers to a joint owner or joint owners of a vehicle that are consequential on the death of another joint owner will also be exempt.
As foreshadowed in the Treasurer's annoucnement of 7 June, the broadened exemption will apply from I October 1981, the date from which the registration tax first applied. Amendments proposed in another Bill included in the package-the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administraion) Amendment Bill 1982-will ensure that persons who have paid tax in the circumstances covered by this Bill before the Bill comes into force will be able to obtain a refund of the tax paid. The second amendment proposed by the Bill will exempt a transfer of registration of a motor vehicle to a hire purchase company when the transfer takes place as a consequence of the repossession or voluntary return of the vehicle to the company by the hirer. A transfer under equivalent circumstances to a lessor engaged in a business of letting vehicles on lease is also to be made exempt. The new exemptions will apply in respect of applications for registration made on or after today.

The third amendment proposed by the Bill will extend an existing exemption applying to a registration in the name of a person carrying on a business in respect of which he or she is a licensed dealer under the Australian Capital Territory Sale of Motor Vehicles Ordinance where the vehicle is held by the person as trading stock for resale in the course of the business. At present, the transfer of an Australian Capital Territory registration to a motor vehicle dealer elsewhere in Australia-for example a New South Wales dealer in Yass or Queanbeyan-in the course of carrying on business as a licensed dealer is subject to tax. The amendment proposed will extend the exemption to dealers licensed in a State or in the Northern Territory if, in the dealer's own State or Territory, there is an equivalent exemption for Australian Capital Territory dealers. In this regard, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has written to the Premier of New South Wales on the question of the possible granting of reciprocal exemption in that State. Explanations of technical aspects of this Bill and of the other Bills in the package are contained in an explanatory memorandum that will be made available to honourable members in the near future. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I call your attention to the state of the House.
The bells having been rung-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! A quorum not being present, the sitting will be resumed at 3.20 p.m.
Sitting suspended from 3.15 to 3.20 p.m.
The House having been counted and a quorum being present-
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY TAX (INSURANCE BUSINESS) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (3.21 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will ensure that premiums on insurance in respect of an employer's liability at common law for an injury to or death of an employee are exempt from tax. Under the Workmen's Compensation Ordinance employers in the Australian Capital Territory are required to take out insurance with an approved insurer in respect of

A.C. T. Tax (Insurance Business) Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2073

their liabilities under that ordinance and at common law for an injury or death of an employee. Existing provisions of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act exempt premiums payable by an employer on a policy of insurance against his or her liability under the Ordinance. That exemption is accepted as applying to exempt the full amount of a premium under a single policy of insurance covering both a liability under the Ordinance and one at common law. The amendment proposed by the Bill will exempt premiums payable under a separate policy of insurance taken out in respect of a common law liability only. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
WANT OF QUORUM
Mr CohenMr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I want to question what happened earlier. I understand that the House just collapsed for want of a quorum. That occurred in 1972. It would appear that this is the third time since Federation that the House has collapsed for want of a quorum. I would like to know why we are still sitting.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- The honourable member for Robertson has raised a question about the want of a quorum. The Standing Orders provide that if the Chair believes that within a reasonable time a quorum will be obtained he may vacate the chair for a period and then resume it and ascertain whether a quorum is present.
Mr Cohen-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise another point of order. I had the unfortunate pleasure of being here when this happened in 1972.
Mr Hodgman-You were not here today.
Mr Cohen-It is the Government's responsibility to keep the numbers in the House. The Government has failed in its duty there, as it is failing in everything else in this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Robertson will resume his seat. I remind the honourable member that the Standing Orders have been altered since 1972.
Mr Jarman-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Is it not the duty of every honourable member who is paid a salary to attend this House to be here when required regardless of whether the honourable member is in Opposition or in Government? If members of the Opposition are not here deliberately should they not be reprimanded?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I think the honourable member knows the requirements of attendance. It is not helpful to the proceedings of the House to have these sorts of points of order raised.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY STAMP DUTY AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (3.25)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill proposes to exempt from stamp duty certain conveyances of freehold or leasehold land to or from a trustee in circumstances where the beneficial interests in the property remain unchanged. The Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act imposes duty on a transfer of, or an agreement to transfer, freehold or leasehold land situated in the Territory and on a transfer of a marketable security that is registered in a register kept by a company in the Territory.
The first of the amendments proposed by this Bill will exempt from duty a conveyance made in consequence of the appointment or retirement of a trustee or of other change in trustees in order to vest the property in the trustees for the time being entitled to hold it. The second will apply in circumstances where a person purchases land in his or her own name with funds provided by another. The present law applies in these circumstances to impose duty on the transfer -of an interest in land to the trustee under the imputed trust arising in relation to this type of arrangement and also on the transfer from the trustee to the person beneficially entitled to that interest.
Under the amendment proposed the second of the transfers involved in arrangements of this type-the transfer of the land from the trustee to the person who provided the purchase money-is to be exempted from duty. The final new exemption proposed by the Bill will apply with respect to conveyances from a trustee to a beneficiary in the trust. The exemption will be subject to the conditions that the conveyance is not made for valuable consideration and that it does not constitute a breach of trust. It is also to be a requirement of the exemption that the property the subject of the conveyance was acquired by the trustee by virtue of an instrument upon which duty has been paid or on which duty is not payable.

2074 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

A. C. T. Taxation (Administration) Bill

The exemptions, which will be subject to safeguards against abuse, will apply with respect to instruments effected on or after today. Further amendments proposed by the Bill will make broadly similar transfers of marketable securities subject to anti-avoidance safeguards of the kind that are to be applied in connection with the proposed exemptions for transfers of land. These amendments will also apply with respect to instruments effected on or after today. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY TAXATION (ADMINISTRATION) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (3.28)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is the last of the package of Bills designed to correct deficiencies in the machinery and liability provisions of the law relating to Australian Capital Territory stamp duties and taxes. The first of the amendments proposed by the Bill relates to situations where an agreement to transfer freehold or leasehold land is rescinded before the transfer takes place. Under the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act duty is payable on either an agreement to transfer land or the transfer itself. Commonly the duty is paid on the agreement.
As the law presently stands there is no authority to refund duty paid on an agreement when an ageement is rescinded or annulled so that a transfer does not take place. The amendment proposed will introduce refund provisions to accommodate this situation. The amendment, which will incorporate necessary safeguards, will apply in respect of agreements entered into on or after today.
A second amendment will apply to transfers to give effect to a partition or division of interests in marketable securities held jointly or in common by two or more persons. At present, stamp duty is payable on the unencumbered value of marketable securities transferred under arrangements of this type, even though there may be no increase in the value of the parties' interest in the securities in consequence of the division. The amendment proposed will apply in these circumstances, with effect from today, to exclude from duty on the relevant transfer the value of the beneficial interest

held by the transferee in the marketable securities prior to the partition or division of those securities.
Other substantive amendments proposed by the Bill are complementary to amendments proposed by other Bills included in the package. Included in these are the previously mentioned refund provisions consequential on the proposed amendments to vehicle registration tax in the Territory and provisions relevant to safeguards mentioned in relation to certain stamp duty amendments contained in the package. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
PAY-ROLL TAX (TERRITORIES) ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (3.31)-1t gives me great pleasure to move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill, I am delighted to say, will raise the level of the general exemption from pay-roll tax applicable to the Australian Capital Territory. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) and I announced the proposed increase on 2 August 1982. The exemption is to be raised from $80,400 to $120,000 per annum. The higher level will apply from I September 1981, thus providing an exemption for 1981-82 of $113,400 on a full year basis. The last increase applied from I January 1981 when the exemption was brought up to $80,400 in line with that allowed in New South Wales. New South Wales has since increased its exemption level to $120,000 per annum, with effect from 1 September 1981.
The maximum exemption allowable in monthly returns will increase from $6,700 to $10,000 and, in conformity with the existing rules for the phasing out of the maximum annual exemption, will be reduced at the rate of $2 for every $3 by which the wages for the month exceed $10,000. There will be no exemption once the monthly pay-roll reaches $25,000. As a general rule, the new exemption will first apply to returns for the month in which this Bill receives the Royal Assent but end of year adjustments will ensure that the benefits are in all cases backdated to I September 1981. From the day on which the provisions of the Bill come into operation an employer paying wages of $2,250 or less a week will not be required

Broadcasting and Television Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2075

to register for Australian Capital Territory payroll tax purposes.
As foreshadowed in the 2 August statement, further amendments proposed by the Bill will enable future increases in the general exemption level to be prescribed by regulation. This procedure will enable earlier adjustments in the Australian Capital Territory exemption level than have been possible in the past. Explanations of technical aspects of the Bill are contained in an explanatory memorandum that will be made available to honourable members in the next few days. With great pleasure, I commend this Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr N. A. Brown, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (3.34)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Bill introduces legislation to give effect to the Government's decisions on supplementary licences which were announced on 11 August 1982. Honourable members will recall that the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981, introduced by my predecessor, provided the legislative framework for the extension of commercial frequency modulation broadcasting through the supplementary licence scheme. The present Bill makes a number of significant changes to that scheme and includes provision for supplementary television services. A constant source of complaint over many years by people in country and regional areas has been the imbalance in broadcasting and television services available in those areas when compared with the five mainland State capital cities. Apart from national services, these people often have access to only one commercial broadcasting service and one commercial television service. A major difficulty in attempting to redress the balance has been the inability of many of these areas to support fully competitive stations without endangering the viability of existing services. A further consideration has been the need to maintain, as far as practicable, the local flavour and character of country and regional services. The supplementary licence scheme has been developed as a means of resolving these major problems. It also provides a mechanism for the identification of those areas which are able to sustain additional commercial licences.

The pattern of commercial broadcasting and television services in country and regional areas has essentially remained unaltered since the early 1960s, in the case of television, and even longer in the case of broadcasting. The supplementary licence scheme heralds a major expansion in those services. It will enable the progressive development of an additional commercial FM service and commercial television service in most country and regional centres, thereby offering people in those areas greater program choice. A maximum of 99 commercial FM services and 36 commercial television services could be established under the supplementary licence scheme.
Careful attention will need to be given to the planning of these new services. I intend to make a full statement on planning guidelines for the implementation of the supplementary licence scheme as soon as possible after the legislation has been passed by the Parliament. My statement will cover all the practical steps required to implement the scheme and will cover matters relating to the commencement of the scheme, the definition of service areas, the procedures by which applications will be processed and the determination of technical specifications. Consultations will also be held with industry bodies and individual licensees on these matters. My Department is establishing a special task force to handle the implementation of the scheme and to institute more effective procedures for handling the large number of planning proposals which will result.
I now turn to the provisions of the Bill. The Bill introduces a major innovation in the licensing of broadcasting and television services. Honourable members will be aware that the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942 as it stands is a particularly complex one, due in part to the fact that it provides for the licensing of stations and technical facilities, rather than broadcasting or television services as such. As new types of services have become available, or as new uses have been found for existing technology, it has been necessary to accommodate these changes through the creation of new classes of licence with the result that the Act has become exceedingly complex.
Under the system adopted in the Bill, a supplementary licence will authorise the provision of a broadcasting or television service to a specified area. There will no longer be any need for the licensee to apply separately for licences for translator stations to retransmit the supplementary service. In determining the service area of a supplementary licence, the Minister will endeavour to ensure that, as far as practicable, the supplementary licence will serve the same area as that of the related commercial licence and

2076 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Broadcasting and Television Bill

associated translators. I believe there would be great merit in adopting a service-based approach throughout the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and I am gratified that a start is being made with the supplementary licence scheme.
I now propose to give a brief outline of the scheme. The Bill allows the licensee of a commercial amplitude modulation broadcasting service or a commercial television service to lodge with the Minister an application for a supplementary licence to operate one additional commercial service within his service area. In the case of broadcasting this additional service must be an FM service. The Bill also allows a consortium of licensees serving the same area to apply for a single supplementary licence.
Once an application has been received the Minister may either accept the application and forward it to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal, together with a specification of the area to be served by the licence and other technical specifications, or reject the application on planning or technical grounds, giving his reasons to the applicant. As the supplementary licence scheme will not apply to the five mainland State capitals, applications will not be accepted from licensees serving those areas.
Once the Tribunal receives an application from the Minister it may conduct a public inquiry into the grant of the supplementary licence; and must determine whether an independent commercial licence would be viable in that area, and if so, whether it would be in the public interest, on certain specified grounds, to invite applications for such a licence. As a result of its consideration, the Tribunal will either recommend to the Minister that applications for an independent licence be invited, or grant the supplementary licence for up to five years.
After eight years of operation, or earlier if the licensee so elects, special renewal provisions provided for in section 86A will come into operation. At such a renewal the Tribunal must re-examine the question of whether an independent licence would be viable, and if so, whether it would be in the public interest to invite applications for such a licence. If the Tribunal determines that the area still cannot support an additional independent licence or it is not in the public interest for such a licence to be granted, the supplementary licence will be renewed for up to three years. The viability of an independent service and the public interest consideration must be re-examined at each subsequent three-yearly renewal.
Once the Tribunal determines that an area can support an additional independent licence and

that applications should be invited, it renews the supplementary licence for up to three years, notifies the supplementary licensee of its determination and recommends to the Minister that applications be invited for an independent service to commence three years later. The Minister has three months to decide whether he accepts the Tribunal's recommendation. If he does not accept the recommendation, the supplementary licence continues in force until the matter is re-examined by the Tribunal at the next three-yearly renewal.
If the Minister accepts the Tribunal's recommendation, the licensee is notified, and has at least three months to decide which licence he wishes to retain. He may choose either to retain his original commercial licence or his supplementary licence. The licensee must also decide whether he wishes to allow the unwanted licence to expire, or to seek to transfer it to another party. If the licensee chooses to retain the supplementary licence or transfer it to another party, it subsequently becomes a full commercial licence.
If he decides to transfer one of the licences, he has eight months in which to arrange the transfer and gain the approval of the Tribunal. This time limit may be extended at the discretion of the Tribunal to ensure continuity of service in the area concerned. If a successful transfer is effected, no further action is required by the Minister. If the licensee elects to allow one of the licences to expire, or is unable to arrange a successful transfer, the Minister may invite applications for an independent commercial licence. If he does not do so or if an independent licence is not granted for any reason, the supplementary licence continues in force.
Supplementary licences will be subject to the normal requirements imposed by the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942 and related legislation. However, there are several special requirements. A supplementary broadcasting or television licensee will be required to gain the approval of the Tribunal before undertaking regular broadcasts or telecasts of programs from the related commercial station, and in the case of television only, the programs of any other station operated by another licensee, the Australian Broadcasting Commission or the Special Broadcasting Service. Special provisions relating to local content will also apply to supplementary television services. A supplementary television licensee will be required to encourage, as far as practicable, local advertising and the provision of local programming on his supplementary television service.

Broadcasting and Television Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2077

The above outline broadly sets out the main features of the supplementary licence scheme as embodied in the Bill. As I announced on II October 1982, the increasing work load being experienced by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal due to the rapid increase in size and complexity of the broadcasting industry and the even greater workload anticipated with the introduction of supplementary licences, has made it necessary to increase the membership of the Tribunal by three to a maximum of eight members.
I believe the supplementary licence scheme, as provided for in this Bill, is an effective means of bringing a wider choice of services to those areas which, because of their limited population, cannot support additional independent commercial licences. The scheme will also contribute to the steady growth of the commercial sector in nonmetropolitan areas. The Bill before the House provides the means to do this, and allows for the necessary increase in Tribunal membership to handle the volume of inquiries which the supplementary licence scheme will generate. Detailed notes on the causes of the Bill are included in the explanatory memorandum that has been circulated to honourable members. Mr Deputy Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Barry Jones) adjourned.
BROADCASTING STATIONS LICENCE FEES AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr N. A. Brown, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (3.46)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill makes a consequential amendment to the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act to make the terms used to refer to supplementary broadcasting licences and stations consistent with the terms used in the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill 1982. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Barry Jones) adjourned.
TELEVISION STATIONS LICENCE FEES AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr N. A. Brown, and read a first time.

Second Reading
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (3.47) - I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill amends the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend that Act to supplementary licences for television stations, consequential to the introduction of the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill 1982. References in the Act to commercial television stations, licences and licensees are applied to supplementary television stations, licences and licensees. Provisions have also been inserted to deal with licence fees payable by a consortium of commercial television licensees holding a supplementary licence. The Bill provides that the supplementary television station will be regarded as a separate operation for the purposes of licence fees assessments. The effect of these amendments is to place supplementary licensees on the same basis as commercial licensees in respect of the imposition and calculation of licence fees. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Barry Jones) adjourned.
HEALTH LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1982
Bill presented by Mr Carlton, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health) (3.48)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This is an omnibus Bill to amend the National Health Act, the Health Insurance Act and the Health Insurance Commission Act. By the Bill the Government seeks to give effect to a number of measures foreshadowed by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney). These measures will further demonstrate the Government's concern for those persons and families in our community who are in special need.
The Bill would implement a major expansion of the pharmaceutical benefits scheme. The Government proposes to make available drugs and medicinal preparations on the pharmaceutical benefits schedule at 50 per cent of the general contribution rate to a large number of persons in need who presently pay the full contribution rate. The Bill would also make a number of amendments to pensioner health benefit entitlements to

2078 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No.2)

reflect the significant improvements to our welfare system that are included in the Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill. The opportunity has been taken to make some important changes to the health insurance arrangements.
Let me now deal in detail with the changes to the pharmaceutical benefits scheme. The new patient contribution arrangements for pharmaceutical benefits will involve a three-tier system of contribution in place of the present twotier system. Pensioners, including supporting parent beneficiaries, who hold pensioner health benefit cards and sickness beneficiaries who hold health benefit cards, and their dependants, will continue to obtain pharmaceutical benefits without charge.
Health care card holders and those on social security pensions, including the supporting parents benefit, or service pensions who, because of income, are not entitled to a pensioner health benefit card, will be classed as concessional beneficiaries. As honourable members will recall, under arrangements introduced from September last year, people who are entitled to a health care card are low income persons, unemployment and special beneficiaries meeting the income test, and all migrants during their first six months residence in Australia. By virtue of clause 27 of the Bill such concessional beneficiaries and their dependants will be entitled to pharmaceutical beqefits at the reduced contribution rate of $2 per benefit item. About one and a quarter million people-who under existing arrangements are required to pay the full patient contribution-will be assisted by this initiative. The rest of the community will pay a patient contribution of $4 per benefit item-an increase of 80 cents. These new arrangements come into operation on I January 1983. It is estimated that the changes could result in a net increase in Government spending in 1982-83 of about $2.8m and about $7m in a full year.
Provision is made in clause 26 of the Bill for the patient or an agent to be responsible for the establishment of the appropriate entitlement-that is, whether pharmaceutical benefits are to be supplied free of charge or for a $2 concessional patient contribution. At the present time medical practitioners and participating dental practitioners are the only persons allowed to endorse pensioner entitlement numbers on pharmaceutical benefit prescriptions. From 1 January 1983 this will no longer be the case. The patient or his agent will establish the relevant entitlement by completing a declaration that will be printed on the prescription form. This new arrangement would ensure that patients receive their appropriate entitlements in respect of patient contribution

concessions for their pharmaceutical benefits. In addition the new arrangement should overcome problems met by patients and chemists when entitlement numbers were omitted from their prescription by the prescriber.
I would now like to turn to the amendments proposed in this Bill to effect other changes already announced by the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney). Clause 5 of the Bill would amend the Health Insurance Act to assist invalid pensioners and persons in receipt of a sheltered employment allowance who want to reenter the workforce. From 1 January 1983 any such person who loses entitlement to these social security payments because he or she commences open employment will be entitled to a health care card for twelve months free of income test.
It might be worthwhile if I take this opportunity to remind honourable members of the more significant benefits that are available to persons who have a health care card. These are: The provision, with agreement of the medical practitioner, of scheduled medical services free of charge; in other cases a commonwealth medical benefit of 85 per cent of the schedule fee for medical services or the schedule fee less $5.00, whichever is the greater, without the need to insure; free out-patient treatment and free in-patient treatment as public patients in shared wards of public hospitals; the provision of optometrical consultation services free of charge; and from I January 1983, pharmaceutical benefits at the concessional rate.
It has always been of major concern to invalid pensioners that if they attempted to return to work they would .lose their fringe benefit entitlement. The health care card entitlement will go a long was towards removing this concern and, it is hoped, encourage some invalid pensioners to re-enter the work force. I am sure that all honourable members will welcome this initiative.
I would now like to draw honourable members' attention to the extension of full fringe benefit entitlement, subject to an income test, to persons in receipt of the proposed rehabilitation allowance. This new form of income maintenance to be paid under the Social Security Act will be introduced from I March 1983 for people who undertake a rehabilitation program with the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service. As honourable members will be aware from the Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill the allowance will be available at not less than the rate and under the same conditions as the invalid pension. Clauses 4 and 14 of the Bill would extend the definition of eligible pensioner and pensioner

Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No.2)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2079

in the Health Insurance Act and the National Health Act to include persons receiving the rehabilitation allowance. Such persons would thus receive a pensioner health benefit card, subject, of course, to the fringe benefit income test.
Perhaps at this stage I can remind honourable members of the benefits available from the Federal Government for persons holding pensioner health benefit cards or health benefit cards. These persons are entitled to: The provision, with the agreement of the medical practitioner, of scheduled medical services free of charge; in other cases a Commonwealth medical benefit of 85 per cent of the scheduled fee for medical services or the schedule fee less $5.00, whichever is the greater, without the need to insure; free out-patient treatment and free in-patient treatment as public patients in shared wards of public hospitals; the provision of optometrical consultation services free of charge; free pharmaceutical benefits; free hearing aids and batteries; telephone and postal concessions; and travel concessions with Australian National Railways and for sea transport with the Australian National Line.
The Bill would also provide that persons who receive the family income supplement or the mobility allowance that would be introduced by the Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill will not lose their eligibility for a health care card because of this additional income. The amendment to the Health Insurance Act will ensure that any family income supplement or mobility allowance that a person receives will not be taken into account when assessing eligibility for the health care card.
I now turn to some important changes relating to health insurance arrangements. First, I draw the attention of the House to the measures in clauses 23 and 43 of the Bill. These measures would preclude the application by any State or Territory of any special levies on registered health insurance organisations. I am sure that honourable members will be aware of the legislation passed recently by the Victorian Parliament which imposes a levy on health insurance organisations in that State. The levy, at the rate of 80c per week per family contributor and 40c per week per single contributor for basic hospital tables, has been imposed since 1 August 1982. The levy is intended to finance out-patient services provided to insured persons in Victoria. Separate charges are not raised by the Victorian public hospitals for these persons. The Victorian Government introduced the levy because of alleged difficulties

in collecting out-patient revenue. The levy arrangements has a number of undesirable implications which, from the Federal Government's viewpoint, make it unacceptable.
Victoria has used a broad legislative provision to solve an administrative or management problem in its hospitals. This arrangement cuts across the Federal Government's 'user pays' policy for health services. The levy is estimated to produce revenue in excess of that indicated by utilisation of out-patient facilities and thus contributors to Victorian health funds are paying more than they need for health insurance. The Bill would preclude the operation of the Victorian levy from the date of royal assent of this Bill and preclude the introduction of similar levies for in-patient and out-patient services in any State or Territory. The bill would reaffirm the Federal Government's responsibility in the area of health insurance, including its role to protect the insured public and the taxpayer. The proposed amendments do not affect the basic responsibility of the States and the Northern Territory to determine charges in public hospitals.
Secondly, I would like to draw honourable members' attention to provisions in the Bill relating to the scrutiny of any directions a Minister may give a registered organisation concerning its management practices. Earlier this year in the debate in the other place when the power for the Minister to give such directions was included in the National Health Act the Government undertook that it would examine some form of scrutiny of these directions. Tabling in the Parliament was foreshadowed. I am pleased to point to the provisions at clause 19 of the Bill which require the Minister to table a copy of such directions in each House of the Parliament. The clause provides that either House may disallow a direction within 15 sitting days of its being tabled. The opportunity has been taken to include rights of appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal against a number of administrative decisions to which presently there is no right of appeal. These are at clause 36.
The Bill supplements further initiatives in health care arrangements for pensioners and beneficiaries, announced by the Minister for Social Security, that come within the provisions of the Social Security Act. These include: Increasing the limits of non-pension income for entitlement to pensioner health benefits; and removing the special inGome test on sickness beneficiaries' entitlement to health benefit cards. These initiatives will operate from November this year. The Bill before the House is an important piece of legislation. It represents a major extension to

2080 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

health benefits while at the same time providing in some areas greater incentives for people to improve their positions and become less dependent on the Government. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN BICENTENNIAL ROAD DEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND BILL
1982
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir~Minister for Transport and Construction) (4.1) ~ I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to establish the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund, from which an estimated $2.5 billion will be provided over the next six years to upgrade Australia's roads by 1988~our bicentennial year. This funding is additional to and separate from the $3.65 billion provided to the States under the Roads Grants Act 1981. Together, the programs will provide the impressive sum of $914m in 1982-83, rising to $1,208m in 1983-84, for all categories of roads. This is the biggest drive to boost road construction ann improvement ever mounted in this country. The Programs' contribution to national growth and prosperity will benefit all Australians.
The object of the new Program is to fund national, arterial and local road projects of significance that will develop the Australian road network to a high standard. The Program will facilitate the reliable and efficient carriage of traffic. It will enhance the safety of Australian roads. The ABRD Program will address four main areas of need:
The national highway system will be brought to a high standard to meetour growing transport requirements for the efficient movement of people and goods around Australia. The Program will ensure the completion of a sealed, and virtually flood-free, national highway system.
The construction of development roads, including some in remote areas and roads of national tourism importance, will be accelerated.
Specific urban and rural arterial road projects will be funded and, where States so choose, assistance may be provided for approved urban public transport projects.

Local government authorities will be able to nominate local projects for inclusion in the program.
The ABRD Program will generate a number of important benefits:
Lives will be saved as a result of the improved safety on our roads.
Communications between the States, and regional areas, will be enhanced as a result of better national highways and arterial roads.
Considerable savings will be made in vehicle and transport operating costs.
Savings will be made in private and commercial travelling time.
Travellers in more remote areas will benefit from reductions in dust hazards and reduced delays due to flooding.
It is estimated that 8,000 jobs will be provided in the road construction industry alone. Moreover, it is expected that at least 20,000 jobs will be provided in direct and indirect employment throughout the ABRD Program's duration.
The Government considers that this Program will be a tremendous tribute to the 200 years of our nation's development. Roads affect every Australian. Road transport accounts for almost 80 per cent of our domestic freight tonnage and 90 per cent of passenger kilometres travelled. Since roads are important to every Australian, it is appropriate that the Australian Bicentennial Authority has fully endorsed the ABRD Program. It will leave an enduring legacy of the bicentenary to all future Australians.
The Commonwealth acknowledges that the level of funding of roads in recent years has not kept pace with increases in road construction costs. While Roads Grants Act funding beyond 1984-85 has yet to be determined, the Government will need to give consideration to the level of road funding to be provided for the next five-year period 1985-86 to 1989-90 well before the conclusion of the current five-year program. However, the Fraser Government has resolved to make a major investment in our road network~a national asset of critical importance. The ABRD Program is the Government's response to this important need. A recent Commonwealth-State study of national highway deficiencies concluded that, at the former levels of funding by the Commonwealth, it would take until well beyond the year 2000 to bring our national highways up to an acceptable standard.
The urgency of the problem and the need for additional funds was brought home to me when I

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2081

undertook a tour of inspection of the Bruce Highway between Rockhampton and Townsville earlier this year. I indicated at the time that the condition of the road was, to put it mildly, totally inadequate for a national highway which was serving an area undergoing such rapid development. A joint Commonwealth-Queensland study later confirmed this assessment. I am sure that you, Mr Millar, concur with every word I have said.
The establishment of a trust fund has been adopted for the ABRD Program to ensure that all funds raised from fuel surcharge are used for projects approved as part of the ABRD Program and for no other purpose. The Fund will receive all revenue generated from the surcharge on motor spirit and diesel fuel excise, less applicable rebates. All interest earned on Fund investments will accrue to the Fund. The special surcharge was proposed at last June's Premiers Conference and supported by all States and the Northern Territory.
As noted earlier, total Commonwealth road funding in 1982-83 will now amount to some $914m. This represents an increase of $229m or 33 per cent when compared with road funds allocated in 1981-82. In 1983-84, when the ABRD Program is fully operational, Commonwealth expenditure under the ABRD and roads grants programs will total an estimated $1.208m.
Mr CohellNot enough.
Mr HUN1-1 can see by the grin of the honourable member for Robertson that he is very pleased about it. We share the joy. That will represent an increase of $S23m, or 76 per cent, over 1981-82 road expenditures. These increases are far in excess of recent movements in road building costs. The special ABRD surcharge on motor spirit and diesel fuel excise is being phased in to allow State and Northern Territory road authorities time to gear-up for the substantial increase in construction activity that will result from the Program. One cent a litre has been applied since 17 August 1982 and this will rise to 2c a litre from 1 July 1983. The surcharge will be discontinued after 31 December 1988 and, as provided for in this Bill, the Trust Fund will be closed down one year later following the acquittal of any outstanding commitments.
While the impact of the ABRD Program on our road network will be substantial and appreciated by all travellers, the cost of the surcharge to individual motorists and road transport operators will be relatively small. For example, even at the 2c per litre level, an average motorist travelling IS,OOO kilometres per year can expect to pay only

67c extra per week. For the driver of a typical 38-tonne truck, the 2c surcharge will mean that a Sydney-Melbourne round trip will cost an extra $18 in fuel. Significantly the response I have already received from road authorities, local government organisations, the Australian Road Transport Federation and others has been very positive indeed. It has confirmed my belief that the Australian people will accept an increase in government charges and costs if they can clearly see where the money is going and know that it is to be spent for such a constructive purpose of enormous economic and social benefit to the community.
ABRD funds will be allocated between the various road categories in the following proportions: In 1982-83, national roads, 40 per cent; urban arterial roads, 30 per cent; rural arterial roads, IS per cent; and local roads, IS per cent. They are the local government roads, the shire roads, the municipal roads, et cetera.
Mr Cunningham-Do not forget the Princes Highway.
Mr HUNT-That comes into the arterial category in Victoria. For the year 1983-84 and beyond, national roads, 42 per cent; urban arterial roads, 30 per cent, rural arterial roads, 16 per cent; and local roads, 12 per cent. Notwithstanding these percentages, a State or the Northern Territory may seek and receive approval to transfer funds between the urban and rural arterial roads categories, or from both or either of these categories, into national roads. So we have left a fair degree of flexibility in that regard to assist the States and the Commonwealth to achieve its priorities jointly.
The Bill does not provide for transfers from the local roads category. On a category by category basis, this will mean that in total some $396m will be available for upgrading our national roads in 1982-83, rising to about $S2Sm in 1983-84. Similarly, some $317m is expected to be available for urban and rural arterial roads this financial year, increasing to approximately $448m in the following year. Local road funds will be allocated a total of an estimated $200m in 1982-83 and about $23Sm the year after. No set ratio will be used to apportion national road funds between the states and the Northern Territory. Rather, this money will be distributed in accordance with the requirement of achieving the basic Program objectives and national priorities, following consultations with the States and Northern Territory.
Developmental roads will also be eligible for assistance under the national roads category. Developmental roads are roads which are significant

2082 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

from the national point of view for the development of particular industries and energy resources, including those in remote areas. Roads which facilitate international trade or commerce, or tourist activitiles, may also be classified as developmental roads. ABRD funds allocated for the
urban arterial, rural arterial and local roads categories will be distributed between States and the Northern Territory in accordance with current funding relativities. Local road funds in turn will be apportioned within the States in accordance with principles to be developed for this Program. On a State by State basis, indicative figures suggest that, taking into account both the ABRD Program and the ongoing roads grants
program, the following increases in Commonwealth funding will be provided: New South Wales, a 34 per cent increase this financial year and a 78 per cent increase in 1983-84 compared with the 1981-82 figure; Victoria, increases of 34 per cent and 77 per cent respectively;
Queensland, 35 per cent and 81 per cent; South Australia, 30 per cent and 68 per cent; Western Australia, 34 per cent and 77 per cent; Tasmania, 29 per cent and 65 per cent; and for the Northern Territory the respective expenditure Increases will be 27 per cent and 62 per cent.
Turning to the arrangements which will apply to the administration of the ABRD Program, honourable members will note that there are a number of significant changes whencompared with the arrangements applying to the roads grants program. Firstly, as this program approaches the upgrading of the road network from a national perspective, Commonwealth approval will be required for each ABRD project. Thus national priorities will be considered in the project approval process and, in general, projects will be significant in nature. However, the Commonwealth's involvement will not be a heavy handed intrusion into State and Northern Territory affairs. On the contrary, projects will be identified by way of close consultation between the respective governments and the approval process will primarily be a vehicle to ensure that the objectives of the Program are being effectively pursued. Consultations with the States and Northern Territory are already underway to identify projects for inclusion in the Program.
Another departure from practice under the Roads Grants Act is that this Bill provides for separate allocations to be made for urban arterial roads and rural arterial roads. This will enable appropriate attention to be devoted to roads in urban areas where the majority of Australia's population lives. In this regard the Bill also permits the States and the Northern Territory, if they

wish, to expend part of their urban arterial roads allocation on urban public transport capital works. This acknowledges that urban public transport services have the potential to take considerable pressure off urban arterial roads.
To maximise the benefits of the Program on our road system, a provision has been included in the legislation making it necessary for the State and Northern Territory governments to maintain, in real terms, the level of road funding from their own resources. Where a State proposes urban public transport projects they will be required to maintain their own spending on capital works in this area. The Australian Bureau of Statistics implicit price deflator for private non-dwelling construction will be used, amongst other pertinent factors, in determining whether the States and Northern Territory have in fact maintained their expenditure in real terms. However, if a State or the Northern Territory allows its expenditure on roads or urban public transport to fall behind in real terms in a given year, and subsequently fails to compensate for the shortfall with an equivalent increase in the following year, then its allocation may be offset by withdrawal of an equal amount of its ABRD funds. This will ensure that real improvements are made to our road system, and Commonwealth funds are not used to allow States to diminish their continuing financial responsibilities for their own roads and public transport services. We are keeping the whole system honest.
Furthermore, the Government is determined that all taxpayers will receive full value for each dollar they are being asked to pay. With this in mind the existing tendering requirement for national road construction works is being extended in the ABRD Program to cover urban and rural arterial road categories and urban public transport projects. It is only in a competitive environment that we can be sure of getting maximum value from this massive investment in construction.
Highlighting the bicentennial nature of the Program, all projects will be marked by appropriate bicentennial signs. This will guarantee that all Australians will see where their funds are being spent. The signs will also have the effect of reminding Australians about the bicentenary and the important contribution roads make to the economic and social life of our nation. I will be reporting to the Parliament annually on trust fund transactions and on the progress made in approved projects.
I have canvassed the more significant elements of the Bill before the House today. The remaining provisions are similar to those contained in the

Tariff Proposals

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2083

current roads grants legislation, the most recent Act of which passed through this House in the preceding autumn session of Parliament. The explanatory memorandum that I have circulated describes in detail all the features of the Bill. Therefore, I do not propose to deal further with any individual sections. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
CONSTRUCTION OF PHYSICS DIVISION BUILDING, MARIBYRNONG,
VICTORIA
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (4.20)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Construction of Physics Division Building, Materials Research Laboratories, Maribyrnong, Victoria.
This proposal is for the construction of a new building to accommodate physics research activities at the Materials Research Laboratories and, in particular, those activities related to high energy.laser and associated electronics experiments. The new building will enable consolidation of these activitie~ in a single location and will replace existing sub-standard buildings. The Committee has endorsed the need for the work and found that the design of the proposed building is satifactory. The estimated cost of the work is $2.6m at March 1982 prices. The Committee has recommended construction of the work in the reference. If the House agrees to support this motion, planning can proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
TARIFF PROPOSALS
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (4.23)-1 move:
Customs Tariff Proposals No. 25 (1982),
The Customs Tariff proposals I have just tabled relate to proposed alterations to the Customs Tariff Act 1966. The proposals, which operate from tomorrow, contain changes resulting from the Government's decisions on recommendations made by the Industries Assistance Commission in its report on groups D, F and H of the reference on miscellaneous manufacturing. The Government has accepted the Commission's recommendations on long term rates of assistance except in

respect of certain matches, pyrotechnics and containers. The latter two goods are receiving further consideration by the Government.
Wooden matches in boxes for retail sale are to be dutiable at a composite rate of 15 per cent plus
a specific rate equal to the excise paid on locally produced matches as recommended by the lAC. However, the Government feels that there are no compelling reasons for increasing the duty on cardboard matches and wooden matches imported in bulk as recommended by the lAC. Matches for the non-retail advertising market, either m,mufactured or packaged locally, enjoy a reasonable degree of natural protection arising from the personalised nature of the end product. The Government has therefore decided to introduce a composite rate of 5 per cent plus a specific rate equal to the excise paid on local production for cardboard matches and' wooden matches imported in bulk, or in boxes containing 25 matches or less.
In respect of hand sieves and hand riddles, the Government has decided to phase the present duty of 41 per cent down to the long term rate of 20 per cent recommended by the lAC to reduce the risk of disruption to the local industry. The rates to apply to the other goods under reference will be: 25 per cent for insulated wire, et cetera, fitted with connectors; 20 per cent for ammunition and parts there for, except bullets, shot and slugs, and amusement park equipment; minimum rates for the remaining goods under reference. A comprehensive summary setting out the nature of the changes has been prepared and is being circulated to honourable members. I commend the proposals to the House.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (4.26)-There are a number of matters under reference which the Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman) has not mentioned in his statement. This is the only opportunity the House has to debate these matters as they become part of legislation towards the end of the year or the parliamentary session. Items such as cartridges, bullets, shot, grenades, torpedoes and mines are listed, some without alterations and some without duty. I draw to the attention of the House the need for items of that nature to be, wherever possible, produced in Australia, for both defence and employment needs. There is a perceived need for an Act similar to the buy American Act which operates in the United States of America. Australia, unfortunately, has a long history of preferring to buy many of its goods, especially of a military nature-a number are mentioned in the schedules to the Tariff proposals-outside Australia. With the very

2084 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Tariff Proposals

serious employment situation which exists in Australian industry I think it is time that any purchases outside Australia which are capable of being reasonably made within Australia should be subject to the right of appeal against the purchase by the Australian manufacturer involved.
I draw attention to one specific matter. I will hold up the House for only a minute or so. Recently, certain autoclaves for equipment at the Government Aircraft Factories have been subject to a contract let to a United States company. The Defence Department and the Government in their purchases have the benefit of not having to pay duty when purchases are made overseas whereas duty would be payable on items purchased overseas by a private purchaser. This is an instance of an item being purchased overseas when a reasonably competitive Australian tender existed. Had the circumstances been reversed the Australian tenderer would not have been permitted to obtain the contract over a United States firm because of the operations of the buy American Act. In this instance the United States tender was significantly lower than the Australian
tender because an alternative form of control system was built in at a lower cost than that which had been indicated to the Australian firm's estimator would be required in the tender. I am concerned that there is not a specific requirement on government purchasing, especially of a Commonwealth nature, that wherever possible the normal commercial practices be used and purchases be made within Australia.
I make one other point. I am sure that had private enterprise been engaged in this contract negotiation, prior to letting the contract outside Australia, it would have asked the Australian firm whether it could match the other tender with the lower cost control system which it would accept. The Australian firm was of the opinion that it would not be accepted. Had that been done, a firm in Victoria, where employment is in short supply, would now have a government contract which it does not have. The Government would have been assisting by utilising its own expenditures to support Australian industry. I believe that this is an instance which indicates that there should be very definite guidelines to the effect that wherever practicable Australian companies should get all possible assistance. This and other measures like it come before this Parliament regularly. I believe that it is probably time that we had a proper debate in this Parliament on all matters relating to protection and, in the current economic circumstances and employment climate, all matters relative to the encouragement of doing work in Aust.ralia wherever that is possible.

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (4.31)-in reply-I wish briefly to reply to the remarks of the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) from which I do, not dissent in any great substance. The Government is firmly committed to the Australian manufacturing sector. I believe there are always opportunities for government and, indeed, the community, to do more and mor~ for that sector. The matter raised by the honourable member for Corio is indeed a serious one, and one which I will be very happy to refer to the new Minister for Industry and Commerce, the Honourable Andrew Peacock.
I believe that the Government's track record shows-I concede the honourable member's point that there is no real debate, so effectively we have to be taken on trust-that it has been very conscious of all the competing interests, particularly those of the manufacturing sector, in assessing what should be its response to each Industries Assistance Commission report that comes before it. For my own part, I concede quite frankly that I look first for persuasion that there are gounds for reducing protection, perhaps for similar reasons to those that have been expressed by other honourable members. Specifically, I will refer the remarks of the honourable member for Corio to the new Minister for Industry and Commerce, and I expect that the honourable member will receive a response to his suggestions.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce)-For the information of honourable members. I present, on behalf of the Minister for Administrative Services, the report of the Industries Assistance Commission on miscellaneous manufacturing groups D,FandH.
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE (PRIMARY PRODUCERS) BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 16 September, on motion by Mr Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (4.33)-Again at the outset of a debate concerning the primary producers of this country I must register a complaint that the Government wishes the Opposition to contain its remarks to 50 minutes; when the

Drought Assistance Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2085

country is undergoing what is probably the worst drought in history we have to limit our remarks. I wish to explain to farmers and graziers who may be listening that when Government members point out that the Opposition has not covered certain aspects, that it has not said anything about a particular matter, as occurred last night in the diesel fuel debate when again the Opposition was limited to 50 minutes, the reason is that in order to have some co-operation with the Government in this House we have to limit our comments.
The Government Whip, who I expect is under instructions, is the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier). I thought he would be very concerned about his electorate. He has been making a lot of noise about the drought in his electorate. I believe that he should be given ample opportunity to speak about it, as should the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren), the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham), the honourable member for Grey (Mr Wallis), the honourable member for Capricornia (Dr Everingham) and the honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell), all of whom are members of the Opposition and represent large rural electorates. The Opposition is not opposed to the Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Bill. I"suppose I would need to say that three times so that members of the National Country Party would hear, if ahy of them were present.
Mr HodgmaDBe fair; there are no Labor Party members here.
Mr KERIN-There is not one Country Party member here. The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham), a Labor Party member, is here. If the Minister wants another quorum we will call one. The Opposition will be moving an amenment, only by way of qualification, because of deficiencies that we see in the Bill. The purpose of the Bill before the House is to give effect to the special Commonwealth drought assistance measures which were announced by the Government on 31 August. Basically, there are two measures. There is to be a subsidy on payments of interest rates over 12 per cent, estimated to cost $36m in a full year, and there is to be a subsidy on fodder, estimated to cost $320m in a full year. In general I have commented, and I continue to comment, that because the Government had no effective ongoing drought policy it has been forced to act suddenly and, as a consequence, in an ill-considered way. My initial reaction when I heard of the measures was that the package represented a blank cheque. An immediate criticism related at one level to the potential for abuse and, at the second level, to the potentially severe macroeconomic implications of the blank cheque.

I have also criticised the package, as have other people, because it would be of greatest benefit to those producers who had taken least steps to protect themselves from drought.
Just how generous is the package? I am still trying to work that out. On some calculation it is likely that only one out of every four primary producers is likely to qualify for the interest rate subsidy. But I do not know. We do not have the figures on which to work. In the Senate Estimates committees, Mr Miller, the Deputy Secretary to the Department of Primary Industry, told senators that he had few estimates. On what basis is the estimated cost of $36m worked out? How many producers are likely to benefit? As the price of fodder skyrockets, in part as a result of the subsidies, and as more producers try to buy fodder, the fixed value subsidy will be of less and less assistance to producers. I know that it applies at 50 per cent but as the value of a bale of hay has risen from $2.50 to $8 the overall value to the producer is less because he has to pay the balance. So the generosity of the package may turn out to be more illusory than real. Again I ask: On what basis is the estimated cost of $320m worked out?
Another important question that is as yet unanswered relates to Australian fodder reserves. Just how much fodder is available in the eastern States? What steps are being taken to determine this? It is of considerable importance to producers to know whether there is enough fodder to last weeks, months or years. The Australian Wheat Board has already indicated that it may not be able to meet export demand due to a reduced crop. An increased demand for stock feed will reduce exportable surplus still further. Should Australia be considering importing millable wheat or increasing the supplies available for stock food? The drought has an affect on many industries that are not covered by this Bill. I note particularly the fishing industry. I just ask the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) what assistance is to be available to this industry. It cannot even apply for assistance under the rural adjustment scheme.
Let us take the Bill itself. Few details of how the schemes are to be administered have yet been worked out and as a consequence the Bill is vague, bestowing on the Minister the power to determine how the schemes are to operate. Is it appropriate for the Parliament to approve such costly schemes, to the value of $356m in total, when it is given no details on how the schemes are to operate? What safeguards are provided? The potential for abuse was and is still immediately obvious. What are the eligibility criteria? Some of them have been laid down but many primary producers

2086 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Drought Assistance Bill

must still be uncertain about whether they will be eligible. They are required to make decisions relating to fodder purchases in the face of this uncertainty. There are already reports of the mass shooting of stock. The Government's assistance package has come too late and/or is not relevant to these producers. The Bill refers only to sheep and cattle. It makes no mention of whether the stock are to be breeding stock. What about other livestock, for example goats and horses? The Bill also gives the Minister the power to determine when the drought has ended. Again I ask: On what basis will the Minister decide-on the recommendations of the Department of Agriculture? As there are differences between States and even between regions, the potential for differences under this system is great. South Australia does not even have a drought declaration but I think it is being forced to move in that direction because there has to be such a declaration. As I pointed out in earlier debates in this session, the criteria for drought declaration vary greatly.
I wish to make a few general comments about the whole treatment of drought in Australia. After two centuries of European occupation of the driest continent one would have thought that the farmers and graziers would have learnt that drought is part of the primary producers' environment. I put it to the Parliament that an overwhelming majority have done so and that farm and property management is the key to onfarm drought fighting strategy. Most farmers and graziers to whom I speak accept that fact. One would have thought that after two centuries of European occupation of the driest continent the governments, the government departments and the politicians of the Commonwealth could face a drought without a wrangle centring on buck passing, carping criticism, political opportunism and caustic castigation, but apparently this is not the case because away the wrangling goes again. It is the Fraser Government's desire to criticise and score political points against the New South Wales and Victorian governments-rather than to concentrate on the most appropriate drought measures in consultation with the State governments-that is causing this. It is not just a lack of consultation being complained about by the Victorian and New South Wales governments, but it is a lack of consultation being complained about by the South Australian and Queensland governments. I will now talk about what Mr Chapman, the South Australian Minister of Agriculture-who admittedly will be there only to 6 November-had to say. He is reported as stating:

It is amazing that two people, the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Anthony, and the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Nixon, being two Country Party members of the coalition, should have lost touch with the rural community to the extent to which they appear to have done, or that they should be such lightweights in the outfit at that level that they have not been able to convince the Prime Minister and his Treasurer to give the rural community a fairer deal.
That was the criticism by Mr Chapman before the drought package was announced. Criticism is not just confined to Labor governments; it is found in the conservative State governments. What is happening? Of course, it is the old divide and rule game that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) practises at every oppoortunity. This marks his destructive, divisive leadership of the country. I will point out the facts about the Victorian and New South Wales situation in a moment. But, of course, the only reason why they are being criticised is that they are Labor States. South Australia will be a Labor State after 6 November. Mr Ahern is a very co-operative man and he has had worries about the Commonwealth proposals in this regard. I refer to questions I put on notice to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Minister for Primary Industry last year. The Minister was then standing up for States' rights because it did not suit the Commonwealth to come in with measures of drought assistance. The answer to a question put to the Minister for Finance (Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle) stated:
it is open to the States, in line with their overall responsibility for the provision and administration of natural disaster relief, to provide whatever forms of assistance they regard as appropriate . . .
There are similar answers from the Treasurer and the Minister for Primary Industry in Hansard. This is last year when the Commonwealth did not want to hear about the drought. The Opposition believes that drought arrangements at the Commonwealth level should not be part of the natural disaster arrangements but administered by a separate body in the Department of Primary Industry which has the on-going duty to assess, monitor and collate administrative actions, the efficacy of measures and research into a range of matters inherently involved in a drought, for example, the criteria for drought declaration. The reason why the Opposition believes drought should be out of the Natural Disaster Organisation arrangements is that a drought is a different disaster from a flood, bushfire or cyclone. It is vastly different in terms of duration. There are great elements of difference in terms of mitigation. As the National Country Party has a great propensity to distort, I make it clear that I am not saying that the $3 for $1 arrangements, or any other existing measure of Commonwealth assistance, would be changed if

Drought Assistance Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2087

the administration of drought was taken out of the Natural Disasters Organisation arrangements.
Wh~t I am ~ayi~g is that we want a drought specIfic orgamsatlon or drought specific administrative arrangements.

~eeping to general comments, the Opposition

belIeves drought measures should be about assist-

ing and

fgarramz7lerrss

and graziers, about letting make their own decisions

farmers and en-

couraging on-farm management that takes into

account the fact that drought is a part of

~ustrali~'s natural environment. The Opposition

IS not gOIng to oppose these measures but believes

that in the spirit of rational debate it should be

critical of them where deficiencies are so evident.

The States will have to administer one of the two

measures before us today. Again I say that there

was no consultation on that. This means that in

s?me cases there are now nine separate drought

aId schemes for the States to administer and argue

through their administrations, their Cabinets and

Treasuries, when extra funds are required.

I will centre on the farm property management matter that causes the Opposition so much trouble. To some degree we have here an open-
en~e~ arrangement which no one will oppose for polItIcal reasons. However, there are difficulties in the approach ~eing taken particularly as these relate to farm management. Mr Chatterton, the shadow Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries in South Australia summed these up best. Of course, after 6 November he will be the Minister. He said that what these measures mean is that we will have to turn farm management policies on their ~ead. He h~s put down four golden rules to apply If we are gOIng to adopt the Commonwealth's approach to drought now. As his first rule, he is
reported as saying:

Do not prepare for a drought by conserving hay or grain, as the. Federal Government will, in times of drought, provide gram much cheaper than you, the farmer, can produce it.

The second golden rule is:

I?o not build up a~y cash re~erves for a drought in the form of mcome equaitsatlOn deposits, debentures or other liquid
assets, as they will disqualify you from interest subsidies handed out to relieve you of the effects of the drought.

The third golden rule is:

Do not reduce stock numbers in a drought as the Government wiII subsidise half the cost of feeding them, the returns from their wool wl!1 pay for. the remaining cost, and the chances are that you II make a JolIy good profit at the end of it alI.

The fourth golden rule is:

Always buy the cheapest and most marginal land. In the good years, the return on capital is magnificent, and in the drought years any losses will be carried by the Federal Government and the . . . taxpayer . . .

He might be overstressing that and in the real world I do not think any farmer will follow those rules but he is pointing out the fact that the way a g.overnment, at the Commonwealth level in partIcular, should attack the problem of a drought in an on-going fashion should not be to reward bad managers a~d penalise good farm managers. What the BIll does by requiring people to run down their liquid assets really does penalise the good farm managers. People who invested their money in off-farm assets will immediately qualify
for .these meas.ures?f assistance. Farmers who put theIr .money l~tO Income equalisation deposits, have Invested In hay and grain storage on their properties and carried out a range of other measures, will not be as eligible. I think that is bad. That is why we have some doubts about this legislation. These measures are the Fraser Government's response to one of the most crippling droughts we have ever undergone. The drought is entering its fourth year in many areas.
I now refer to the situation being faced in New South Wales because the Minister for Primary Industry never misses a chance to kick the head of the New South Wales Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries, Mr Hallam. Let us look at the reality of the situation we face in that State. I point out that it took the Commonwealth 41 months to come in with any extra measures of assistance to New South Wales. Some 90 per cent of New South Wales is drought stricken and 52 of the 58 Pasture Protection Board districts are now drought declared. The winter wheat crop potential of 7 million tonnes has now been reduced to 1.5 million tonnes. That represents a potential loss of $800m. Sheep numbers are down to 45 million from a high of 73 million. Cattle numbers have de.clined to 5 million from a peak of 9 million. As I saId, New South Wales is now in its forty-second month of continuous drought and has entered into its fourth financial year of drought. That is how severe the problem is in New South Wales. That is what the New South Wales Government has been coping with under the existing arrangements.
It is very important to work out what the overall impact of ~he drought on the economy is going to be because Jt will have a significant influence on the ca~acity of the Government to manage the domestIc economy. What I pointed to in New South Wales-and the position in the other States mll:st be t~ken .into account-can be seen as a very senous SItuatIOn indeed. Farm incomes were expected to d~cline by about 50 per cent during 1982-83. That IS the result of increasing farm costs an~ falling re~urns as well as the drought. On that baSIS the loss In taxable revenue now would be in the order of $400m to $500m and the second and

2088 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Drought Assistance Bill

subsequent round effects could result in a total loss to taxation revenue of around $800m. The value of rural exports is likely to fall by about 3 per cent this year, but it will fall by a lot more next year. That will put further pressure on an already weak exchange rate accentuating the need for devaluation. Pressures for devaluation are continually building up because the Government's policy of exchange rate management does not let it adjust fully to reflect changes in the market. We know why it is not doing that: Devaluations are inflationary. The drought is causing massive problems for Australia's macro-economic management.
I will turn to what the Government has done in terms of this drought. The Government was prepared to do absolutely nothing. Legend now has it that the Prime Minister in one of his visits to this country saw a droughty sky. I do not quite know what a droughty sky is but I understand it is red. I thought the droughty skies were from the volcano in Java. Anyhow, I am prepared to accept that the Prime Minister saw a droughty sky and suddenly decided to move in. That was marvellous because the Minister for Primary Industry would not do a thing. He knocked back the State Ministers at the end of July and even after the drought aid package was announced his office did not know what was happening. Of course, what happened was that the Prime Minister completely undercut the Minister for Primary Industry on that matter. In the last session of this Parliament the Minister denied that it was an initiative of the Prime Minister. I guess those two people have made up since then.
One can go through the reaction of the Minister to requests from New South Wales, Victoria and the other States. As late as a week after the Budget he was still kicking heads quite happily. One can look at the comment he made in the House on 18 August in answer to a question. He said:
The Commonwealth does not need to make a commitment to help drought affected farmers, because its commitment is already through the natural disaster relief arrangements.
In an interview on AM on 24 August the Minister for Primary Industry said:
There is no need for additional measures. The present measures are open-ended.
Suddenly on 31 August, after the Minister had said that, the Prime Minister announced a package of drought aid measures. We welcome them but we point out that the Minister was prepared to do nothing. That is why the measures have been so poorly thought through. Always act tough seems to be the dictum of this Minister. He did not do anything but kick heads for nearly four years.

The latest kick in the head for the New South Wales Government, apart from some of the other measures the Government is constantly criticising in this House and despite what has been said about Sta~es' rights, is the criticism that the New South Wales Government will not adopt the small business scheme the Queenslanders have. Let us look at this scheme. In Queensland in 1981-82, $56,500 was lent to four applicants and in 1982-83 there have been no approvals at all'. The 1981-82 approvals declined as areas were removed from drought declaration. Of course, there have been some refusals. The main reason the Queensland figures are down is that Queensland has not had the drought for the duration or with the severity that has occurred in New South Wales. But when members of this place kick the New South Wales Government it needs to be remembered that there have been only four successful applications in 1981-82 and no approvals in 1982-83. So it is not actually a marvellous bonanza.
Let us look at how the New South Wales Government is approching this problem. The manager of the Small Business Agency in New South Wales looked at the Queensland arrangements and said that 'such business to be actively associated with primary production in the area' has to be the criteria. The New South Wales Government looked at that. The extreme example would be something like 26,784 retail and service establishments in drought affected areas. If the average amount loaned to the businesses was $15,000 it would cost the State $402m. No one is suggesting that there needs to be a scheme that big. The members of this House who are criticising the New South Wales Government can be assured that the New South Wales Government is looking at the matter. But the matter involves a massive budgetary consideration.
If the amount of the maximum advance in Queensland was $30,000, the cost to New South Wales would be about $804m. I accept that the Commonwealth would come in on a three to one basis, but it is still a budgetary consideration for the New South Wales Government.
I have pointed out that the Minister for Primary Industry, the Treasurer and the Minister for Finance have said that drought arrangements centre on the States administering them and deciding upon them in terms of their own financial capacity. These members of the Government should realise that the Commonwealth Government will not come in on the New South Wales State Government's requests for assistance with the number of unemployed in the country areas. It is something that is being negotiated. Also, with respect to the New South Wales Government, in

Drought Assistance Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2089

the last session the Minister attacked Mr Hallam because he would not go on with further extension. He simply had to wait until his own Government could get the extra measures through in terms of the Budget process in that sovereign State Government. That is the reason the additional State measures in New South Wales were not announced until the Budget came down in September.
Let us look at some of the other matters, such as the rural adjustment scheme. This Commonwealth Government knocked back the request of the National Farmers Federation and nearly all the major farm organisations in this country for assistance with respect to the rural adjustment scheme. There was a very small increase. Surely this was one of the ways the Commonwealth Government could have assisted the New South Wales Government in the Budget. Looking at the amounts New South Wales should be getting to meet the level it was geting in 1977, or in the time of the Labor Government, it should have received something like $17m this year and not the paltry $4.38m it received. Again, we can look at the package and the problem the New South Wales Government has had. In New South Wales, 85,000 individual applications for grants worth $40m.have been approved. Since I January 1980, $60m has been paid in drought loans made up of 3,700 carry-on, loans worth $50.7m; 86 dairy company loans worth $8.4m, which has assisted 700 dairy farmers; and 108 restocking loans worth $1.8m.
I refer to the package announced by the New South Wales Government. To add to what it is doing the package shows that the New South Wales Government is responding, after it has argued the matter through its own administration and Budget Cabinet. The freight rebate on fodder and stock movements has been increased from 60 per cent to 75 per cent of the cost. The water cartage rebate has been increased from 50 per cent to 75 per cent of the cost. The carry-on loans limit has been increased to $60,000 for farmers in their third year of drought. The interest rate for carry-on loans will remain at 4 per cent with a two-year holiday period on repayments. The eligibility criterion for carry-on loans has been increased from net assets of $350,000 to $450,000. The extension of carry-on loans to fruit growers for the removal of fruit trees which have died or become permanently unproductive through drought has been extended. Drought relief assistance will be made available to drought affected primary producers adjoining a drought declared district provided they are located in clearly definable areas. I could go on. I am giving all these

details only because I would like to point out to the House that the New South Wales Government is responding. It is the one with the greatest problem.
The latest whipping boy has become the Victorian Government. The Victorian Government will not pay a slaughter subsidy for sheep. The reason for this-again I hope that honourable members will accept that it is a sovereign government-is that the Victorian Government has a drought advisory committee and II of the 15 members, with the strong backing of the Department of Agriculture, have said that a bounty to shoot sheep was not appropriate at this stage. I was speaking to a live sheep exporter. I just think it is stupid to shoot sheep. They must have been skinny old sheep. If a farmer is going to pay money to feed them he can sell them for $14 to the live sheep trade. I will simply quote from the editorial of Stock and Land of 7 October, which states:
The Victorian Minister of Land, Mr Rod MacKenzie, is quite right to be upset by the Federal Government's ongoing practice of making announcements on how the state should spend money on drought aid without prior consultation.
Federal Governments have been treating State governments with this type of contempt~particularly in agriculture~for a long, long time.
It will be remembered that it was a Federal Government announcement, without prior consultation, that forced the Hamer Liberal Government into guaranteeing $4.5 million to prop up the now out-of-business CF & G meat works~a move that finally cost the State about $3.8m.
I will continue with this quote because there has been another announcement about sheep being transported to Western Australia. That has been watered down quite a lot because Mr Old stepped in and pointed out that there needed to be a bit more consultation on that. The editorial of the Stock and Land goes on to state:
Victorian farmers will not be missing out on much if the latest federal scheme to rail sheep to Western Australia is not taken up by the State Government.
The watering down has occurred because Mr Old has said that that is not on-as well as laying down criteria for the sheep-unless the sheep are bought in Western Australia. Let us look at what some of the other State Ministers have been saying about this lack of consultation. Mr Ahern-I attended the Press Club luncheon at which he gave these details-said that the method of administering the fodder subsidy has not yet been worked out. On the matter of water cartage he said that a 100 per cent subsidy on water cartage was too open to abuse. How does one tell whether the carter has delivered 10 loads or 100 loads? That is why the Queensland Government put the

2090 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Drought Assistance Bill

subsidy at 75 per cent. Mr Ahern also raised the problem of stock watering points. If there is a subsidy for that stock watering points will be put everywhere. He said that it was also very difficult in a drought relief program to reward good managers and penalise bad managers. In other words, Mr Ahern in Queensland-I think we are all agreed that he is a very active Minister for Primary Industries-also is worried about some aspects of the drought relief package that has been handed to him on a plate by this Government without consultation. Let us examine what Mr Chapman, the Minister of Agriculture in South Australia, had to say. He said that under the scheme fodder prices will increase. He took up the same line on the water subsidy and recommended a subsidy of only 75 per cent. He also raised the question of small business loans. They are being proceeded with now. He raised the question: How does one know whether a dealer in a country town lost his trade because of this drought or because another dealer provided a better service? Again, he was pointing to the fact that there has not been adequate consultation.
I am not critical of any move by this Commonwealth Government to provide drought assistance. The Opposition has been calling for such assistance. It is essential. The Opposition is critical of the Government because, in the case of New South Wales, it delayed taking action for 41 months before it gave the State extra assistance. The Opposition is concerned that some of these measures, some of the ways in which they will be administered and some of the elements of the eligibility for drought assistance are subject to a lot of discussion and debate. It is quite proper that there should be discussion and debate. It is very important that this Parliament set up the best schemes possible. It is very difficult to do that. I accept that there will be problems no matter which course the Government takes. There will be abuses and rorts. That is not the way 99.9 per cent of the farmers will approach these measures for drought assistance.
I still think the Government, in the interests of good administration, should clear up some of the elements of doubt in the minds of informed commentators. For example, I refer to the interest subsidy on rates over 12 per cent. It was drawn to my attention that one farmer had borrowed $lm over 12 months ago. The interest bill, at 18 per cent, is something like $200,000. The subsidy on interest over 12 per cent probably means he will get a $80,000 hand-out from the Federal Government for a farm purchase decision made a little over 12 months ago. Maybe this eventuality is covered by the legislation. But there are real

doubts about some people being able to rip off this scheme because it is open-ended. I point out that other schemes of assistance to primary industries, such as the beef incentive payments scheme, had an upper limit of $2,000. The wool incentive payments scheme-I think that is what it was termed-in the late I960s and early 1970s had an upper limit. There has been some upper limit on the amount of assistance given. Very few schemes have been as open-ended as this one. Centrally, the Opposition is concerned that this legislation does not reward good farm managers sufficiently. The Opposition believes there should be an asset test. Therefore, I move:
That all words after 'That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House isofthe opinion that-
(I) a limit should be set on the sum that any individual may receive in anyone year,
(2) eligibility should be determined by a ceiling on total assets instead of the proposed liquidity test and
(3) those persons who are predominantly dependent on their farm for their living should be objectively defined'.
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo) (5.3)- The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) has certainly given us a strange and contrary type of response on behalf of the Opposition. He started off by saying that the measures are proper and that his party would not oppose them but he then went on at great length to explain what was totally wrong with these measures. He finished up by castigating farmers and saying that all sorts of people would take advantage of the measures introduced but that 99 per cent of farmers were the sort of people who would not take advantage of the measures; he expected that 99 per cent of the farmers would use these measures properly. I would rather accept his last remarks than all the other material he brought forward.
The purpose of this Bill-I reiterate what the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) said when introducing it-is to help prevent drought affected farmers from walking off their properties because of difficulties in servicing their debts. The important factor in this legislation is the provision of assistance to save farmers walking of their properties. A second purpose is to reduce the cost of drought feeding and so enable graziers to retain stock, particularly breeding stock. This will also contribute to a more rapid economic recovery in the rural sector when the drought breaks.
The Minister also made it quite clear in his remarks that the Commonwealth's philosophy is to allow the subsidy to . '! paid on all feed and supplements which are L .. ;mally used or required in a

Drought Assistance Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2091

particular State or region to keep sheep and cattle alive in a drought. The scheme is designed to prevent fodder prices from escalating abnormally because the wheat price cannot be manipulated, as the Opposition spokesman on primary industry matters well knows. If other fodders become too expensive-he suggested some measures which would make them too expensive-logically farmers would switch to wheat. The Commonwealth will provide up to $320m-the Minister made it clear that it is not a set figure-for fodder subsidy. This provision is based on current livestock numbers of about 14 million cattle and 93 million sheep on drought affected farms-this, of course, must vary if the drought extends even further-and the assumption that there wiII be a need to subsidise about 70 per cent of feed and grain for those sheep and cattle.
This BiII is an urgent Bill. The Opposition spokesman made some caustic remarks about the fact that we have requested that 50 minutes be allocated to speakers from the Opposition in this debate and 20 minutes be allocated to speakers from this side of the House. That is the equivalent of 50 minutes for each side of the House, alIowing for the Minister's introductory remarks. I have no doubt that every member who represents a rural seat would like to speak ad infinitum on the necessity of the BiII. All members on this side of the House are well aware of the urgency and are prepared to accept the fact that only a short time is available for debate on this BiII before it goes through. I call on the Opposition to facilitate that.
Throughout my electorate I have had meetings with farmers and employers. I can assure the shadow Minister, who is sitting at the table, that there is no way known that his price of $14 a head for sheep is approachable in the areas that I represent. In fact 50c is more likely to be the ceiling price. If he has any doubt about it he should come to my electorate. I wiII also show him some of the sheep. If he thinks that they are fit to be fed and maintained he has another thing coming. But then, of course, that is an indication of how far removed the Opposition is from reality. He said that the New South Wales Government is responding. I am delighted to hear that. I can assure him that the Victorian Government is not responding. We are stiII waiting to see the Victorian Government spend its first $1 m out of the $7m that it is obliged to contribute to drought relief. The Victorian Government has a lot to answer for in the rural sector.
I congratulate the Minister for introducing the measures outlined in this Bill. I drew to his attention and to the attention of the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) the fact that the

forms available for the interest subsidy were available only at official post offices; non-official post offices had been denied the opportunity to have these forms. I point out to the House that this problem was very speedily attended to by the Ministers concerned. That matter has been rectified and the forms will be available shortly. It is interesting to note that in Victoria the fodder subsidy forms are available only through the Rural Finance Commission. I cannot answer for other States but in Victoria, unfortunately, Rural Finance Commission offices are only in certain areas. Again I suggest that the Minister should look at the possibility of approaching the Victorian Government in the hope that he will get some co-operation-he might get some in this case-in having these forms distributed through non-official post offices as well. That would save many problems. It would alIow the people at least to obtain the forms so that they can apply for assistance in the proper way as speedily as possible.
The honourable member for Werriwa, the Opposition spokesman, in his remarks pointed out other areas related to drought and the measures that should be taken. I draw his attention to the arrangements that the Federal Minister has made with State governments in regard to the introduction of a core program of assistance in the various States. Such programs, of course, of necessity have always been the responsibility of the States. They have introduced them in co-operation with the Federal Government on a $3 for $1 basis. Amongst these measures was the proposal to provide assistance to small business in drought affected areas. A number of small business people in the Bendigo electorate-particularly in the rural sector and smalI towns, who handle farm equipment and so on-have huge quantities of farm machinery and supplementary equipment on a floor plan basis, of necessity. As anybody who has anything to do with this knows they could not possibly fund all the equipment. They inevitably have bank loans in order to run their businesses and they are finding that the interest rate of 23 per cent that they are paying on the floor plan today, coupled with no sales, is crippling them. The Socialists over the other side could not care less about the small businessman, but he has employees and the result wiII be that those employees will lose their jobs. We approached the Government of Victoria to introduce the core measures that we put up. What was the response? Nothing!
Mr Hunt-According to them it would be too expensive.

2092 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Drought Assistance Bill

Mr BOURCHIER-That is right. The Victorian Government claims it will be too expensive. That is how much it cares about not only the employers but also the employees. The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham), even though he represents an area which is reasonably free from drought he is associated with the farming sector and is well aware of the problems created by drought. He knows that many sheep need to be slaughtered in order to reduce the size of flocks to a reasonable level so that the farmers will be able to carryon. This proposition was put to the State Ministers. I say 'Ministers' because we heard from the shadow Minister that Mr Mackenzie claimed that he did not have discussions with the Federal Minister. It might be interesting to record that Mr Mackenzie is not the Minister for Agriculture in the State. I should think that the proper response would be for our Minister to go to the State Minister for Agriculture, which he did. I cannot, nor can anybody else, be responsible for what the Minister for Agriculture in that State does not communicate to anybody else.
The simple fact is that there is a definite need for a sheep slaughter bounty. Thousands and thousands of sheep will be slaughtered. The response of the Victorian Government was: 'We are not interested in providing a sheep slaughter bounty'. It was not interested at all. I asked the Federal Minister what action we can take, but unfortunately we are tied; the matter must go through the State Government. All I can say is that the Government of Victoria ought to keep in mind that every sheep farmer and every employee in the rural industry is not necessarily a voter against it. In time to come they will remember the way in which they were treated.
Why will the Victorian Government not take action in regard to small business? Many small businesses are facing closure. I recently attended a field day in my area. I spoke to a number of the business representatives there. They are not selling any equipment. Anybody in his right mind knows that when that happens the first logical thing to do is to stop operations, cut overheads and put off staff. They are trying to do the right thing. Most of them, in co-operation with their staff, are arranging temporary stand-downs on a rotating basis so that the staff can use up their holiday pay in order--
Mr Howe-Half a million people are unemployed.
Mr BOURCHIER-The honourable member is trying to exacerbate that situation, and the actions of the State Government in Victoria will

only make it worse. If the honourable member feels something about the matter he should go to the State Government and ask it to do something about it. There will be 500,000 unemployed people in Victoria if the honourable member has his way. There is no doubt about it. The honourable member for Batman has no consideration for
unemployed people as long as he is sitting on his socialist behind. The State Government has a lot to answer for. It is up to it to take the appropriate measures to make sure that small business receives the advantage of loans of up to $40,000 at 4 per cent interest which have been provided in conjunction with the Federal Government. If it does not do that it will see utter chaos and disaster throughout rural Victoria.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (5.14)- Following that rather stirring speech from the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier) which basically ignored the Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Bill and referred to the Victorian Government, I should like to make a few remarks. In his speech the honourable member referred to my electorate of McMillan in the Gippsland area. We do not have the serious problem of the drought and we will not take part in any benefit to flow from this Bill. The farmers in my area, because of the good rainfall in that part of the world, are in a very lucky position. But at present there is a fair chance, the way the season is going, that there will not be a hay cut in that part of the world and there is a strong possibility that we may see this drought spread to other areas, including Gippsland.
The purpose of the Bill, of course, is to try to keep, as the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) said, farmers from walking off their properties and to give them some assistance. The Opposition wholeheartedly supports that proposal but has some reservations. Those reservations were expressed by the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), the shadow Minister for Primary Industry, in what was a very sensible speech which concisely covered many of the issues. That could not be said about the speech we heard from the honourable member for Bendigo. There is no need for me to go over the same ground that the honourable member for Werriwa covered; I shall move on to some other issues in regard to this Bill.
The fodder subsidy is said to be costing some $320m. The matter that has not been raised is that for this subsidy to operate and to cost $320m the farming community will have to borrow in excess of possibly $1 ,000m. In today's economic climate one of the biggest problems facing farmers is the way in which and under what sort of structure

Drought Assistance Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2093

they are to borrow that money. Anybody dealing with banks at present and trying to work on an overdraft basis knows that bank managers are calling in people left, right and centre to have overdrafts adjusted in order to bring them down to as small an amount as possible so that the money can be re-lent by way of personal loans in order to attract a much higher rate of interest.
Of course that is a possibility because under this legislation $320m will be available to subsidise that interest. The banks have a vested interest in seeing that the farmers do not use overdraft facilities but personal loans and fixed term loans in order to survive this drought. This will create a lot of difficulties. Many farmers are having difficulties raising funds. Even with this subsidy allowance they will still have to convince their banks that the money should be made available to them.
The sum of $320m is for fodder. The farmers will have to borrow the money to provide the fodder. The interest rate is 12 per cent. This money will have to come out of the system. That will put enormous pressure on the Budget figures that have been made available. Where will the money come from? What other costs will be pushed back on to farming organisations because of the drought? These questions have not been clearly addressed by the Government.
The other big issue is this: What fodder is available? What will farmers buy with the money that they are able to borrow in order to feed their stock? We-heard a fair deal about sheep from the honourable member for Bendigo, but where will the grass hay come from to feed our cattle? It looks as though we will have to feed our stock on rations from some of the pellet companies in order to feed our stock. This will be a very serious situation for rural areas. We cannot sit back and say that this is a light issue; it is not something that people can take for granted. Being a farmer I realise the situation. Many people on the Opposition side represent rural electorates. We are well aware of the situation in the country. The Government is not making any moves to find out what fodder is available. What will happen? What will this money be spent on? The Bill will go through the Parliament and the farmers will be able to go to the banks and say: 'Here is the money. What will we spend it on?' Luckily, in one way wheat crop in Western Australia has been very good this year and we will have enough wheat, but that will also be a very difficult problem.
The drought has caused unemployment. This issue has not been addressed by the Government. it has not taken any employment schemes into

consideration. In his statement Mr Nixon made no reference to State suggestions in relation to drought assistance. The Labour agriculture Ministers in Victoria and New South Wales were looking for a program of proposals to ease rural unemployment. We have a stand-off situation; the Government wants to give assistance to small business. The State governments are saying: That is not the way we want to do it'. After all, the State governments have the prerogative to spend the first $7m in Victoria and the first $1 Om in New South Wales. The Federal Government should go to the State governments and say: 'We are telling you of your responsibility; what is your suggestion?' When the governments of those States say to the Federal Government: 'Our first priority is to put some money towards employment schemes within the area', what will the Federal Government do? It will say: 'No. We cannot be in that. We would rather see help for small businesses. Government members will then come in here and try to score political points against the State governments. If the State governments are to be given the responsibility of making the first decisions on spending this $7m to $1 Om in the States, surely this Government can put some money towards employment schemes. We have massive unemployment in the country and even in the cities. It is just as bad now right throughout Australia and the country areas. Something must be done about the employment situation. I urge the Government to have another look at the funding of employment schemes.
I said earlier in my speech that I come from an electorate that does not have real problems. I would rather allow the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren) to take advantage of the time that is available to say a few words because his electorate is right in the heart of an area which is very severely drought affected. I do not have a
lot more to say, except that I think the politics of the drought situation should be taken right out of any discussion between the States and the Federal Government. We talk about the dramatic issues that are facing Australia and the rural sectors in Australia at the present time because of this drought. If the Federal Government believes that a slaughter bounty subsidy is so very important, surely it could put that money forward without demanding that the States do something about it in the first place. It is a disastrous situation. The Federal Government could, if it really wanted to, talk directly with people in those shires that have been declared drought stricken. There is no reason whatsoever why the Federal Government cannot talk to the shires and make special grants available. There is no need for the Federal

2094 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Drought Assistance Bill

Government to be crying poor or to be pushing this problem on the States. The Federal Government is in a position to do something about the policies and the things that it is claiming the States should do. I suggest that the Federal Government should put its money where its mouth is. If it wants to introduce a slaughter bountry immediately it should put up the money to do so.
Mr LLOYD (Murray) (5.22)-The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), in his reply to the statement of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) on drought, talked about the restriction on the time that we have this afternoon to debate this issue as if talk were the important thing when it comes to assisting people in a drought situation. Action is what is important. That is where the Australian Labor Party is caught flat-footed, because all it can do is talk. It has shown time and again when in government, either federally or at the State level, that when it gets beyond talking there is for country people no action whatsoever. Listening to the Labor Party speakers it became evident that they also are caught flat-footed as they do not know whether to criticise the Government for being too mean or too generous. They can be seen wavering from one side to the other all the way through this debate because they are embarrassed by the fact that we have responded in such a generous and prompt way to this drought situation and they are not quite sure how to handle it. The important point is what this Government has done. There has been the most generous and prompt response by any Federal government in the history of this country to what could be nationally the greatest natural disaster that this country has ever known. The Government has done this in two stages. First of all it introduced the core measures which for some time have been agreed with the States. It has put more pressure on all the State governments to be more realistic, to update the provisions and to include in the measures the important sector of small business. The Federal Government has come in with two very generous and, I think, very practical measures with regard to interest rates on loans and the fodder subsidy.
But before going on to those matters I want to talk about the sheep slaughter subsidy. Opposition members have been talking about the slaughter subsidy core measure as if this was something new. Every State government agreed under the core measures six or seven years ago to share with the Commonwealth Government the cost of slaughter subsidies on cattle. What is so new or revolutionary about extending slaughter subsidies to sheep? They have already been accepted by the State governments as part of the

core agreements. Honourable members opposite completely misunderstand the significance and reasons for a slaughter subsidy. It is not to encourage farmers to slaughter sheep but to prevent the unnecessary slaughter of sheep because it puts a floor in the market. It stops the processor from walking away with give-away sheep. If honourable members look at the figures on cattle slaughter after the slaughter subsidy was introduced during the beef depression they will find that cattle slaughter actually decreased. The price increased immediately by up to $40 a head for cattle. If the Victorian Government must introduce this subsidy for sheep, as it has already agreed to do for cattle-the Victorian Government has agreed that slaughter subsidies are a part of the integral core arrangements-no amount of talk or rhetoric by Mr Cain, who is threatening to sack officers in the Department of Agriculture if they speak up for what they really believe in, will stop that. If a slaughter subsidy is introduced the price of sheep will immediately increase and the unnecessary slaughter of sheep will decrease.
I turn now to the Commonwealth-only measures for fodder subsidies. If we look at the basis on which they are being applied-the relative nutritive value of wheat and the value of other subsidies-we see that what the honourable member for Werriwa and other Opposition speakers have said about increasing the price for fodder is utter rubbish. The provisions mean that, as the price of stock feed wheat is fixed, a ceiling is placed on the price of all fodders during this drought. There is no doubt that, with the shortage of a whole range of hay and other fodders, the price will increase up to the relative nutritive value of wheat. If that subsidy were not based on wheat the price of fodder would continue to escalate because of its scarcity value. It is rubbish for somebody to say, as the honourable member for Werriwa said, that the price of hay has immediately gone up to $8 for each bale because of the subsidy. Either the farmer has not done his homework or it is just pure talk. On the basis of the relative nutritive values of hay and wheat throughout northern Victoria, no farmer should pay more than $4 for each bale. If he does he is being silly and has not done his homework on the equivalent of pellets based on wheat.
I wish now to talk about the drought fodder reserve. The Australian Labor Party has talked about this and has asked what the Government knows about this. The Government has already had discussions with the Australian Wheat Board. It is well aware that wheat is the drought fodder reserve for this country. When it comes to interest rates I did not hear any screams from anybody in

Drought Assistance Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2095

the Labor Party about how wrong, how unfair or how parochial it was to bring in the 10 per cent housing subsidy limit on interest rates. Ken Davidson of the Age talks about pork-barrelling and how unfair, unjust and wrong it is to bring in a 12 per cent limit on interest rates for farmers who get rid of all their realisable assets. We have not heard a squeak from Ken Davidson or anybody else about what the Government has already done in reducing housing interest rates to 10 per cent. That indicates the fairness of some of these people. Compare what is done for those people who are facing possibly the worst drought in the history of this country with assistance for people in other sectors of our society.
The implications of this drought are frightening for this country-not just the short term regional effects of cash flow for farmers and other business people, but also for agricultural machinery agents and those servicing the industry. If we look at this in the long term we see what this means for the national herd, the price of meat and the consumer price index. We see a dramatic reduction in employment and in other respects in abattoirs once the drought kill is finished. We see what it means for the transport industry, the service industries and the balance of payments for this country with the wool, grain and meat industries all decreasing. It is of the greatest national importance that the national herd be maintained at the highest possible level; otherwise it could be 20 years or 30 years before we are able to build it up again. It is important that the grazing areas should not be overgrazed' by providing this fodder subsidy. Farmers and agriculturally-related businessmen should be kept as economically viable as possible for the future.
Some policy problems still have to be resolved. I refer to the problems in relation to the unemployment benefit and the household support and sickness benefits for farmers in this serious situation. I am pleased that the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) has already confirmed that the more flexible unemployment benefit provisions for farmers will continue and that the household support provisions are being reactivated. Most things are clear, although I hope in the very near future it will be clarified that the drought loans made to farmers in these difficult times will not be classed as assessable income against them if they apply for household support or the unemployment benefit. I hope that these two aspects are publicised as widely as possible. I hope that the recent interpretation of the sickness benefit is changed back to what it was. Before then a farmer who had a negative income because of drought or other problems could not claim a

sickness benefit. How could one suffer a loss of income if one had a negative income? That shows the absurdity of that situation. We could be getting back to that situation because of the latest determination by those people who are advising the Department. I hope that is clarified.
I hope also that share farmers-wheat share farmers, dairy share farmers-who will suffer as much as owners of farms in this drought, will be able to obtain the loans necessary to keep them in business, to pay off their machinery and to put in crops next year. They suffer the problem of not having property to use as security to obtain drought loans. That raises the question whether this country should have a natural disaster insurance scheme-I believe that it should-as do many other countries, which would encourage farmers to help themselves more than is presently the case.
I return to the Labor Party and its dilemma. It has been caught, and caught nicely, by the speed and comprehensive nature of the response by the Government. The Labor Party in responding to the Government's action has two separate voices. First of all the honourable member for Werriwa stated: 'How can we compete? The Government has given a blank cheque to solve the problems'. Yet, on the other hand, Senator Walsh, also speaking for the Labor Party, is saying that there is no need for any of these sorts of provisions, that they are all unnecessary. I get the impression from the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) that he thinks that what we are doing is too generous for those who are caught in this terrible drought. When it comes to incentives, the honourable member for Werriwa and the State Minister for Agriculture in Victoria, Mr Kent, say that we have to have more incentives so that farmers can look after themselves, and income equalisation deposits are one of the main forms of incentives. Yet Senator Walsh says that there should not be IEDs. What does the Labor Party really believe? What did the Labor Party do when it was in government? It cut off taxation incentives for farmers for water storage and fodder storage facilities and to maintain as high a level of fodder stocks as possible.
What about the State Labor governments? They are caught in their own rhetoric. When it comes actually to spending money to help country people in this drought they do not want to do it. I suggest that honourable members look at the attitudes of the New South Wales Labor Government and the Victorian Labor Government. They do not want to allocate any money whatsoever for people in rural areas. Let us examine the speech we have just heard from the honourable member

2096 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Drought Assistance Bill

for Werriwa and the amendment moved by him. He indicated, once again, that he is not sure whether to be on one side or the other in this argument. He stated first of all in his speech that really what we are doing will penalise the good managers, the successful farmers. But when one reads his amendment, with all its expenditure and assets limitations, one sees that, if the amendment were accepted, it would have the opposite effect to what Labor Party members have been advocating in their speeches; it wiII penalise the good manager. I strongly support and congratulate the Government on this most generous and prompt response to the terrible situation that this country is facing. I condemn the Labor Party Opposition for its terrible response to people in need in this country.
Mr WALLIS (Grey) (5.33)-1t always amazes us members of the Australian Labor Party that as soon as a Labor Party member has the temerity to talk about anything dealing with the rural sector we seem to get the backs up of people in the National Country Party. We have just seen an exhibition of that. The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd), who has just resumed his seat, wasted most of the IO minutes of his speech-he devoted most of his time attacking members of the Labor Party. If we had more time to debate this Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Bill and did not have to push it through we would be able to go back over some of the shonky schemes that his party introduced for farmers in the early 1970s, schemes that were admitted to be shonky. Yet here we have members of that party attacking members of the Labor Party.
National Country Party members feel they are the only ones who speak for the farmers. My electorate covers 90.4 per cent of South Australia and it could be said that about 45 per cent of its population is rural. The National Country Party candidate there has yet to break history; he has yet to save his deposit. So let us forget about all that rubbish of attacking the Labor Party. We have a shadow Minister for Primary Industry who not long ago came through my electorate and spoke with groups of farmers throughout the electorate. He was able to attend a field day and again to speak to those people. I am sure that the people who met him respect not only him as a person but also the way in which he is performing his job. They know that he has knowledge and experience to back him up. I am sure that, when the next general election comes around and he becomes Minister for Primary Industry, the farmers wiII throw more of their weight behind the Labor Party.

My electorate probably is not as badly hit by the drought as some. The figures I have been able to obtain indicate that it is anticipated that the wheat growing areas of the Eyre Peninsula will be able to harvest between 35 and 40 per cent of the crops harvested last year. Certainly, in some areas of my electorate the situation is extremely bad-it is as bad as it is in the worst areas elsewhere-but in other areas it is very patchy. In some areas people will get through. Although the situation is not all that bad in some areas in my electorate,
some people will be able to gain some assistance from this Bill. I think the Government should be condemned for trying to rush this BiII through. It
is an extremely important Bill. I am sure that people in my electorate wiII not appreciate the fact that this BiII is being rushed through in this manner and that members who represent affected areas are not being given an opportunity to debate the BiII fully.
We do not oppose the Bill in principle. We feel there are some things wrong with it and we have moved an amendment in an attempt to draw attention to some of those wrongs. We are as aware as anybody of the effects of the drought, not only in country areas but also in city areas and country towns where there are manufacturing industries making farming equipment et cetera. Quite recently we saw that Horwood Bagshaws, one of the oldest machinery manufacturers in South Australia, had to cut down staff numbers. It had to put off in the vicinity of 350 people. That is another effect of the drought-in the country town of Mannum, where that manufacturer has its factory, people are being put off work and there is no alternative employment. Of course, that only accentuates the problem that faces everybody in those country areas. We are fully aware of the problems. I am because I have spoken to people in the worst affected areas. Whilst we do not oppose the Bill, we feel that our amendment is worthy of support. I want to give my colleague, the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren), an opportunity to say a few words on this BiII, so I will close on that point and urge honourable members to give their sup.. port to the amendment moved by the honourable member for Werriwa, who I am sure when the next general election comes around will be the next Minister for Primary Industry.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (5.37)-1 thank my colleague the honourable member for Grey (Mr Wallis) for graciously allowing me time to say a few words on the Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) BiII. There has been a certain degree of acrimony already in this debate today. I think that is a shame; in fact, it is a disgrace. Here we

Drought Assistance Bill

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2097

are, a nation faced with probably one of the greatest natural disasters it has ever faced, yet a group of members of this Parliament seems to believe that, if concern is demonstrated for people living outside the metropolitan area, somehow or another that concern lacks a degree of legitimacy. I feel that is a great shame. My experience has been, when I go around my electorate, that people-farmers, members of rural communities, business people in small rural towns-want to talk to politicians. They want to put their position before people who are concerned and are prepared to listen to them. They really do not believe that only one party in this nation can legitimately speak for them. I hope that claiming that only one party can legitimately speak for country people is not perpetuated in this Parliament. It is a disgrace that such a view is held. It does not do people well to speak in such a way.
We have a grave crisis on our hands. I do not entirely criticise the provisions of this Bill. I certainly support the amendment moved by my col-
league the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin). What we require is maximum cooperation between the Commonwealth and the States, instead of the fiery vilification that we have heard today. It would be very easy for me to turn around and criticise the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). In many respects he has been somewhat derelict in his duty. In fact, it would be easy to say that the Minister, probably for reasons of a certain degree of bigotry, has turned his invective upon States because he cannot stand the political complexions of their governments. I think it is probably a cynical abuse of his position and a rather contemptuous disregard of the genuine anxieties of primary producers and residents of country towns. He announced the introduction of a fodder subsidy and the proposal to move sheep to Western Australia without consulting the State and without due regard to the administrative detail. The drought should be perceived as a national disaster and not as an exercise in political point scoring.
His pursuit of a sheep slaughter scheme irrespective of issues of practicality or equity indicates how ill-equipped the Minister is to hold his office. The slaughter bounty, as it stands, requires further examination. It would be easy but, of course, rather cynical simply to jump on the bandwagon and to agree without question to the sheep slaughter bounty as presently operating. There is even some disagreement in the ranks of the Victorian Farmers and Graziers Association regarding this matter. There is also to be taken into consideration the fact that in Victoria something like 350,000 sheep will be sent out of the country in

the live sheep export trade in the next few weeks. I must put on record the initiatives taken by the Victorian Government to meet the crisis confronting primary producers, small businesses in country areas and municipal authorities. they are there for anyone to see. These initiatives have already had a beneficial effect and the contributions to rural communities will be much appreciated. It is extremely difficult and must be frustrating indeed for a co-operative program to be developed between the various tiers of government if the Minister wants to score political points off the New South Wales and Victorian governments.
I live in an electorate in which \0 municipalities are wholly or partially drought declared. Through my contacts with farmers, small business proprietors and local government officers I am aware of the diversity of impact that the drought is having on all sections of the communities in these areas. Action is under way to assist major primary industry sectors, but I want to mention a couple which at yet at this stage have not been mentioned. Some of the drought affected industries have been ignored, and I ask the Government to recognise the case of these producers. I refer to two in particular. Firstly, honey producers are going to have a disastrous year as there is little flow coming through the normal sources of nectar. Even a nectar source such as cape weed, which usually provides a reliable supply, is virtually non-existent in most areas this year and pollen supplies are likewise reduced. Most apiarists receive a very modest income in the best of years, but this year their plight will be enormous. I hope that the Government will give serious consideration to helping them out, as it will other drought affected primary industries.
The second industry I refer to is not one of the greatest industries of Australia, but it is very signigicant for the people working in it. Believe it or not, it is that of eel production. It has recently been brought to my attention that the drought has seriously affected the availability of eels. I will not go into the reason for this shortage but suffice it to say that here is an industry which will receive a minute percentage of return this year. While I am mentioning other industries apart from livestock and crops, I should draw the Minister's attention to the tremendous impact the effects of the drought will have on the economies of small towns. This has been alluded to by every speaker today and it is a factor which we should all take into consideration. The entire rural community is at stake, and this should not be underestimated. I hope that the Government will heed the call of

2098 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

these communities and will take adequate steps to ensure that their plight is not ignored.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
In Committee
Consideration resumed from 23 September.
Schedule 2.
Department of Defence
Proposed expenditure, $3,902,509,000.
Department of Defence Support
Proposed expenditure, $428,711 ,000.
Mr FALCONER (Casey) (5.47)-1 want to speak very briefly indeed on one particular aspect of the Defence estimate which is of interest and concern to me; that is, the future of the Williamstown Dockyard, in particular its future as a centre for constructing warships for the Royal Australian Navy. The Government has been considering the future of this facility and has been conducting a number of discussions and negotiations with the unions involved in the dockyard, with the management and with other industry suppliers to try to reach a solution of the problems that the dockyard has had in the past. Basically those problems relate to a lack of productivity. It seems that it has been very difficult to get jobs done on time and to get them done efficiently.
It appears that there have been management problems which have been related to the way in which materials have had to be purchased. They have been related to the confusion of responsibility between the management of the dockyard itself, the Department of Administrative Services, which formerly had the responsibility for certain aspects of procurement of materials, and the Department of Defence itself. As a result the situation which obtained at least until very recently was that there was a confusion of management responsibility. Briefly, the management of the dockyard itself did not have full and proper responsibility for taking decisions and carrying them out in respect of the acquisition of materials and the construction of ships. That was the basic problem on the management side.

The problem on the work force side was that it appeared that a number of labour practices in the dockyard were not contributing to efficient output at the dockyard. For example, the old problem of demarcation disputes seemed to plague the dockyard. Disputes between different unions as to who was going to install certain pipes within a vessel and who was going to do certain other work resulted in debilitating demarcation disputes which meant that the hourly productivity of the dockyard was very low. Indeed, there was a great deal of down time as these disputes were being sorted out. I am aware that some announcements have been made about the streamlining of the management procedures. I am aware that the Government has said that a decision about the construction of follow-on destroyers for the Royal Australian Navy at Williamstown Dockyard will depend, to a very large extent, on firm guarantees being given that productivity can be improved and that some of the work practices which have been damaging the output of the dockyard can be altered and streamlined. I am aware of some steps for improvement that have been made. I would like to hear from the Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner), however, what changes have been made as a result of the departmental reorganisation. What difference has the formation of the Department of Defence Support made in terms of authorisations and administrative procedures between the management of the dockyard and the Department itself? Those of us who have a very real concern for the future of naval shipbuilding in Australia would like to be assured that the departmental reorganisation has assisted matters rather than hindered them. I put the point of view that the ability of Australia to construct naval vessels in its own dockyards is of very great defence significance. It is not just a matter of having the ships themselves--
The CHAIRMAN. The Chair is reluctant to interrupt the honourable member but it is obliged to draw his attention to the fact that he is not being strictly relevant to the estimates. I ask him to address himself particularly to that requirement.
Mr FALCONER-Mr Chairman, I am concerned about where the money allocated for ships is spent. That is the basic reason for my concern. Whilst ships can no doubt be procured from overseas-we are presently obtaining guided missile frigates from Todd shipyard in Seattle in the United States of America-there is great advantage for Australia in ensuring that the defence dollar is spent in this country's own shipyards. I would like to receive some information from the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2099

Minister as to how the review of the Williamstown Dockyard is proceeding and the extent to which we can expect that there will be an announcement in the near future about an acquisition program involving the construction of ships
at the Williamstown Dockyard. The estimates that I have indicate that Australia ought to be producing for its defence expenditure at least one new destroyer every two years to ensure that our destroyer force remains up to date, having regard to the age of some of the ships in the present de-
stroyer force. I would be grateful if the Minister could provide some information of that nature.
Mr VINER (StirlingMinister for Defence Support) (5.53)-It is some time since the estimates of the Department of Defence and my Department of Defence Support were first discussed in Committee. With that time having passed, I
wi1l not dwell upon matters that were raised by honourable members in the earlier debate. I wi1l simply, having regard to the hour, comment briefly on the matters raised this afternoon by the honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer). I am grateful for his expressing in the chamber his interest in the future of Williamstown and the building of naval ships within Australia rather than the persistent acquisition of such ships from
overseas. The honourable member has spoken to me privately about the matter so I know of his interest. Therefore, I was not suprised to hear him directing questions to me in the chamber. I hope that other honourable members, like the honourable member for Casey, will show a continuing interest in the future of the new Department of Defence Support.
Regrettably, we have lost shipbuilding skills within Australia because orders have not been placed within our own shipyards over recent years. That has occurred for a decade and more. There is a very keen interest in the Navy in seeing that Australia retains a shipbuilding capacity and, more than that, increases its capacity and puts itself in a position where it can enter upon a program of building for the Navy's requirements. I will not expound upon that at length. The Committee will appreciate that many considerations have to be taken into account before actual decisions are made for the building of any type of ship within Australia. But we have some notable success. I refer, for example, to what is being done in the construction of patrol boats at Cairns by North Queensland Engineers and Agents. It is a fact that we have had some less happy experiences in some of our shipyards. They are matters that I and my colleague the Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair), the Navy and the establishments themselves, both private and public, must keenly

address our minds to if we are to put any of those yards in a position where we can confidently place a contract with them. That is what is happening with regard to Williamstown at present.
My colleague the former Minister for Defence, the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen), gave a great deal of attention to the needs of Williamstown Dockyard. A number of reports have been presented to the Government. I assure the House that with my new responsibilities I am giving those reports keen attention and seeking to put the Williamstown Dockyard in a position where the management of that dockyard can put a proposal to the Government to which it can confidently respond by placing contracts with the dockyard for the construction of naval ships. In particular, I refer to the prospect of building follow-on destroyers.
The creation of my Department will not hinder that objective at all. It should both facilitate it and aid us in our objective of increasing the productive capacity of the dockyard. A good deal of work has been done in close co-operation with the Australian Council of Trade Unions in weeding out unhealthy work practices and improving the productivity of the dockyard. Discussions are going on with the ACTU at present. For its part, the Government has recently appointed a civilian general manager. There has been worldwide advertising for the permanent appointment of a general manager. We have also recently appointed a full time civilian personnel manager with the objective of helping us in improving the work practices and productivity of the yard.
What is being done at present is aimed at putting the yard and my Qepartment in a position, together with the Navy, to report to me and my colleague the Minister for Defence, within the fairly near future-I will not say within a couple of weeks, within one month or within two months but it is thereabouts-and to make recommendations as to whether we can constructively look at the prospect of placing orders with Williamstown Dockyard. I conclude my remarks on that note. They are necessarily general but I am conscious of the time. I wanted to say enough to ensure my colleague that we are doing everything we can, through the new Department, to improve the capacity of both public and private shipbuilding yards in Australia to meet the naval needs of our defence forces.
Proposed expenditures agreed to.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Department of Trade and Resources
Proposed expenditure, $347,565,000.

2100 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Department of National Development and
Energy
Proposed expenditure, $77,469,000.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (8.0)-In making a contribution to this debate I am mindful of the fact that the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen), in support of the abolition of the House of Representatives Estimates committees, suggested that the present Committee debates would prove to be far more revealing of government activities or inactivities than the information obtained by putting a series of questions to a Minister and ministerial advisers in the more intimate atmosphere of an Estimates committee meeting. I have great doubts about the claims of the Leader of the House. I cannot say that the estimates debates to which I have listened so far in this House have provided anywhere near the revelations that have been provided in the current review of Budget appropriations which has taken place in the Senate Estimates committee meetings.
I wish now to refer to a specific item of the 1982-83 estimates of expenditure for the Department of National Development and Energy, namely, Synroc development and demonstration which relates to the Australian Atomic Energy Commission subdivision under capital works and services, Division 924. The appropriation is for $4,567,000, of which $1,009,000 is to be provided in 1982-83 for further development of Synroc. The comment in the Estimates papers indicates that the program is expected to be completed over a period of three years at an estimated cost of $2,754,000.
It is not my intention, nor am I able, because it is a financial appropriation, to oppose the proposed expenditure of this money, although I view the nuclear industry and the inevitable attendant horrors of nuclear war as being the main contributor to the state of insecurity and fear which abounds in the population of the developed world, particularly among those people who live in the crowded cities of Europe. However, I wish to draw attention to two matters which are of considerable importance when we are discussing government policies and expenditure which relate thereto. The first is the propensity of Government Ministers to deceive, by omission, extravagant claims or a plethora of words intended to disguise the real truth. The second point relates to the constant failure of Government Ministers to admit to the true costs of the nuclear fuel cycle.
Now it is stated in the Estimates that the estimated cost of the 3-year Synroc development and demonstration program is $2,754,000. The Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony)

in a speech in this House on 22 September 1982 claimed that highly radioactive wastes can be safely managed and disposed of. The Minister then went on to describe the Synroc method of radioactive waste disposal. The Minister said:
The Synroc method has been developed by the Australian National University and the Australian Atomic Energy Commission. It provides for the incorporation of radioactive waste elements within the crystalline structure of synthetic materials which are closely related to those which occur in nature and have trapped and retained radioactive substances for many millions of years. The Synroc material is designed for disposal by deep burial in stable geological environments where it would remain stable for many thousands of years.
That is what the Minister said about Synroc. Would any reasonable person not assume from that statement that here was a safe method of getting rid of high level radioactive waste? Of course they would. But the Minister has been deceptive. Let us contrast his statement with statements of Dr R. Smith, the Deputy Director of Operations at the Australian Atomic Energy Commission, at a meeting of Senate Estimates Committee E on 9 September. Senator Hill was questioning Dr Smith. He asked:
Has any international atomic energy body yet agreed to accept Synroc as a repository for waste?
Dr Smith replied:
No. I think one has to regard Synroc as something for the future, it still has to be developed. Some countries have accepted the glass form as the way in which they will dispose of waste in a solidified form, certainly in the immediate future. If Synroc is to be accepted, more research and development work will have to be carried out. That is one of the things we are attempting to do with the money we now have. Then, having proved, in fact, that it does have the advantages we believe it does, that will then be the stage when other countries might take it up. I might say that other countries are also looking at it in the same way as we are, that is, as a second-phase development for the solidification of radioactive waste because of the advantages it appears to have.
Senator Hill, in another question, asked:
When you say that the product requires further research and development, does that therefore mean that Synroc itself requires further research and development before it will be proven, plus that the total system of the integration of waste into the rock process also is going to require research and development?
Dr Smith replied:
The simple answer to that is certainly yes. At the moment it is a very interesting and exciting concept which, at small scale level, appears to offer significant advantages from some points of view. But what you have to do now is carry out further research, take it through the development stage and then ultimately to a demonstration phase in the full active condition. You have then to be satisfied that the costs that come out of that in fact are going to be attractive and that the properties you get are attractive compared with the alternative which is your borosilicate glass.
It is quite clear from this question and answer session between a senior public servant and a senator that, contrary to the only possible interpretation of the extract I quoted from the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2101

speech of the Minister for Trade and Resources, Synroc is not proven as a safe method of radioactive waste disposal. It is also clear that even when the present $2.754m project is completed we will still not know whether Synroc will be an economically feasible method of disposing of radioactive waste. Does the Leader of the House still claim that the present debates in this House can elicit the kind of information that the Senate Estimates committees are uncovering from senior public servants who do not have any political axe to grind and whose reputations are at risk if they make extravagant or false statements? I doubt that the Minister for Trade and Resources, who I am glad to see is at the table, would be prepared to admit that remarks in his speech of 22 September were deceptive. In fact, the whole of his speech about the uranium industry was deceptive, but unfortunately as the present debate relates to the Budget appropriations I cannot pursue that matter.
The second point I wish to make relates to the cost of the development of Synroc. Prior to the present program some $463,000 had been provided to support the development of Synroc. In the present program the Government has committed $2,740,000 but we do not know how many additional funds will be required to ascertain whether Synroc is a commercial proposition. The Government continually fails to inform the Australian public of the true costs of the nuclear fuel cycle. If Synroc is ever found to be proven and an economic proposition for the containment of radioactive nuclear wastes, will this cost be added to the costs of energy produced by nuclear fuel? The United States House of Representatives Committee on Government Affairs made this very point when, in 1978, it claimed that nuclear power is only a cheap form of energy if all the hidden costs of federal subsidies and waste management are ignored. If all the subsidies and concessions given by government are taken into account, it becomes a very expensive form of energy indeed.
I return to the comment of Dr Smith in his reply to Senator Hill when he referred to borosilicate glass as an alternative to Synroc. Dr Smith did not mention one important fact concerning borosilicate glass, but, of course, in all fairness to him, one has to agree that this was not part of the question. However, it is important to point out that one of the reasons why Synroc is being developed at all is that borosilicate glass when buried in an appropriate deep hole is unable to retain the radioactive wastes.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr SHACK (Tangney) (8.1O)-ln this debate on the estimates of the Department of Trade and Resources, I wish to speak about the importance of international trade in overcoming the present world recession. In doing so, let there be no lack of appreciation about the grave international economic context in which we find ourselves. I use the word 'grave' and I am very pleased that the Budget and the Treasurer in his Budget Speech squarely faced up to this reality. The international outlook is grim. One needs to cite only three facts to evidence that this is the case. Firstly, 30 million people are currently unemployed in the Western nations. Secondly, in 1981, there was no growth in world trade, the first time this has occurred in 20 years. Thirdly, last year again, in six out of the seven Western industrialised nations production actually fell.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has estimated that the United States economy has been in a down-swing for over three years and the economies of Japan and Europe have been in a down-swing for two years. Notwithstanding the optimism that a recovery phase may begin at the end of this year, the harsh reality of current times is that we are in an international recession, the extent and depth of which few predicted. It is against that background that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcom Fraser) during the parliamentary winter recess took the challenge of economic recovery to the Western world at large. In the United States, he spoke with President Reagan. On 18 May just three weeks before the Western Summit meeting was held in Versailles and Bonn, he spoke to the Foreign Policy Association in New York. In an address entitled 'The Western Alliance: Perceptions and Reality', the Prime Minister developed the theme that the Western alliance:
. . . which has served the West well for over 30 years, which has preserved peace through a period of unprecedented tension-is now facing the most severe and dangerous challenge of its existence.
The Prime Minister argued that the West had to revitalise itself from within-spiritually, ideologically, diplomatically and militarily-if it was to preserve the freedom of the world in the face of the totalitarian threat of the Soviet Union.
The Prime Minister observed:
The best laid political and strategic policies, even if fully agreed on, will be undermined and frustrated if there is no economic recovery.
The Prime Minister called for imaginative and creative policies to support the fight against inflation, to increase productivity and to speed up the growth of economic trade. Specifically, the Prime Minister proposed that, at the then coming

2102 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Summit at Versailles, the major Western nations make four interrelated commitments. He proposed, firstly, that there be a stand-still on increases in protection and on the introduction of new protectionist measures, particularly in nontariff forms; secondly, that there be no new or increased export incentives and subsidies and that there be an international commitment to the abolition of existing export incentives and subsidies over a period of five years; thirdly, that there be a commitment to significant and progressive implemented reductions in all forms of protection in accordance with a set formula to be determined through the mechanisms of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade; and, fourthly and finally, that these three proposals be priority items for consideration at the November 1982 meeting of the GATT ministerial council.
In world circles, these proposals have been labelled as breakthrough initiatives which, if adopted, hold hope for a speedier world recovery. They are now being seriously considered by the nations which make up the GATT in the preparations for the GATT ministerial meeting next month. The thrust behind Australia's trade proposals is the recognition of the importance of trade liberalisation to eventual recovery of the world economy. The freeing of trade, along with the continued reduction of inflation, is a necessary condition for revived and long term economic growth. An acceptance and an understanding of these facts by all nations are absolutely vital. We can be thankful that there is no dispute about the seriousness of the present world economic situation. A measure of this seriousness is the fact that the GATT meeting I have referred to is the first to be held, at a ministerialleve\, since 1973. We must be concerned that there is talk from some governments of withdrawing from GATT and resorting to the system of preferential trade treatment which caused so many problems prior to World War II.
It must be realised that, if the current tide of protectionism is not turned, developing countries will be unable to service their debts, igniting an even greater financial and trade catastrophe than perhaps occurred in the 1930s. If anybody disagrees with this or believes that this sort of talk is alarmist, they need only recall the present situation of Mexico and the concern about the Philippines. I believe that the Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony), who is at the table, deserves to be congratulated for his efforts in convincing the leading international trade figures of the world of

the vital need to consider Australia's trade proposals. We must keep up the pressure in the international context to make all nations fully appreciate that a move towards greater inward thinking, greater economic isolation and greater protectionism could lead the world economy to financial and trade collapse. I believe that Australia is maximising its influence in world forums-and the Prime Minister is exerting his efforts in this direction at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting in Fiji-to ensure that a recession, which we are currently experiencing, does not become a depression.
In fact, Australia's trade proposals, as outlined prior to the Versailles conference and as put before the GATT ministerial preliminary meeting by the Acting Prime Minister and as further enunciated by the Australian Prime Minister in Fiji this week, hold out hope for a speedier world recovery. If nations, Australia included, become more inward looking and more protectionist in their thinking, we can look forward to a period in respect of international trade and financial security that perhaps we have not seen since the 1930s.
The argument that I am putting forward has a very real message in relation to our own internal economic problems. Up until last year we had largely been able to avoid the problems of the world recession. The resources investment boom and the accompanying high rate of capital investment in Australia shielded our economy from world trends. But, considering Australia as an exporting nation, finally and ultimately the recession has caught up with us. The continued deterioration of economic activity around the world and the downturn effect on trade and on commodityand energy prices have ultimately affected the demand in markets for our own exports. Australia has as much to gain from trade liberalisation as any other nation. Within world forums we have embarked on an advocacy, calling on all nations to accept the need for trade liberalisation. It is in our interests as much as it is in theirs that we bite the bullet on this matter and ensure that a recession does not develop into a depression the likes of which we probably have not seen since the 1930s.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (8.20)-The previous speaker, the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack), took something of a global approach to the subject before the Committee, which essentially relates to the estimates of the Department of National Development and Energy. Nevertheless, I think in a sense one has at least to look at what one can glean from the estimates of the Department that relate to the subject of energy and

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2103

relate that information to a broader scene. Recently the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Sir John Carrick) put out a Press statement following the International Energy Agency meeting. I will begin by quoting from that statement, which reads:
The Minister noted that the key issue facing industrial countries continues to be whether further improvements in energy efficiency and fuel substitution will be brought about by energy policy processes. If not, they are likely to be brought about by recurrent sharp oil price increases reSUlting in constrained economic growth. This report is a timely reminder that whilst much has been achieved, much more needs to be done' . . .
I think that in terms of oil pricing undoubtedly it is true that Australia has attempted to use the market mechanism. One might say if one were cynical that it did so to improve the revenue situation of the Government. If one were not cynical one might say that the Government had a conservation purpose. I would be interested if, at the end of the debate, the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony), who is sitting at the table, could demonstrate how this enormous increase in taxation, which is reflected in this Budget and has been reflected in every Budget over the past three or four years, has in fact really made a major contribution in this country to energy conservation. I think the answer to that question would be that a marginal contribution certainly has been made but not a dramatic contribution-not a contribution commensurate with the fact that the Government has been collecting in each year since we moved to import parity between $3 billion and $4 billion in terms of additional revenue.
I think the reason we have not moved towards a greater emphasis on energy conservation-one can see this if one looks at the sections of the report that deal with the allocations to that area-is that very little money indeed, as part of the total Budget, has been given to energy conservation. I do not think the Government is particularly interested in developing anything like a comprehensive energy policy. If what the honourable member for Tangney suggests is correct and the world is currently facing its most serious international economic crisis, certainly in the post-war period, I think any serious observer would have to suggest that one of the fundamental factors causing that crisis was the dramatic increase in energy costs. That increase occurred particularly in relation to world oil pricing. Until the mid-l 960s oil had literally been given away to the industrialised world and that world had built economies on dirt cheap oil, economies which were energy intensive by their very nature.

We now move into the 1980s in a situation where, not only with respect to oil but also with respect to all non-renewable energy resources, we are beyond the point where those resources will be cheap. A crisis is developing in this country, which these estimates certainly do not reflect and do not come to terms with, which might be described as an energy price crisis. It is a crisis in which not only have we seen dramatic increases in the price of petrol with all that that has meant in terms of disrupting every aspect of life in Australia but also we are now seeing increasingly all forms of energy increasing in price in the various States at a very rapid pace indeed. That means higher energy costs for industry and commerce. It means energy budgets for the average family which are very different in real terms than they have ever been in the post-war period. Energy policy should not be put to one side. It is an absolutely integral part of economic policy internationally and in Australia.
If one looks at the relevant sections of the Budget Papers one will see that that is indeed what the Treasury suggests. It suggests that a lot of our problems relate to the way that this Government has gone into the matter of the development of energy resources. It has certainly not gone into energy conservation or into an energy policy that seeks to create some balance between liquid and non-liquid fuels in terms of development as it occurs in the country. It certainly has not created a balance between renewable and non-renewable resources or between development and conservation. Rather the Government has gone gung ho into developing at the fastest possible rate anything that was related to energy and that it felt might be flogged overseas. That was the so-called resources boom which the Minister for Trade and Resources, who was such a great exhorter of that boom, talked about several years ago.
The States were confronted with this great mirage. No one was more enthusiastic in 1978 than that Minister. No one was more enthusiastic in saying to the States: 'In anything in the way of infrastructure, power stations or energy development the Commonwealth stands behind you'. We had a massive increase in borrowing in 1978. Projects were started in various parts of the country. Now, several years later, as the Treasury points out in the Budget Papers, that mirage has vanished and many of those projects are in the process of partial completion. Many of them are now putting a major burden on State economies as a proportion of capital works in the various States. We are years away, perhaps as much as a decade away in some cases, from getting a real return from that investment.

2104 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

It seems to me that we in this country need
quite desperately to come to terms with energy policy and to begin to discuss it. Whatever one might have said about the previous Estimates committees, at least they made the Minister get involved in discussion with the speaker rather than with his mate at the table. At least he had to face certain questions and certain statements. He had to answer questions on why he had said that there was no chance at all of, for example, projected development in the aluminium industry not reaching 1.6 million tonnes by 1985 and that growth would take place at the rate of 3 per cent
to 4 per cent every year. The Minister was quite clear about that but at least we could talk to him about it. We could talk to some of the people on the other side who are no doubt listening to this debate with some interest in terms of what they thought and what their response was.
In terms of this area of national development and energy it is absolutely crucial that we in this Parliament have genuine debate. We need to discuss the issues. We need to begin to thrash out policies not for development in an unplanned way but for orderly and planned development which will mean that people involved in the energy industry in this country have some long term security. When mines are open there needs to be some certainty that they will remain open and that jobs will be protected. There needs to be some certainty that when power stations are being built they will not break State treasuries.
The Minister for Trade and Resources who is at the table and having a private conversation may laugh. Last year in the Estimates we talked about a Commonwealth evaluation of power stations. it was virtually non-existent. This year the States have had their borrowings restrained in that area. It is a different picture not because of anything that goes on in the mind of that Minister-he thinks very little-but because the economic recession which is occurring within this country now means that very hard choices have to be made. The States have to make those very difficult choices because the Commonwealth has been very successful in moving much of the responsibility in terms of public borrowing from itself to the States. This has had a massive impact, I believe, in a whole range of areas in State Budgets, particularly capital works.
Mr HICKS (Riverina) (8.30)-One section of the Budget that is of utmost importance to the Riverina electorate, and indeed to Australia, is the allocation of finance by the Federal Government to water related projects. This year the Government is providing a total of $41. 7m as part of the five-year National Water Resources Program. It is

providing outside this program an amount of $6.5m to Queensland for the Burdekin scheme. A total of $109.1 m has been spent in the first four years of the National Water Resources Program. The amount of$41.7m to be spent this year is 27.5 per cent more than in 1981-82. Although as the member for Riverina I could never be completely satisfied with the amount being allocated to water resource development, nevertheless I consider this year's increase in expenditure to be significant. This money will be spent mainly on rural water conservation, irrigation, salinity mitigation, drainage and flood protection. Most of this year's money has yet to be allocated to specific projects.
One of the major problems facing areas that make use of Australia's river systems is salinity. Perhaps some of the worst affected areas can be found in the Riverina. Following a tour in 1977 by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony)-he is the Minister who is sitting at the table and who has been castigated quite unreasonably by the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe)- the Maunsell and Partners Pty Ltd report was commissioned. It resulted in a concerted effort by the State and Federal governments to alleviate the problem. In 1981-82 the Commonwealth provided $5.4m for this scheme. Assistance in 1982-83 under this heading will depend on the allocation of assistance under the National Water Resources Program.
A visit by the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Sir John Carrick) to the Murray Valley earlier this year indicates the importance the present Government places on remedying, as far as possible with the technology available, the salinity problem. Some of the schemes implemented in recent times to alleviate salinity problems in the Riverina include the Curlwaa subsurface drainage scheme east of Wentworth, which has reclaimed and protected irrigated farm lands and prevented salt inflow to the Murray River of 10,000 tonnes per annum, and the Buronga salt interception scheme, which is situated along a five-kilometre reach of the Murray River immediately downstream of Mildura Weir in New South Wales. The WakoolTullakool subsurface drainage schemes are located in the most seriously salt affected irrigated lands in New South Wales. The scheme now under construction is designed to reclaim salinised areas and to protect surrounding lands in a total area of 47,000 hectares by pumping ground water from the underlying sand beds to lower the shallow water tables. Stage I is now operating.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2105

The Berriquin sub-surface drainage scheme is to be carried out in the Berriquin irrigation district. Maunsell and Partners recommended a programmed expenditure over 12 years which would total $27m at 1979 values. A program of works was initiated in 1980, when work was commenced on the first phase. An annual expenditure of $4.8m will be required to complete the project within 12 years. The second phase will include the construction of a drainage system east of Tocumwal known as the Lalality drain. Survey and design for this phase are continuing and construction will commence as funds become available. Other works that will be required include drainage works in the Mallee Cliffs area, the Denoboota irrigation district, the Bringan Irrigation Trust area, which is adjacent to the Murray River near Barham to the south of the Wakool irrigation district, and the Pamaona Irrigation Trust district situated on the eastern bank of the Darling River 12 kilometres upstream from Wentworth. I have recently flown over the Wakool-Tullakool subsurface drainage scheme. I was impressed with the improvements which are already taking place although only part of the scheme is completed and that part has been operating for only a short time. It is imperative, because these schemes are implemented on a dollar for dollar basis with the New South Wales Government, that the State Government give these salinity reducing schemes utmost priority.
It is pleasing to see that the Federal Government is providing $lm for water research in 1982-83. This is an increase of 67 per cent over expenditure for 1981-82. It will place greater emphasis on water research and will establish a national water research council to advise on national research priorities and funding requirements. While speaking about the New South Government I commend the work of the officers and the work force of the New South Wales Water Resources Commission. It is with their assistance that so much is being accomplished in the Riverina. While salinity is one very pressing problem, the conservation of water is one of this nation's most pressing needs. The commitment of the regulated flow now available in the Murrumbidgee River system has reached the stage at which plans need to be prepared for the development of the next major storage on the system if the present users are to be assisted in time of drought and if appreciable further irrigation is to be possible.
The completion of the Tombullen storage and Hay Weir project has improved the situation and permits the necessary lead time for planning and development of the next major storage in the

Murrumbidgee Valley. A number of alternatives have been looked at, including headwater storage. However, preliminary investigations have shown that the most viable scheme to be considered is that known as the Lake Mejum scheme on the Murrumbidgee River near Narranderra. There are a number of proposals for this scheme, but basically they consist mainly of a gravitated scheme or an alternative scheme using electric pumps. It was thought that the pump scheme would be the most cost-effective alternative but recent massive increases in electricity charges in New South Wales have no doubt made the designers of the scheme take another look at it.
This scheme is long overdue. I have read a number of statements, by people who should know better, that the project has been held up by a lack of Commonwealth funds. We in this chamber know that that is not correct. As we all know, the construction of the Lake Mejum scheme depends, first, on its priority rating with the New South Wales Government. It is to be hoped that the New South Wales Government will make some positive movements in this direction soon rather than negatively blame the Federal Government for delays. Other facets of water control are important in my electorate. Although dependent on State priorities, they will depend very much on Federal funding. One such project is the reconstruction of the old flood banks and construction of new levies required around the town of Deniliquin in the southern Riverina. These are required to make Deniliquin flood free. Some housing construction has recently been held up because of the requirement for a flood-free area. I believe the State Government has announced a grant for the investigation and planning for those levies, which is a start in the right direction.
When we talk of water conservation we tend to relate to huge schemes consisting of multimillion dollar dams and accompanying reticulation. In the Riverina, with an average annual rainfall of 240 millimetres or 9.5 inches, small towns and even the city of Broken Hill exist under precarious water supply conditions. Broken Hill has two reservoirs-Stephens Creek, which has been dry since April 1977 apart from a small flush in 1978-79, and Umberumbeca which has been dry since May 1981. The city, therefore, relies on a small diameter pipeline approximately 113 kilometres long which brings water from the Darling River. In summer this pipeline is inadequate. Water rationing has been part of Broken Hill life for the past two years. For a city the size of Broken Hill this is unreasonable and a great deal of thought needs to be given to the construction of

2\06 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

a larger pipeline if Broken Hill is to develop. The cost of water to the people of Broken Hill and to the mining companies of that city is also unrealistic but I will speak of that matter in this place on another occasion.
Some smaller towns are affected by lack of a reliable water supply, one being the opal mining centre of White Cliffs. The dam in that town is almost dry and a pipeline from the Darling River would overcome the long term problem. In the short term, the search could be continued for a suitable underground water supply and a bore could be provided to meet the town's immediate needs. Tibooburra is fortunate enough still to have six metres of water in the town dam. A new 30,000 cubic metre dam is about to be constructed. A report on the Ivanhoe water supply situation has been completed by the New South Wales Government. That Government promised to fund completely a permanent water supply for that town.
The water users on the Riverina have been concerned for some time at the proposals put forward in the discussion paper prepared by the New South Wales Water Resources Commission. One of the proposals is that through the rating of water users, the Government should recoup the cost of part of the capital works associated with water conservation. Irrigators and other water users of the Riverina totally reject this proposal and consider that capital works should be financed out of general tax revenue in the same way that roads, bridges, airports and other public utilities are financed. The New South Wales State Government denied that it has any intention drastically to increase water rates but as yet has made no announcement of its proposals in this regard. As I said earlier, I, as the member for Riverina, could never be completely content with the amount being spent by the State or Federal Governments on water quality control or conservation, but I commend the Federal Government on the increase in expenditure this year and its approach to water quality and conservation in Australia.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (8.40)-Mr Chairman, I wish to speak to the estimates for the Department of Trade and Resources. The money which is best spent is that allocated to the Trade Publicity Branch of the Trade Promotion and Services Division located in Melbourne. The Trade Publicity Branch is a specialist unit with the main task of promoting Australian products overseas and in Australia. It is one of the bright spots, if not the bright spot, in the Department. It operates very successfully and is most cost effective. It carries out its tasks excellently, despite the Department's shift of emphasis from trade to resources, even

though the sale of resource commodities is based on price, delivery and demand and does not need the same support as manufacturing.
We all know the obsession of the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) with the exploitation and selling out of our mineral and energy resources at any price. We remember the Minister heralding in the resources boom with a fanfare prior to the last elections. The resourcesled recovery advocated by the Minister led us down the garden-path. However, the Minister is still obsessed by his idea that the easiest way out of the current recession is to sell the farm. He seems to forget that there are not many buyers around as the demand for our raw materials diminishes. His preoccupation with resources leads the Minister to neglect our manufacturing sector, the major employer in this country. This neglect manifests itself in the move to transfer the Department's Trade Publicity Branch. When an increased effort is needed in export promotion the Department is cutting back the amount of export promotional support to the manufacturing sector.
The Department and the Minister apparently believe-despite the wealth of evidence to the contrary-that resources are a better long term prospect than is manufacturing. Two thousand jobs are disappearing daily in our manufacturing sector and the Minister for Trade and Resources, adding insult to injury, proposes to dismantle the Trade Publicity Branch of his Department by shifting it from Melbourne to Canberra. The proposed move to Canberra is the latest in a series of decisions to remove Federal Government technical branches from the real world. Victoria employs more people in the manufacturing sector than does any other State. The proposal is part of a bureaucratic centralisation process which is not in the national interest. The transfer is unnecessary and will create a major loss of promotional expertise to industry. Many of the facilities for the Branch are not located in Canberra or readily available there. The facilities available to the Branch in Melboune include access to freight forwarders, shipping, an international airport, designers, printers, freelance journalists, artists, photographers, and, most importantly, direct contact with the manufacturing industry. Such access is essential for manufacturers to receive a realistic approach-not an ivory tower approach-to their promotional needs. The World Trade Centre in Melbourne is the obvious permanent location for the trade publicity branch. If the move to shift it to Canberra proceeds it will take several years for the branch to recover its lost efficiency, if it ever does.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2107

I note again that our trade promotion is under attack when jobs are fast disappearing and when the United States of America and other advanced countries are making every effort to re-establish their export trade promotions and so recover the ground lost to Japanese exporters. The Minister's support for the move actually gives the coup de grace to our export manufacturing industry while his Government facilitates the import of manufactured products. It looks as though he is conspiring to assist the Japanese to achieve in peace what they failed to achieve in war. It is about time the Minister thought and acted as an Australian and made it his business to protect the jobs of Australian workers and not the profits of foreign corporations.
Hundreds of jobs are disappearing daily in my electorate and scores of Australians are losing their jobs. The grave economic situation in which we find ourselves as a result of the Fraser Government's policies will be further aggravated by the weakening of our export promotion. The Trade Publicity Branch offers many services to manufacturers, including trade fairs, trade display support, shipping co-ordination, advertising campaigns, pUblications and media promotions. Its work has received worldwide acclaim. In the 10 month period from July 1981 the Branch showed 35 overseas trade displays in 24 major cities. More than one million visitors saw the products of 733 Australian exhibitors who reported direct sales of $15.5m and negotiated sales of $114m. It should be understood that the service offered by the Trade Publicity Branch is especially valuable to small manufacturers who cannot finance their own promotions as can big corporations. Small business, being more labour intensive, is the major employer in Australia. Approximately 90 per cent of Australian companies have fewer than 100 employees. Foreign takeovers, plus the tendency of capital to concentrate wealth and power in fewer and fewer hands, dealt a big blow to our small business. Small companies are unable to compete in terms of finance, planning, the search for export markets, and sophisticated marketing techniques. That is why the Trade Publicity Branch is so important to them.
The Minister, in answer to my question of 16 September, stated that the proposal to transfer his Department's Trade Publicity Branch from Melbourne to Canberra had been brought almost to the stage at which it is to be referred to the Interdepartmental Committee on Location of Australian Government Employment. Evidently the Minister is not aware that the LAGE Committee consists of the Chairman of the Public Service

Board and permanent heads of administrative departments who are more concerned with the logistics of the transfer than with the logic of it. This is instanced by the fact that in its eight years in has never opposed a transfer. If the Minister is really concerned with the efficiency of the Branch and if he insists on bringing the case before the Committee, I suggest that the matter should be taken to a more independent tribunal-perhaps to the Reid Committee which, according to the Govern-
ment, will look into Public Service efficiency.
The Minister also stated in the same answer that the Branch 'not only covers the interests of people in Melbourne but it also covers the interests of people all around Australia'. This part of the Minister's answer shows that he completely missed the point of my question. If the Branch were located, for instance, in Sydney I would argue to leave it in that manufacturing centre. For its successful operation and in order to be able to serve the interests of 'people all around Australia' the Branch has to have close contacts with manufacturing industry. If the policy of cutting back on manufacturing export promotion and transferring the Branch to Canberra is carried out it will be a devastating blow to manufacturing industry and, consequently, to employment. I again seek an assurance from the Minister that these policies will not be carried out and that the Trade Publicity Branch will be located permanently at the World Trade Centre where it will have direct contact with the manufacturing industry.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (8.50)-This evening I would like to speak on the estimates for the Department of National Development and Energy and in particular the amount allocated in the Budget to water resources. The severe drought gripping many parts of Australia at the present time is an unfortunate reminder of how vulnerable our agricultural sector is to the lack of water supplies. It is an appropriate time for us to reflect on the need for further established water supplies so that their important contribution to the national economy is sustained. In the past our public expenditure on water resources development has been profitable for the nation. The availability of water in this country is a determining factor in our national development and the population of our continent.
It is timely to consider the future and to look to the future. From the earliest days of European settlement thought has been given to the development of water resources and to how Australia's climate can be combated to reduce drought and the impact of floods. In the 1930s Dr Bradfield had a bold and imaginative vision or concept to divert water from coastal north Queensland streams

21 08 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

into central water courses in the Eyre Basin. This and say that the Government is running scared. It

proposal did not proceed because of the enormous had the opportunity to front up before Estimates

unknowns at the time.

committees, with all of its advisers, to answer

Major problems to be combated in the development of water resources are: Water evaporation,
salinity and drainage. However, now is the time to
look ahead. I congratulate the Government on its . announcement of a study of water resource needs
to the end of the century which is now under way.
This study is to identify water resource development and management issues which have a poten-
tial for impeding plans for national development.

questions. When one looks at the estimates it is quite obvious that the Government wants to get
away from that form because it was just too hot in the kitchen. I do not intend to make what has
been termed a second reading speech. In fact I
want to direct some very serious questions to the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony),
who is seated at the table and who was previously
the Minister for National Resources.

The Budget provides for the allocation of $41. 7m for the National Water Resources Program-an
increase of 30 per cent on last year's Budget. This
shows that the Government is indeed serious

I wish to raise a number of matters that are listed in the estimates, in particular the problems
with which Australia is faced following the atomic
tests at Emu, Monte Bello and Maralinga. The

about the development of the nation's water reBudget estimates allocated $234,000 for radioac-

sources and it also shows the importance that the tive waste management. What is this money spent

Government attaches to the development and on? I hope that the questions which I am asking

management of those resources. The appropriwill be taken on board by the appropriate Minis-

ation includes up to $400,000 as a start on projects ters for answers later on. In a previous forum at

initiated by the Australian Water Resources least we got an opportunity to ask questions. In

Council in areas of high priority. Further work on the estimates $45,000 is allocated for support for the development of the perspective on Australia's the continuing presence of members of the Aus-

water resources to the year 2000 is proceeding, at an estimated cost in the Budget of about $480,000.
This report, which is to be completed next year,
will enable the Government of Australia to have

tralian Federal Police at Maralinga. An amount
of $49,000 has been allocated for the refurbishing of facilities for continued on-site surveillance of
Maralinga. Some $10,000 has been provided for

an up to date assessment of Australia's water site inspections at Maralinga and Monte Bello and

needs and problems to the end of the century. As $80,000 has been provided for radiological surthe Minister for National Development and Enveys at Maralinga and Monte Bello atomic test

ergy (Senator Sir John Carrick) has said, this will sites to identify areas of residual radioactivity, as

provide a basis for future initiatives.

foreshadowed in the reports of the Australian

The work that the National Water Research Ionising Radiation Advisory Councl. Another Council is doing in developing a perspective on item in the estimates, about which one clearly

Australia's water needs and problems to the end needs to ask specific questions in order to underof the century is one of the most important future stand what the hell it is about, involves an amount initiatives this Government has undertaken. Deof $50,000. It has something to do with some

cisions which will be made will concern the nature uranium operations. In total, almost a quarter of a

of Australia's future. I am confident that projects million dollars has been allocated.

will be developed and undertaken to enable devel-
opment to take place which will enable wealth to be created and will also offer exciting new job
prospects and opportunities for Australians. The
harnessing of our water resources for the better future of all Australians is one of our great chal-
lenges. It can and must be met.

I ask the Minister: Why should Australia pay for the police surveillance at Maralinga? Is it not
the responsibility of the United Kingdom? How many police officers will we get for $45,000? Will
we get two or two and a half police officers? Has anyone any idea of the area that is involved?
Again I ask: Why should Australia be carrying

Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (8.55)-Firstly, I rethat responsibility? What about compensation for

mind the Committee that this procedure for dethe poor victims who were involved in those tests

bating these Estimates was imposed on honourat Maralinga? We have evidence in another docu-

able members on this side of the House. ment that a pilot study of some 200 people has

Previously we had Estimates committees in which shown that there has been a considerable inci-

the Minister responsible, surrounded in some dence of cancer, genetic breakdown, child defor-

cases by an entourage of up to 20 advisers, could mities and so on. An amount of $90,000-odd has

be cross-examined on the estimates. I register the been set aside, with an additional $200,000 from

protest that has already been registered by the Department of Health to further that study.

honourable members on this side of the House Who will pay the compensation when finally the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2109

responsible government has to pay the money? Why should this not be sheeted home to the United Kingdom Government? Surely it is the responsibility of the United Kingdom Government. Some deal might have been done at that time to absolve it of its responsibility.
The nuclear veterans association-an association which was formed in Australia to try to look after those victims-has found it almost impossible to get information about these problems. The Minister in another place who is now responsible for this portfolio has been stymying questions on that issue for two or more years.
Mr Shipton-A profound contribution!
Mr SCOTTAn honourable member opposite says that I am making a profound contribution. The people opposite are the kinds of people who say 'Gung Ho. We are into the atomic age. We can set off bombs in Australia'. That was the atitude which was expressed in 1954. If honourable members opposite care to educate themselves I commend to them a book about Maralinga and the horrors which people are suffering and for which we will eventually have to pay. The smile will be on the other sides of the faces of honourable members opposite once that is established and the people who are currently suffering start to line up for some form of compensation.
I also raise the matter of surveillance. It is known that previous surveillance of the safety precautions taken was in the form of a few signs erected around the site. Along the many miles of boundary of the site, signs were erected advising of the radioactive problems there. But no consideration was given to the Aboriginal tribes who lived in the area. If Government members really have any compassion in their hearts for the original inhabitants of this country, they will take the time to read the book Maralinga and to understand what those people are suffering. We should find out about what is going on at Yalata. There are reports, unconfirmed as yet, of cancers, deaths and deformities, among that tribe. What is this Government going to do to try to give them the kind of assistance necessary, in a health sense first of all, but also in compensation for those and other people involved in those tests?
Again, I come back to the question: Should this Government be responsible for this matter, or should the responsibility in fact be sheeted home to the United Kingdom Government? Because of the forms of this Committee, I have to cut off my remarks there, but I think I have made my point on that issue. I hope that those questions will be taken on board and I will get some answers.

Mr COWAN (Lyne) (9.1)-1 wish to refer to the issues contained within the Estimates concerning water conservation. I appreciate the fact that the Estimates provide $41.7m of Commonwealth money for the promotion of water resources conservation in Australia. Whilst I commend the Government on that provision, I, like other speakers on the Government side, wish to state tonight my personal concern that we are not involving more of the finances of Australia in promoting the actual productive resources of Australia, particularly water and soil. We had eight major droughts within Austraiia in the past century and they certainly have played havoc with production and returns. Added to that are the problems with flooding, et cetera. We have been treating only the symptoms and not the actual disease in this respect.
I refer honourable members to a review of the rivers and streams of New South Wales, conducted by the Honourable J. G. Beale, when Minister for Conservation and responsible for water resources in that State. In that review 33 of the river valleys of New South Wales were surveyed to determine their potential for water conservation. Only a few months ago, Mr Beale, who is now retired, suggested a bicentenary 25 year program of soil conservation, growing trees and water conservation within Australia. I believe that there is a great necessity for a national water program. In saying that, I appreciate the fact that the States have responsibilities for their domestic supplies and barrages within their State streams, licensing upon the streams and the general conduct of irrigation within the States.
Only 33 years ago, with a population of seven million people, we spent, in present day values, $4 billion on the Snowy scheme. Was that not a wonderful investment for Australia? Therefore, I believe that we as a national parliament should give greater attention, as I said earlier, to developing the productive resources of this country. We as a government, as are all the governments in Australia today, are becoming too concerned with other issues that do not produce food, build the economy, or increase our national earnings. It is time that we gave greater attention to the basic necessities of a young country that needs developing, not only in water resources. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) is in the chamber tonight. He would agree with me that greater attention should be paid to roads. He has come up with a roads program for the bicentenary upon which he must be congratulated. Those are the issues that matter to this country.
We hear the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) and other honourable members

211 0 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

from the socialist side of the chamber stand up there and talk about little, fiddling issues that do not matter to the average Australians, who want to see the taxes that they are paying going into something that will develop this great country of ours. That is the theme I want to speak about. It is the theme that we, as a national parliament, must follow, to promote the development of Australia, instead of directing our attention to other matters that are not productive for this nation. I raise these issues because, ever since I have had a seat in this Parliament, I have been very concerned that not enough of our attention is devoted to productive resources. When one travels around the electorates, one finds that the response of the average elector today is a silent response but a determined one. They want to see the Government giving greater attention to these issues which we are concerned about today.
I congratulate the Minister for Trade and Resources, the Acting Prime Minister, who is sitting at the table tonight, on the initiatives that he took in southern New South Wales in the Murray scheme years ago. That scheme has now borne the fruit that the honourable member for Riverina (Mr Hicks) spoke about this evening. Nobody has forced the water issue in this chamber more than the honourable member for Riverina has in the almost two years that he has been here. He is the one who, with the Acting Prime Minister, has led the way in the development and the desalination of the Murray. Last weekend in my electorate we had 12 inches of rain.
Mr Morris-What about the Hunter River?
Mr COWAN-If the honourable member wants me to talk about the Hunter I will accomodate him. At this time the New South Wales Government has no overall State program. What it is doing in the Hunter is building dams for industry. It is chasing the dairying and grazing industries out of the Hunter Valley. The unionists will not load the ships. Honourable members opposite should be ashamed of the Hunter Valley. They should be ashamed to sit in this Parliament.
The other day we had 12 inches of rain on the coast. Naturally, I now come into this chamber and say: Here is all this water flowing out to sea. It could be conserved. I think of the Murray River and the Darling River and its tributaries. I know that there has been agitation from the Barwon and other areas for the water to be diverted to the western part of the State. Maybe that is something we should think about. It is all part of a national water program, something we are not addressing ourselves to and something I believe that we will have to address ourselves to in the future.

The New South Wales Government stands condemned. Not only does it not assist to build barrages and initiate flood schemes for its water, but also it has taken away the subsidy that was available to landowners to construct dams upon their properties. We had taxation concessions and a lot of support from the Commonwealth, but the New South Wales Minister for Conservation wiped that out and said: 'We will not assist you'. As a matter of fact, I might have been the responsible State Minister when that assistance was initiated. We were very proud of it. The landowners in the State are not very proud of the Labor Party.
Let us look at the overall situation in Australia today. We are competing with other countries on world markets for the sale of products of the land. Countries we are competing against are producing their crops under irrigation. Australia is basically a dry continent. We do not have the snow waters that the Americans have. So, we depend upon the conservation facilities on our streams. Unless we are prepared to make a move towards conservation, we will become uncompetitive on world markets, even more uncompetitive than we are at present. It is essential that we come up with a water resources program for Australia that will enable us to give to our landowners, who suffer great adversity at this time, some security for the future. They need to know that schemes will be available to them, that they will be able to produce crops on their farms and compete with the rest of the world. That is a very important factor to remember. One becomes concerned when one looks at the Budgets of all the governments throughout Australia and sees money going on unproductive issues in this nation while we fellows from country electorates are always crying out for productive ones. They are the issues which will solve the problems of Australia, and nothing else.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr COWAN-Honourable members opposite do not want to do a bit of damned hard work. They want to cut hours. They want higher pay. They want to put up costs within Australia. They are the ones who want to do that. We want a little common sense on these issues. I hope that in the years to come we will have for Australia a national water resources program that will envisage the harnessing of all the natural water resources available to us. Combined with this must go the conservation of soil. I spoke early this evening about the Honourable 1. G. Beale. He is a man who envisaged a bicentennial program of planting trees over a 25-year period which, like the scheme of the Minister for Transport and Construction, is a worthy one for this land. In what better way could we celebrate the bicentenary of a young

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2111

land such as ours than by developing its natural resources?
Motion (by Mr McLean) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Proposed expenditures agreed to.
Department of Transport and Construction
Proposed expenditure, $414,823,000.
Department of Aviation
Proposed expenditure, $374,837,000.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (9.13)-This Bill provides for the allocation of $374,837,000 for the operations of the Department of Aviation for 1982-83 and of $414,823,000 for the Department of Transport and Construction in the same period, a total allocation of $789,660,000. Disgracefully the Committee is to be allowed one hour to examine, question and discuss the hundreds of items of expenditure involved. Of that 60 minutes the Opposition is to be allowed three speakers, each for 10 minutes. In practical terms that means a fraction of a minute per item of expenditure. This makes an absolute farce of parliamentary procedure and of any responsible consideration of the vast amount of public money involved. We saw that farce this afternoon when this Parliament lapsed for want of a quorum by the Government.
The person responsible for this lamentable state of affairs is the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), who is away presently strutting the world stage in Fiji. He is the man who has led this country into its first depression in 50 years. I, as shadow Minister for Transport, like many of my colleagues was denied the opportunity by this discredited Government to participate in the second reading debate on the Budget. The question to be asked is: Why did the Government abolish the separate Estimates committees of this House which were set up in 1979, because tonight's type of arrangement had been found over many decades of experience to be totally unsuited to the public interest and to any proper and critical examination of the proposed items of expenditure? The reasons given by the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) a few weeks ago were at best spurious. They were a cover up for the real reason, which is this Government's desire to prevent any detailed analytical examination of the proposed items of expenditure. Why? Because it does not want the public to be aware of what it is about and because its Ministers are unable to present themselves responsibly before separate Estimates committees of this House to explain the justification for the proposed expenditure.

This scandal-ridden Government has a total inability to face the truth, to tell the truth to the people of Australia. It has instead allowed tax thieves to prosper in its period of office while ordinary wage and salary earners have been slugged $30 a week additional tax to make up for what the thieves have got away with. There is one solution left for those opposite; that is to get out of this place as quickly as possible. The sooner they are swept from office, the better this country will be. I will quote from the transcript of an interview given by a well-known political commentator of Liberal Party ilk, Katharine West, on the Australian Broadcasting Commission PM program on 22 September last. Referring to the Fraser Government she said:
It's failed to follow through its increasingly unconvincing rhetoric about sound economic management, about proper standards of Ministerial conduct, and about strong Government. It's being guided by double standards, and I think this has gone through all the criticism within the Liberal Party of the Fraser Ministry's conduct on this . . . What the great error of the Fraser Government in the last week has been, that in its effort to find scapegoats, to blame everybody but itself, to shift the blame elsewhere, it has aroused all kinds of private, as well as public hostility among many people in the Australian community who feel that they either have been scapegoated or unjustly pilloried in one way or another against our traditional concept of the rule of law, or they fear that they may be.
The style of presentation of the proposed expenditure of the Department of Aviation and the Department of Transport and Construction makes it almost impossible to make any ready comparison of past and proposed expenditure on an item by item basis. I know-I have learned subsequently -that the Ministers responsible made available a type of comparison to the Senate Estimates committees. But that information was not presented to this chamber with the estimates. That situation arose because on 7 May last the Prime Minister sacked the present Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) from aviation responsibilities and split the Ministry of Transport into two separate ministries-a Ministry of Aviation and a Ministry of Transport and Construction. Why did that split occur? Why was that ad hoc decision made? It was made because Liberal Party members opposite were dissatisfied with the performance of the then Minister for Transport and the Country Party would not agree to his being removed. So the only thing that the Prime Minister could do was chop the ministry in two.
We now have those estimates before the Parliament with a few minutes to look at the hundreds of millions of dollars of proposed expenditure involved with no ready comparison to be made, and those opposite who parade themselves around

2112 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Australia as dries, as free marketeers and as responsible members who want to see an analytical examination of proposed items of expenditure, sit mute-dumb. That shows the fallacy of their proposals for the analysis of public expenditure. We are one of the only countries among comparable Western democracies in which the administration of national transport policy is split between separate ministries. Yet the clients serviced by the Ministry of Transport and Construction and the Ministry of Aviation themselves operate across all modes of transport. Here we have this hapless and embattled Government not knowing which way to go, not being able to present the estimates to this Parliament in a form which can be readily digested by the public or the House and not even allowing time for proper examination of what is proposed.
Mr Hunt-Take your mind back to when you were in government; you did not have Estimates committees then.
Mr MORRIS-You are the Minister they sacked. You do not want to open your mouth too loudly. You are the one who was sacked from aviation because of your incompetence. Ask your colleagues behind you. They got rid of you. I did not get rid of you. I wanted you to stay.
Mr Hunt-Rubbish.
Mr MORRIS-it is a fact. When Labor comes to government-I make this quite clear-there will be an end to this waste and inefficiency and there will be one ministry of Transport to properly and responsibly manage national transport policy and affairs. I turn now to aviation. The increased allocations that are proposed for airport development are before us, but no cost-benefit studies of the major items of expenditure have been carried out. Instead we have major items of expenditure being made on an ad hoc basis depending on which State election is to be held next or which marginal seat is involved. Already the works program for the introduction of widebodied jets, the Airbus and the Boeing 767, are behind schedule because of poor planning, understaffing and a lack of resources. The redevelopment of Brisbane Airport has been put back one year, again because of bungling within the Department of Aviation and the former Department of Transport. The promised redevelopment of Darwin Airport has been put into limbo because the Government cannot make up its mind about what to do with the Air Force in Darwin.
How much faith can we put in the accuracy of the figures in the statements before us when the Treasurer (Mr Howard) this morning admitted that the Estimates still before us in this Budget are

$300m out? He said that there are changes in the circumstances. How much notice can we take of these estimates? I say to honourable members 'Very little until we can have them vouched for by some independent authority.' Expenditure in some areas is understated; in other areas it has been overstated. This was an electioneering Budget. The Government wanted it to be seen by the private sector as being reasonably respectable. Already it is blowing apart. The estimates before us will do the same thing. Two things are certain: Firstly, the estimates before us are unreliable. Secondly, new and increased government charges on the revenue side have been overstated. Because of the new charges, which the previous speaker, the honourable member for Lyne (Mr Cowan), lauded the Minister for Transport and Construction who is at the table about, including the new $2.5 billion tax on fuel for road users, every form of surface transport charge will be increased. Rail charges will go up because of the abolition of the excise exemption of off-road use of diesel fuel in what is a claw-back, back-door form of resource profits tax. Rail freights, passenger fares, road transport and coach fares will go up. Who is responsible? A National Country Party Minister who masquerades as representing the people who live in the country.
In the couple of moments left to me in which to speak let me raise with the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) the answer he gave to a question asked this morning by my colleague the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) in relation to the certification of the CASA 212 aircraft by his officers last year. The question was avoided by the Minister, paticularly that part of it which asked:
What audit checks are made in such cases of the amounts paid to or on behalf of the officers by the importer concerned?
The Minister fudged the question and avoided it. There is massive opportunity for malpractice. There is no proper audit procedure. This Government has to answer this question if it is to conduct its affairs properly. Who checked whether the aircraft which became the subject of a claim for the investment allowance-a benefit costing hundreds of thousands of dollars of taxpayers' money-was a new aircraft? The Minister for Aviation says that it is not his responsibility to see whether an aircraft is new or used. The Treasurer cannot say, on behalf of the Australian Taxation Office, whether it checked this. The Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock) is mute. Who is responsible? That is the question I want answered tonight. This is again another glaring example of turning a blind eye to massive amounts of public revenue forgone. When it

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2113

comes to the little people, the Government can send the bailiff to the widow in my electorate to collect a lousy $611 of tax owing on the estate of her deceased husband before it has been through probate yet it cannot attack the real issues involving hundreds of millions of dollars.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr GROOM (Braddon) (9.23)-The honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) has carried on in his usual fashion. He asked why the Parliament has changed the system of examining the Estimates this year. The reason must be patently obvious from the way the honourable member for Shortland carried on in his brief speech. We saw the same kind of approach under the former system of examining the Estimates. All the Opposition members wanted to do was make cheap political points and enter into character assassinations. We have seen this day after day during this session of the Parliament. Names have been dropped by Opposition members who do not care whether there is any truth in the allegations they make. Where is the justice in that kind of conduct? I think we should all deplore the kind of approach that the honourable member for Shortland has adopted in this Estimates debate and on previous occasions when he has spoken on transport matters.
I want to speak briefly about aviation and the estimates for the Department of Aviation. Firstly, I congratulate the Government on the decision it has made to establish a specialised Department of Aviation. I believe it is a very sensible decision and one that has clearly been well accepted by those directly involved in aviation, particularly the aviation industry. It is terribly important that in Australia we have an efficient aviation system. A major part of the infrastructure is our airports. It is very pleasing to note that the Government in this Budget and in the estimates now before the Parliament will make a substantial contribution to improving the standard of airports around Australia. We have only to look at the figures. The amount to be spent on airport works to be commenced during the year is $355m. That is a four-year figure. In this financial year the amount to be spent on new airport development is $49m. This includes development works at Brisbane, where a major redevelopment is taking place, Perth, Townsville and Hobart in my State of Tasmania.
The Government is also spending a very substantial amount of money on improving those airports which are being transferred under the local

ownership plan. This is a very important plan which gives local communities the chance to be involved in the management and control of their local airports. Part of the arrangement is for the Government to provide funds to upgrade those airports prior to their transfer to local ownership. The sum of $12m is being spent under that plan in this financial year. It includes substantial works on airports in New South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania. Total expenditure under the local ownership plan in this financial year will be $38m. The amount of $8m is to be allocated for new transfers; that is, for airports being transferred in the forseeable future to local authorities to control on behalf of local communities.
I use this opportunity to mention briefly the situation concerning two airports in my electorate of Braddon in the north-west of Tasmania. We have two very important airports at Wynyard and Devonport. I am pleased to say that both those airports are to be transferred under the local ownership plan. A large amount of money is to be spent on upgrading both of them. In this financial year about $4m will be spent at the Devonport Airport and funds are to be allocated for the upgrading of Wynyard Airport. These two airports are very important to the north-west part of Tasmania which, I suggest, is the most progressive part of Tasmania. To some degree Tasmania is misunderstood. It is a very decentralised State. Over half the Tasmanian population lives in the north of the State. In the north-west area of Tasmania we have about 100,000 people. That is a significant number. We have very important links with the mainland. Many people go to Melbourne and parts further north for medical, educational, social and other reasons. Our links with Melbourne and other parts of the mainland are more significant than even our links with Hobart, our very beautiful capital city. However, we believe our links with the mainland are very important.
It is probably fair to say that the people of the north-west of Tasmania use aircraft more often than people from any other part of Australia. They often travel across Bass Strait by air. This is why the two airports are so important. There is some concern in the Burnie-Wynyard area about the present state of the arrangements by which the airport at Wynyard is to be transferred under the local ownership plan. A decision has been made in principle to transfer the airport to the Marine Board of Burnie. Negotiations have taken place. The Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife), who is at the table, has been involved in those negotiations as was the previous Minister for Transport, now the Minister for Transport and

2114 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Construction (Mr Hunt). There have been discussions with Master Warden Hugh Loane, Brian Loring, the general manager, and other people from the Marine Board on this issue. The Minister made a statement that there would be a transfer to local ownership of the Wynyard Airport but what will be the extent of upgrading of the Wynyard Airport?
The feeling of the local community, on my assessment, is that it is not very interested in a transfer to local ownership, which means taking on a very large responsibility, unless there is some kind of quid pro quo, unless the Government is prepared to provide it with an upgraded airport facility. We believe-I have put this case to the Minister for Aviation many times and I think that he appreciates the importance of the area and the progress that is being made there-that the air-
port must be upgraded to medium jet standard. There is no doubt from the discussions that I have had with East West Airlines, which now operates to the north west of Tasmania, and also with Ansett Airlines of Australia, that both of those airlines intend to operate jets to the north west in the foreseeable future. We cannot say when that might be. It might be a few months away or it might be a year or two away, but it is just around the corner; the jet age is soon to come to the north west of Tasmania. Therefore there is little point in the view of the local community in accepting this marked increase in responsibility under the local ownership plan for the control and management of the airport at Wynyard unless we receive, at the same time, an assurance that the Wynyard Airport will be upgraded to medium jet standard.
I know that the Minister cannot rush into this kind of thing without proper evidence. The Government has to be responsible about it and so does the Department. They need evidence of these things. I believe that the evidence is there. I hope that the Government will look at this matter in a very responsible way. I hope that it will appreciate the importance of the development of this facility on the north west coast. I hope it will realise that these two airports service areas of almost equal importance. Anyone with any feeling for this area and for local conditions and with any understanding of the local problems would realise that the Devonport and Wynyard airports are of almost equal importance and that therefore the same kind of arrangement should apply to both of those airports. We have local ownership at Devonport which is greatly appreciated by the local people. There has been substantial upgrading. It was said to cost $5.5m but I believe that the ultimate figure will be in excess of that. The Government is certainly making a substantial

contribution out of Commonwealth funds to provide a much improved facility at Devonport, but I believe that there should also be an improved facility at Wynyard. I hope that the Government, the Department of Aviation and the Minister will look closely at this issue very soon and will make an early decision so that the Wynyard airport, as I have said a very important airport, can be upgraded to medium jet standard.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (9.33)-In this debate on the Estimates I wish to raise a point in regard to how departmental funds are spent and how private enterprise apparently works with the Department of Aviation. Today I asked the Minister for Aviation:
Under what specific circumstances are officers of his Department permitted to travel abroad in association with the importation of an aircraft at the direct expense of the importer concerned? What audit checks are made in such cases . . .?
As the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) said, the Minister ducked the question. I wish to give to give a little background to the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) and the Parliament to a report which I tabled in this Parliament on 15 September 1982 in regard to an aircraft that was brought into this country. This information was available to the Department. Mr Michael Falls was sent overseas to assess an aircraft. He met a chap overseas called Senor Pablo De Bergia who was the head of the commercial department in Spain. I will quote from part of the report of Mr Falls's visit. It states;
At this time, the agreed delivery date we were aiming at was May 15, allowing time for ferry and Australian C. of A. in time for a revenue flight--
A revenue flight, it should be noted--
in FY \980-81. It soon became apparent that although that date was still some eight weeks away, not many of our requests could be complied with by then.
I stressed to the limit our need for an as-new appearing aircraft for the vital first impression of CASA in Australia.
Further on the report states:
I asked what alternatives were open to us, and stated that we would if necessary, accept a later delivery date, and a lower standard of modification, to ensure no protracted delays to our program.
We are dealing with an aircraft that had first flown in March 1978, had flown 637 hours and was a prototype series 212 CASA aircraft. Mr Falls went on further to state:
De Bergia then said that the only possible paint slot was available immediately, for six days, not long enough for a complete strip and paint, but adequate to remove existing paint stripes, and repaint in selected colours. In his words, his paint people had assured him 'we can make it equal to new'.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2115

Although this would be in a less shiny Acrylic paint. he assured me repeatedly that he would personally guarantee an as-new result . . .
I then said we'd accept a June 10 delivery if they could then ensure the aircraft is wired for FDR and CYR, and has the big batteries if humanly possible.
In an ideal situation, we'd be getting as a first of type, demonstration aircraft, a new machine, optioned to our requirements, and delivered on schedule. Of course one isn't available, and the alternative to not accepting SIN 138 is to accept a slippage in the program of a year
It will be just possible to get the aircraft here by the end of FY 1980-8\.
. . . It will be no more than reasonable in appearance and we'll probably have to do some tarting-up ourselves.
His recommendations were to proceed with the program. He stated further:
I arrange meeting with our maintenance chiefs. . . . state the situation frankly, and request the understanding, patience and co-operation in what will be a frustrating and difficult certification exercise. I believe that if they know the facts, they'll respond wholeheartedly.
I bring this document to the attention of the Com-. mittee and the Minister tonight-I believe that the Minister has seen it-because it also lists some estimated costs relating to a B. Winckel of the Department of Transport who is not recorded as having received any salary. Under the heading 'expenses' Mr Winckel is listed as having received $1,000. It is noted under the item 'accommodation' that accommodation at Seville would be in a fiat to reduce costs. The estimate for that item is $2,300. The estimated cost for Falls and Kelly is shown as $1,500, for Whalen $500 and for Winckel $750. The estimated cost of the Department of Transport certification is shown as $20,000. I asked a question on this matter because I discovered that the Department of Transport had available documents entitled 'Application for Registration of Aircraft' and 'Certificate of Registration-Aircraft' which showed that this allegedly 1978 manufactured aeroplane was manufactured in Madrid, Spain, in 1981. The application was made by Petres Pty Ltd, trading as Schutt Aviation, which was registered in Victoria and the office of which was on the corner of Warrigal and Dandenong Roads, Oakleigh. The certificate of registration shows the same thing. Both documents are undated but they are both signed. It seems that the Department is prepared to send out documents that are signed but undated. We find that an aircraft which is clearly shown to be four years old is the subject of documents that turn up in the Department's offices. I seek leave to have those two documents tabled, if the Minister agrees.

Leave granted.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-We have a clear situation in which a department is allowing certain people to do its work for it overseas. I would like to have received an answer from the Minister today in regard to having an audit but he seems to have ducked the question. Therefore I have raised the matter again tonight. I have been chasing this situation since 19 August, and I do not intend to give up until I get some decent answers.
I wish to say a couple of things in conclusion. The receiving of secret commissions is a very serious offence. In the words of the former Minister, it is a matter of the gravest concern. We know that at the moment a Victorian inquiry is being conducted into secret commissions. We know that a fraud squad inquiry is taking place in Victoria. I ask the Minister: What federal inquiry is being made into these matters that I have been raising since 19 August? Has there been a similar inquiry into fraud in regard to this aircraft and has there been a similar federal inquiry into secret commissions in the federal sphere? I leave the matter at that. I hope that the Minister will be able to answer my questions at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (9.39)-1 wish to take the opportunity in this debate on the estimates for the Department of Transport to direct the House to the important question of alternative modes of transport. The Department of Transport has, over a period, given grants to various States to enable them to expand their public transport services. There have been significant grants to assist in the development of railways, the electrification of railway lines and programs of that sort. Such work is proceeding in Brisbane. There has been considerable expansion over many years in the electric rail network in Sydney. We talk a lot about the need for electrification of our transport modes but the fact of the matter is in my judgment not as much is being done to bring about changes of that sort as ought to be done.
I was one of those who very much welcomed the announcement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that inquiries would be made into electrifying the railway line between Melbourne and Sydney. I was disappointed when that proposal was abandoned. I know that some of the States were not very keen on the proposal. In New South Wales, for instance, the New South Wales Government thought that greater priority ought to be given to the electrification of the railway line between Wollongong and Sydney, having regard to the loads that each of those respective lines carry. I do not wish to agonise in any detail about

2116 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the particular proposals or the way in which they have been considered. What I do want to do is to draw to the attention of honourable members the grim warning that was given in an article appearing in yesterday's Australian Financial Review. The headline to the article was Third Oil Shock is in the Making'. I emphasise that electrification of our transport modes is a subject that is looked at and examined only when we recognise that there are likely to be shortages of oil, diesolene and petrol to run our transport networks.
It is only when we recognise that there are prospective shortages of that sort that we look at the alternatives. I think we have allowed ourselves to sink into a degree of complacency as a result of the extent to which nations, through conservation measures, through the effect of increased prices bringing about reductions in demand, have led people to believe that the problems that we thought might be upon us sooner will not be with us in the longer term. My judgment is that we will have to make changes and to think about them now. The warning that a third oil shock might be imminent to me seems a timely warning of the importance of making changes and planning for changes now. The article stated:
The Western world could be headed for another oil crisis in the late eighties, the International Energy Agency warns in a major report released in Washington yesterday.
In its first world energy outlook published in five years the agency warns that action is needed to head off dangerous demand pressures which could re-emerge in the oil market by the end of the decade.
The agency is concerned that falling oil prices have allowed countries to slacken their plans for structural adjustment to reduce their dependence on oil.
"The basic vulnerability of the world economy to oil supply disruptions is far from being eliminated," it says.
"Unpredictable events in the Middle East remain a major risk that could precipitate another oil price shock".
The agency sees world demand for oil rising strongly after 1985 while world oil supplies remain reasonably stable.
"The results (of the study) it says, suggest a relatively robust and difficult equilibrium in oil supply and demand from the mid-eighties onward with surging demand in the next decade tending to overshoot available oil supplies."
That outlook must give concern to everyone. Honourable members, I understand, do occasionally have the opportunity to see what is happening overseas. If honourable members take the opportunity to look at what has happened in Europe it will be seen that historically a great deal more emphasis has been put on the provision of electric transport. But Europe is not in the position to slacken its interest in these matters as we have. Of course, in the 1950s and I960s, we saw the removal of trams from Sydney. That did not happen in Melbourne and I think Melbourne should be grateful for that. We saw the removal of trolley

buses from the streets of Sydney. Of course, in Europe trams continue to be used. The great cities of Europe extensively rely on trolley buses which still provide an alternative transport mode. Major cities of Europe are expanding their underground rail networks. Cities in the United States that rely very heavily on road transport have been introducing electric underground routes. In recent years we have seen new rails opened in Washington and San Francisco. We have seen new routes
planned in other major American cities.
I recently had the opportunity of visiting Vienna where I saw the very considerable expansion of its underground rail network. I had the opportunity of riding on a new part of the system to the new international city in Vienna. That city has a modern underground network which I think any city in the world would be proud to have. It is a co-ordinated network that links with all other transport modes. It is extremely efficient and modern and is not beset by the sorts of problems that the rail networks throughout Australia are beset by, such as excessive manning. The Vienna
system had considerable automated equipment available to assist in its management. I saw television supervision of escalators in railway stations, the way in which automatic doors closed, lighting and the embarkation of passengers. There was a tremendous amount of equipment which I think would bring great credit to any city of the world. I would encourage transport specialists in this country to look at that integrated system.
I had the opportunity of seeing a very efficient trolley bus network in the city of Solingen in Germany. That city has a large number of buses operating on its network. Over a long period, while there were sceptics regarding the future of trolley buses, the company had to build many of the buses itself. The company is now in a situation where the great bus companies of GermanyMan and Mercedes-are in the business of designing alternative vehicles-petrol and diesel driven buses as well as electric alternatives. I had the opportunity in the city of Dusseldorf, where a battery operated electric fleet was in operation, of seeing the efforts that were being undertaken with transport grants of the same sort we make for experimental purposes. Admittedly there was a small number of buses in the fleet. These had batteries in a trailer towed behind the normal manned bus, such as one would see in the bus routes of Sydney, Canberra and the like. Those buses were run by electric motors and the power came from the batteries carried in the back pack. A system for ensuring that the vehicles are able to be recharged in the streets while the bus drivers are having their breaks has been developed. I

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2117

found that particular initiative a very excltmg one. It was explained to me that there were a number of shortcomings that had to be examined and that these were being reviewed. Over a period, it was expected that many of the bugs would be ironed out of that system and that the alternative mode would be available.
I inform the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) that I intend to speak in the Parliament more frequently about electric transport as I have a great deal more information available. I think it is a very serious matter that needs to be examined because we need to be preparing outselves for any future oil shocks.
Mr WALLIS (Grey) (9.49) - I rise to speak on the estimates of the Department of Transport and Construction. First of all, I make a few comments on the matter of roads. It is a fact that the increase in the Budget allocation, in real terms, for roads this year is only about 7 per cent despite an inflation rate of around II per cent. That means that it is down in real terms this year. A statement came out recently in South Australia which mentioned that councils were getting an extra 17 per cent under an agreement between the State and Federal Ministers. But it was not said at the time that that was at the expense of road works in the unincorporated areas. Although the councils would be quite pleased that they will be getting a rise, it'is at the expense of other areas. I do not know whether that is good or bad. But it is a bit misleading when Ministers say that these councils will get a 17 per cent or 18 per cent rise in their allocation when it is at the expense of other areas. Despite this announcement South Australia still does not seem to be satisfied. In a newspaper article dated Saturday, 25 September and headed. 'Outlook for SA roads grim, says Tonkin' the remarks of the Premier of the State were referred to. The article states:
The Premier, Mr Tonkin, criticised the Federal Government's allocation of road grants yesterday saying it had been called 'Canberra's policy of highway robbery.'
Speaking at the launching of the Meadows District Council Action Plan yesterday, Mr Tonkin said SA had been faced with 'disturbing mathematical trends' in the roads area.
From 1972-73 to 1980-81 the number of motor vehicles in SA had risen by almost 40 p.c., but Commonwealth funding to SA had been cut by 40.2 p.c.
The article goes on to state:
He said SA's share of the 1981-82 highways grants had been 8.22 p.c. of the amount allocated to the States and the N.T.
On all relevant distribution indicators it should have been 'well over 9 p.c.' The extra I p.c. would have been worth about $7m.
He goes on to express other thoughts in this article. Obviously, whatever happened, he has realised that there has been a drop in funding in

real terms to South Australia. He is not too happy about it, especially when one considers that on 6 November he will go to the people in an election.
Last night the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) mentioned an occurrence in Adelaide-that is, the opening of the new Adelaide Airport. He linked that opening at that time with the possibility of a State election. I think he was condemned for that. Quite recently I was invited by a State Minister to go on a trip along the Stuart Highway. It was supposed to be towards the north of the highway where the road has been bituminised. A party flew up from Adelaide and we went on a bus trip. After a while we struck a patch where we were running alongside a piece of roadway which was obviously the new Stuart Highway in the process of being sealed, but we were on the old highway. Naturally it was pretty rough.
I ventured to say that one would have thought that the trip would have been left until next month because I understood that those unsealed sections were to have been completed next month and that if the trip had been left until next month it could have been taken along the completely sealed highway. That was not to be. We went over the rough stuff. I happened to mention to one of the engineers that it was a wonder that the authorities did not leave it until November but he said that it had to be done in October. I was a little cynical at the time. I wondered whether there was going to be an election in November. My cynicism was proved correct because, as I have said, it has been announced that the election will be held on 6 November.
I conclude my remarks on roads by turning to another issue-the bicentenary activity. I am not opposed to this matter but I would like to make two comments. One comment is, as I said last night, that it looks as though we will get a birthday present in 1988 but we will have to pay for it ourselves. This is despite the fact that motorists are paying about $3,OOOm a year into the Government's coffers. That is not enough. The Government is going to take a bit more out of us. It has come up with this bicentenary activity. It might be all right in its own way but I think, as I have said, that it is a birthday present we will have to pay for ourselves. This activity is explained in a very pretty brochure. There are some nice photographs of our road works in it. Senator McLaren asked a question about the cost. The brochure should be nice too-I hope honourable members value itbecause according to the answer given to Senator McLaren each brochure cost $2.IOc, which I think all honourable members will admit is a little

2118 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

expensive for that booklet. I have made enough comment on roads. My time has almost expired.
I would like to say a few words about our rail system. Our rail system has been one of the great decentralised industries in Australia. It has been in the past but it is fast becoming not so today. We are seeing the centralisation of the railway systems in the capital cities at the expense of major country towns. We have seen this in my electorate. We have seen it in the towns of Peterborough Port Pirie and Port Augusta. Of course Port Augusta was the largest of the railway centres and the headquarters of the former Commonwealth Railways. The standardisation of the line shortly at Crystal Brook will have a further effect. Whilst I do .not stan~ in ~he way of progress on that project, In effect It will reduce the number of railway people employed outside country areas.
With the amalgamation of the former Commonwealth Railways in South Australia we have seen a big move in activities from the country areas to the city. This has had a bad effect on morale in those railway areas. My experience at Port Augusta, which, as I have said, was the headquarters of the former Commonwealth Railways, clearly shows to me how far morale in the railway system has fallen. I base that view on discussions with various people in various sections of the railways-administration officers, foremen, employees on the workshop floor, engine drivers and so forth. It appears that people feel that they have no. aim or object any more; it is just a matter of gOing to work, booking on, doing what one is told to do and leaving it at that.
Everything seems to be concentrated in Adelaide. There seems to be a complete lack of promotion in those country areas. People get to a certain level and they cannot go any further. If they want to go any further and get a promotion they have to sell their house in a bad market and move to Adelaide. Again I say that there is low morale and a lack of incentive. As an exrailwayman, this is something I hate to see. Perhaps we can blame the Australian National Railways Commission's administration. But I wonder how much of this has been caused by the pressure p~t ~:m the Australian National Railways CommiSSIOn by the Government and by its strictures that the railways have to run at a profit. That pressure .is there all the time. So the railways, to try to satisfy the Government's wishes, are cutting all the corners and running down the railways to such an extent that, in many cases, the railways are becoming inefficient. I am told that in one of the most modern diesel repair shops in

Australia-at Port Augusta-perfectly good locomotives are standing idle because there are no spare parts. Things such as that are going on.
I know of a quite recent example of the railways promising to take on a certain number of apprentices and then deciding not to put on all those apprentices. The matter was taken up with the relevant Minister and with the railways. I was told t~at the railways did not put on the extra apprentices because they found themselves short of money. The railways found they could put on the apprentices only if the Government gave them more money. I am glad to say that the Minister at t~at time did relent and allow the extra apprentices to be put on. I think a bit of pressure is being put on ANR by the Government but I think ANR is also putting a bit of pressure on the railways. Whereas the railways used to do many things in the past under the former Commonwealth Railways system they now do not do those things. They hope that someone will apply a bit of political pressure on the Government and that the Minister will change his mind. Perhaps it is hoped that the section will be used which states that if the railways are required to do something at the Minister's direction the railways have to pick up the tab. I do not know how many times that section has been used but I think there is a bit of play between the Government and ANR.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Ian RObinson)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (9.59)-At this stage I want to extend the comments of the previous spea~er-the honourable member for Grey (Mr Walhs)-to take in the aviation industry and to talk about an aspect of the estimates of the Dep~~tment of ~viation which is related to the provIsion of an air traffic control tower and a taxiway parallel to the 02-20 runway at Perth Airport.
Consideration interrupted.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order! It being 10 p.m., I shall report progress.
Progress reported.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr Fife-I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2119

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Mr BEAZLEY-The nature of those installations and certainly their location will be to some degree dependent upon which of the four strategies for development is chosen by the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife). Those four strategies are contained in a document which is the provisional master plan for the development of Perth Airport. My plea in this Committee is that the Government, in expending these funds, should do so in a manner compatible with a modified version of strategy No.4 in the document presented to it by the Belmont City Council. What this would mean is that the control tower would be located in a part of the airport and at a height compatible with the location of a new international terminal in the centre of the airport, rather than in its north-west corner, and a terminal facing in a direction that would be between the existing 02-20 runway and a subsequent parallel runway, rather than facing one of those runways. In terms of a taxi-way to serve the aircraft using the 02-20 runway and a subsequent parallel runway, rather than facing one of those runways. In terms of taxi-way to serve the aircraft using the 02-20 runway, that taxi-way should be positioned to maximise its effectiveness in bringing aircraft on to the apron of the internatoinal terminal so located in the centre of the airport. In other words, it should be located on the inward side rather than the outward side of the existing 02-20 runway. This would minimise the effect of the taxi-ing noise on the neighbouring residentail areas. The central 10cation of the terminal under the Belmont City Council's modified strategy No.4 would result in very considerable environmental benefits for residents of the area should the Government choose to adopt that strategy-it will do so at no great additional cost to the Government-over options that have been put forward and preferred by the Department of Aviation, or previously the Department of Transport.
Those environmental benefits are as follows: Firstly, it would substantially relieve pressure on the localities of Guildford, Belmont, Kewdale and Cloverdale by reducing usage of the 02-20 runway-at the time when the parallel runway has been constructed. Secondly, it would relieve potential pressure on the localities of Hazelmere, Midland, Redcliffe, Victoria Park and South Perth by eliminating the proposed extension of the 06-24 runway. Thirdly, by locating the new terminal in the centre rather than at the north-western edge, it would remove from the two-mile

radius of maximum noise level for the ground running of user aircraft the localities of Ashfield, Bayswater, Bassendean, Guildford and Redcliffe. Fourthly, it would ensure that the residents of Redcliffe do not experience massive bottlenecks in the local road systems by diverting airport user traffic, at least for the international terminal, to the south of the airport. Finally, it would improve safety overall by reducing the usage of the airport over settled as opposed to industrial and vacant areas.
These matters are quite vital to the sense of security and well-being in my electorate. As I said
earlier, it could be achieved at no great expense to the Government. In fact I am quite certain that there are honourable members on this side of the chamber, and probably honourable members on the other side of the chamber as well, who would be prepared to swap Sydney's parallel runway for one at Perth Airport. If the Government is looking for cost savings, we in Perth are prepared to be generous and relieve it of that political problem. If it chooses not to do that I hope it will, nevertheless, choose to expend a small additional amount, which is all that would be required, to create a parallel runway.
A further reason the Government should take this action-I raise this matter while we are dealing with the estimates because we are now discussing the overall administration of the Department of Aviation-is that I believe, on an examination of the correspondence and as a result of discussions that I have had with people involved, that during the 1970s commitments were entered into between the predecessor Department, the Department of Transport, and local authorities in the area. On the basis of those commitments the local authorities dropped an objection to the location of the airport in their region and ceased to press for the immediate removal or even the medium term removal of the airport from that locality to some point more distant from the metro-
politan area. Correspondence between the departments and the councils indicated the very clear intention of the Government to proceed with the development of a parallel runway in the not too distant future-basically in the 1980s. Those commitments had considerable meaning in the area. It was with considerable surprise and considerable anger that the councils in the area confronted the provisional plan that contained options which suggested that the Department would not pursue that strategy and had in fact abandoned it. What has given them even greater offence is the extraordinarily rubbery figures that were introduced both prior to and in the provisional master plan justifying an argument

2120 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

against the development of a parallel runway. Those figures relate both to the cost and to the
projected usage of the airport.
I refer now to the usage of the airport. In the provisional master plan the Department sees a very slow increase in the usage of Perth Airport. It believes usage will increase to about 96,000 individual usages per year by the year 20 IO. Previously, in a report that the Department had produced in conjunction with representatives of the local authorities as well as the State authorities, it estimated that there would be 199,500 air
traffic movements. It is a matter of some surprise that the estimate could be so drastically revised in such a short period. If it does nothing else, it demonstrates at least the unpredictability of projections of usage of an airport such as Perth Airport. I think that at least a case can be made that usage will be closer to the 199,000 figure than to the 96,000 figure by the year 2010. Of course, that would justify rapid development of a parallel runway.
The next point I wish to raise relates to cost. In the estimates that were put forward to support the argument by the Department for what was called strategy No.1 of the four preferred options, involving no parallel runway and an international terminal located in the north-western corner, it was suggested that the airport development could proceed at nil cost. If option No. 4 were proceeded with it would involve a cost of effectively about $160m. That nil cost is interesting when one looks at this Budget because that nil cost presumably includes the cost of the taxi-ways added to the existing runways even under strategy No. I. If that is in fact an accurate figure I suggest that the Minister should go back to his Department because, in putting forward this proposition which suggests that in fact it will cost an amount of $3m, he ought to find the fellow who originally costed that at nil dollars because that person could be a very useful person in reducing government expendiure overall! Such individuals ought to be encouraged in the Public Service because they are clearly extremely important to the future economic well-being of this country, let alone my State or Perth Airport!
But be that as it may. I conclude with a plea to the Minister that he remember past commitments of his Department, that he look at the very minimal costs that would be involved in moving reasonably quickly to the development of a parallel runway, that he look at the massive environmental benefits that would result from that and offer some relief to long-suffering residents in the area who, on the basis of past promises, relaxed their commitment to a campaign to remove the

airport altogether from the region, which would have involved very great expense to the Government. If the Minister bears those points in mind I think he will make the right decision for us.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (10.9)-1 am pleased to join in the debate this evening on the estimates for the Department of Aviation. I can assure my colleague the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) that the members who represent the areas around Sydney Airport would be quite happy to give him the parallel runway that the Government seems intent upon foisting on my constituents. I am glad to see that the Minister for noise pollution is sitting at the table this evening to hear some of the things I will say in this debate and I hope later on this evening some of the things my colleague the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon) will say about the problems the Government will foist on our constituents by way of this proposal for the extension of Sydney Airport which will be covered in the Budget spending of this year.
It is interesting to see that the Government has finally accepted what the Opposition has been saying for quite some time; that is, a decision on Sydney Airport is a Federal responsibility. It took a change from a National Country Party Minister to a country Liberal Minister for the Government to make that decision. Finally the Government has recognised its responsibilities under the Constitution to decide what to do about the airports in this country. It is very much according to pressure from the rural part of the country that we have had this decision about the extension of Sydney Airport foisted upon the people who live in the inner metropolitan region of Sydney. I believe that the Government, in adopting the policy of the close spaced parallel runway has made a major environmental, financial and social mistake.
Mr Dawkins-And political.
Mr LEO McLEAY-And indeed, a political mistake, as my colleague said. The Government, by way of this decision, has consigned the honourable member for Barton (Mr Bradfield) and the honourable member for Cook (Mr Dobie) to political oblivion. Any member of this Parliament who allows the Government of which he is a member to cause the extra noise pollution and environmental problems that the extension of Sydney Airport will cause has sold out his constituents. There is no way the honourable member for Barton or the honourable member for Cook can assert that they are opposed to the Government's decision because they are part of a government that has allowed this massive extension of Sydney

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2121

Airport and this massive environmental disaster to occur in the inner south-western region of Sydney. One of the greatest opponents of this massive disaster is my Deputy Leader, the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen), who identified these problems forthrightly in this Parliament and led the opposition to the Government's rather iniquitous decision to allow this disaster to occur. Indeed it will be a disaster.
The Government has produced some rubbery figures. It has talked about $175m, but we can pick any number and multiply it by 10. I believe that the ultimate cost of this extension to the airport will be in the vicinity of $300m, but the Government, by the expenditure of this money, will foist onto the people of the inner western and inner southern suburbs of Sydney a great problem.
Mr MacKenzie-Why are you against country air travellers?
Mr LEO McLEAYIt will create a disaster. The honourable member for Calare is very interested in what happens to Sydney Airport. He is not very interested in the people who live around Sydney Airport. He is not very interested at all; he could not care less. The Country Party could not get this rort through the Cabinet in the first place because its Minister for Transport was an absolute failure as far as it was concerned. It had to get a Liberal who represents a country electorate to push this iniquitous proposal through the Cabinet. It is indeed an iniquituous proposal. Honourable members should look at the phony proposal. The Government says that it will need 20 million cubic metres of fill for Botany Bay. It has not said where it will get it from. It had enough worry with the environmental problems with the last extensions, and now it is talking about finding 20 million cubic metres of fill.
Mr Scott-They could get it from the bottom of the harbour.
Mr LEO McLEAY-As my colleague the honourable member for Hindmarsh said, the Government could get that fill from the bottom of the harbour because it seems to be acquainted with that area of the country. It will not find it in Botany Bay or in the areas around Botany Bay. In fact one of the most massive environmental problems that New South Wales has seen will be created when the Commonwealth Department of Aviation tries to find this fill. It will not come from the electorate of Calare or from the electorates of all these Country Party people who are hot to cause the people of the inner metropolitan suburbs of Sydney the great problems they will have

to put up with. Sydney Airport is surrounded by one of the most densely settled metropolitan areas in the world. More than 250,000 people are intimately affected by any increase in traffic or noise pollution around this airport. The present proposals put forward by the Government will mean at least a 25 per cent increase in traffic into Sydney Airport. That will mean that the chances of an air disaster at that airport will be increased three-fold.
Mr MacKenzie-Rubbish!
Mr LEO McLEAYThe honourable member does not care about the people who live around the airport. He says 'rubbish'. The people who live around Sydney Airport have put up for too damned long with the inconveniences caused by this airport. Quite frankly, they will not put up with any further extension to this airport. The people who live around the airport will see the Government tipped out before they will cop this sort of thing. They will turn the honourable member for Cook and the honourable member for Barton out of this Parliament because they took part in the decision to reduce the quality of life of the people who live in their electorates.
The noise pollution which will come from this extension of the airport will be massive, but the important thing is the thin end of the wedge that this will give to those proponents in the Country Party who want to see Sydney Airport became a 24-hour-day airport. That will put massive pressures on the people who live around the airport. My constituents and those of the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith and the honourable member for Sydney will not tolerate this any longer. Those people have lived for far too long with the problems and the noise of the airport. We hoped that the Government would have seen some sense and realised that it was time that it made a decision as to the site of the second Sydney airport. What did these fudges do? These fudges decided to go for the easy option of increasing the problems of the people around Sydney Airport. This will be the thin end of the wedge to do away with the curfew to help the international operators, the domestic operators and those who travel on aircraft.
It is very interesting to note that the people who live around the airport are the people who use the airport facilities least of all. They do not travel overseas; they do not travel interstate; they do not use the facilities of the airport-not like the cringing member for Dundas who wants to enter this debate. The honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) did not worry too much when the Government suggested that it put an airport in his

2122 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation BiII (No.1)

electorate! He was the one complaining about it first, last, and always. I am quite happy to say that if the Government wants to site an airport at Duffys Forest or in one of the salubrious Liberal Party areas, I will not mind travelling for an extra half an hour by car or by bus to get to my electorate because I want my constituents to have a reasonable night's sleep. I do not want them to be disturbed by aircraft noise or to have the threat of an air disaster hanging over their heads. The Minister, who lives safely in Wagga Wagga, is quite happy to see that his constituents who want to get to Sydney quickly have these facilities and thinks nothing about the noise, the environmental problems or indeed the massive air safety problems and the disruption to the lives of the people who live in the area around the airport which this extension to Sydney Airport will cause. The Government has tonight conveyed the poor old member for Cook and the poor old member for Barton to the political scrapheap. Those two people were part of that decision. They have said that they think that what the Government is doing is all right. They are saying that they are putting an end to their political career. It has to be stopped.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LES McMAHON (Sydney) (10.19)-In speaking after my colleague the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) on the estimates of the Department of Transport and Construction and the Department of Aviation I would like to carryon the good work he has done in looking after his electorate and his constituents. In the announcement made by the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife)-I am pleased that he is seated at the table tonight-of the Federal Government's decision to extend Sydney Airport by constructing a close-spaced parallel runway, once again we see the Government's complete and utter lack of concern for and lack of interest in the needs and well-being of those residents who will be affected. Why has this decision been made? The honourable member for Grayndler stated that this was done in order to save the two marginal Liberal seats of Barton and Cook. This decision is a purely political one which has been arrived at by considering only one factor: What is best for the Prime Minister (Mr Malcom Fraser) and the Liberal Party-no more and no less.
Let us look at the points and the claims made by the Minister for Aviation when he announced the decision to construct a close-spaced parallel runway. Firsly, we had the presentation of the announcement which comprised a glossy white

folder containing no less then 19 pages of information all designed to con the Australian people into believing that this decision has been made in the best interests of all concerned. This soft-sell approach of the Government provides so much information that it confuses and amazes people into thinking that it may not be so bad after all. The Minister says that this new runway is not an alternative to a new airport but a necessary first step. If this Government had got off its backside approximately seven years ago and had made a decision to build a new airport it would now be close to completion and the residents in the areas surrounding the present airport would be far better off. If anyone believes for one minute that this is a first step to a new airport, then he or she is a fool. This Government has never had any intention of constructing a new Sydney Airport.
The Minister spoke of the cost of delays to airlines and travellers and the subsequent cost to the community. The 400,000 residents who will be disadvantaged by the extension are also part of the community. But what of the cost to them? That does not matter to the Government because most of those residents do not vote Liberal. What concerns the Government is that its supporters from the north shore who use the facilities of the airport cannot be inconvenienced. The majority of the people who use the facilities of the airport come from the north shore; but the people who have to pay the costs of maintaining Sydney Airport as the main aviation gateway of Australia pay the cost with their health and they hardly ever use the airport. The only experience of the airport of many of my constituents and the constituents of other members whose seats are affected by the extension-the honourable mmber for Grayndler, the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen), the honourable member for Barton (Mr Bradfield) and many other honourable members-is the underside of aircraft, the devastating aircraft noise and aircraft fall-out. This decision represents one facet of the Prime Minister's policy where the user does not pay.
The Minister also said that there would be no significant change in overall noise exposure. The noise-ridden residents of the areas affected by the airport are not interested in scant promises of no significant change in overall noise. They are interested in and are entitled to actual reductions in the aircraft noise to which they have been subjected for decades. Let us look at a section of my electorate of Sydney as an example of what residents are SUbjected to. The suburbs of Rozelle, Leichhardt, Annandale, Petersham, Stanmore, Enmore, Newtown and Marrickville are directly under the flight path of the north-south runway.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2123

The north-south runway caters for more aircraft arrivals than any other runway at Mascot. In 1981, 43,355 aircraft landed on the north-south runway, which represents 48.6 per cent of total arrivals for that year. This represents approximately 120 arriving aircraft flying over this area each day-seven each hour and more than one every 10 minutes. In the StanmoreMarrickville area people are continually subjected to jet aircraft flying over their homes, schools and work places at an altitude of 100 metres. The noise of a jet aircraft approaching over this area just four kilometres from the airport is rated at 100 to 110 decibels, which is equivalent to a jackhammer heard from a distance of six feet. The effect of continual noise at a level of 90 decibels is expected temporary hearing loss and possible permanent damage over time.
What is the effect on the health of these people who are continually subjected to noise levels in excess of 100 decibles? Will the Government pay compensation to people who experience hearing loss? I doubt it.
Mr Maher-They do not care. They are uninterested.
Mr LES McMAHON-That is right. The Government does not care. What the residents need is not a Liberal Minister's promises of no significant change in aircraft noise but a real decrease in aircraft noise brought about by the building of a new airport and the subsequent decrease in air traffic that this would represent. I am talking about not lost fuel and aircraft and passenger delays but something much more precious and irreplaceable-people's health and well-being. I ask honourable members and the Minister for Aviation: How many jobs would be created in the construction and operation of a second airport for Sydney?It is far in excess of a mere 500 jobs, which is what the Minister stated.
The Minister concluded his statement by saying that he was most conscious of the implication of the decision for some sections of the Sydney community. Finally he said:
I stand ready to listen to and work with all sectors of the community, and with the New South Wales government, to ensure that in taking this far reaching decision and carrying it through, the views of every individual affected by it are understood and fully considered.
As far as the Government is concerned, this is the finish of Sydney's airport needs. The Government will not proceed with a new airport. I fully support the policy of the Australian Labor Party that there be no further extensions to Kingsford-Smith Airport and that there be rapid moves towards the construction of a second airport in Sydney.

This Government must revoke its decision, pull its finger out and build a second Sydney airport.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (10.28)-1 would like to take a few minutes just to respond to some of the comments made by the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) and the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon). The first point I make is that, quite obviously, from the comments made by the honourable member for Grayndler, he is totally opposed to the welfare of country air travellers. If he knew the facts he would know that the access of commuter aircraft and general aviation to Mascot Airport has become very restricted. 1applaud the decision made by the Government and the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) and the groundwork laid by the previous Minister in order to come finally to some reconciliation in this dilemma of Mascot Airport. The proposition which has been put before this Committee is eminently sensible. It is designed to produce a new close-spaced parallel runway. Despite all the protestations of the Opposition and those with entrenched interests, that runway will carry only aircraft that land or take off from or to the direction of Botany Bay. If honourable members had looked at the front page of the Sydney Morning Herald they would have seen noise profiles that would have ensured--
Mr Leo McLeay-Mr Deputy Chairman, 1 take a point of order. One would expect that the honourable member for Calare would pay some deference to your previous experience as Minister for Transport when he stands up here and tells such spacious untruths.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hoo. Charles Jooes)-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr MacKENZIE-I think it was a specious point of order, not a spacious point of order. The whole argument that has been put by the Opposition has been put on completely specious grounds. The Opposition's argument basically deals with noise encroachment and additional noise hazards to people who live in the immediate area. Those are not the factual circumstances. 1 am a member of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation. Recently that Committee conducted some hearings in the vicinity of Mascot.
We were told-subsequently it was proven on the front page of the Sydney Morning Herald as a result of the Major Airport Needs of Sydney study-that the noise profiles from the new closed space parallel runway will in fact be the same as, if indeed not less than they are at the moment. The honourable member for Grayndler may yell and shout as much as he likes, but they are the

2124 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

facts. All of the airlines using that closed space parallel runway will be either landing from the bay or flying off to the bay.
Mr Leo McLeay~Absolute lies.
Mr MacKENZIE~If the honourable member had taken the trouble of looking at those noise profile maps, he would realise that he is not telling the truth in this chamber.
Mr Leo McLeay~ You have never told the truth.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Charles Jones)~Order! The honourable member for Grayndler will cease interjecting. He has had a good run.
Mr Leo McLeay~He is so provocative, Mr Deputy Chairman.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN~ The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr MacKENZIE~ Thank you, Mr Deputy Chairman. I wish to refer also to the New South Wales Premier. I would imagine~indeed the honourable member for Lowe (Mr Maher) would have to agree with me~that the Premier's comments on the close-spaced parallel runway have been moderate in the extreme. He has not taken a hard line. He has seen a very good opportunity to absolve himself from responsibility and to lay all responsibility at the door of the Commonwealth. Did Mr Wran violently oppose the construction of that runway?
Mr Leo McLeay-Of course he did.
Mr MacKENZIE~Did he really? In his public utterances, he did not. He was very pleased to see that some resolution of the difficulties as far as Mascot was concerned was brought forward by the Minister for Aviation. I compliment him wholeheartedly on that approach. What would have happened in time with the congestion of Mascot and indeed if there were to be an industrial disputation at Mascot is that country air travellers, for whom the Opposition seems to have scant regard, would have been diverted to Bankstown. Whilst the honourable member for Grayndler might have agreed that that was an acceptable proposition, I can assure honourable members that country air travellers would not accept that as a reasonable proposition.
Another argument that has been put up has related to safety aspects. If honourable members were to look at the factual situation, they would see that safety requirements can be met by the inclusion of this new close-spaced parallel runway because it allows takeoffs and landings without crossing the east-west runway. The number of

residents who, it has been claimed, will be disadvantaged is 400,000. That is absolute rubbish. They will only be disadvantaged to the extent that we found out during the hearings of our Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation the other day. The only complaints we had from residents of the Sydenham area were that they could not watch their television and the kids were a bit annoyed by the fact that their electronic games on television reversed to zero when a big aircraft went over. That will not occur.
Mr Cohen~That is all you~
Mr MacKENZIE~ The honourable member comes from Gosford. He has no real problems unless he wants the second airport. There are no problems with the new runway as far as cross traffic over the northern areas of Sydney is concerned, despite the fact that honourable members have been making so much noise about that. I applaud the decision of the Government and the Minister and the responsible Minister previous to him because this matter has gone on for at least, I think, eight years. The New South Wales Government has not in any way co-operated. The Commonwealth has taken it upon itself to bear the cost of this facility. All I can say is that the air traffic controllers are in favour of it; the travelling public will benefit from it; and certainly the country air travellers, whom the Labor Party hates, will benefit enormously from it.
Motion (by Mr Fife) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Proposed expenditures agreed to.
Department of Employment and Industrial Relations
Proposed expenditure, $414,709,000.
Progress reported.
ADJOURNMENT
Plight of the Elderly-Parliament: Privilege-Disposal of Radioactive Waste-Ethanol-Ulan Open Cut Coal Mine-Ulan to MusweIIbrook Rail Link-Adelaide International Airport-South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area-Importation
and Use of Medical Products
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (10.36) ~Tonight, I wish to bring before the Parliament the plight of a number of elderly people in our community. The elderly in our community should reasonably expect to live a life of dignity and independence. The present provision of age pensions, nursing home benefits and various other

Adjournment

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2125

social security benefits gives neither. It does not allow people to make fundamental choices about what is best for them as they perceive it. The system at present does not reasonably assist renters in the larger capital cities. It does not assist those who are partially mobile and wish to lead an independent life. It does not assist those who are temporarily incapacitated.
The group of aged persons most oppressed in our community at present is that group renting private premises and receiving only the pension as income. The Redfern Legal Centre has gathered evidence which shows that rents for rooms in Enmore, a depressed inner Sydney suburb, vary from $40 a week to $70 a week. The present single rate of pension is $74.15 a week and the maximum rental assistance is $10 a week. Rentals in cities other than Sydney and Melbourne and towns other than the resource boom areas are dramatically less than that; yet the rental allowance is a constant maximum of $10 a week. There is a need for the rent allowance to be tied to the real value of rents in the various regions of Australia rather than a fiat payment. Many pensioners who own their own homes do not have the resources to maintain them. There is a need for a maintenance loans scheme. Another scheme which should be considered is one whereby home-owning pensioners who take in another pensioner from a welfare housing list would not lose pension eligibility as long as the rent they received was used for home maintenance purposes rather than capital improvement.
Several reports to government in recent years have stressed the need for a co-ordinated and integrated approach at a regional level because, in the absence of such an approach, requests for some degree of care will tend to be met by the most comprehensive and reliable solution available, that is, long term institutional care which is underwritten by the Commonwealth in terms of nursing homes. That is unacceptable in my view. A balance of service options can only be conceived by consumers and their advocates within a regional framework; thus the Government must develop a regional framework of its own or must develop a reliable and powerful mechanism for delegation to State and local governments of these authorities.
Instead of the present inefficient nursing home assistance scheme, the participatory and deficit funded schemes run by the Government at present should become responsive to regional needs rather than to State and political needs. It is most interesting to note that there is a high correlation between nursing home bed approvals, general elections and marginal electorates. It is a sad

commentary on us as politicians that we are so keen to see our names on plaques at institutions that we forget that the real need of the aged in our community is for services that probably can be provided for them in their homes. A regional geriatric service would provide for a regional assessment team to ensure that only those in need of nursing home care are admitted to nursing homes and would ensure that people referred to the team who did not need nursing home care were directed to the proper resources. An assessment team could also provide ongoing monitoring of people in nursing homes and domiciliary care so that people received only the level of care most appropriate to them and so arrest the present tendency which encourages the minimisation of work and the maximisation of profit which results from having as many people bedfast in institutions as is possible in order to attract the expensive care benefit. This would encourage nursing homes to provide a rehabilitation function instead of acting as long term hospices for the dying, as they do at present.
Rehabilitation is understood to include the arresting of further deterioration of function as well as the restoration of function, which is normally meant by rehabilitation. It is only by having proper domiciliary care in this country that the aged who have made this country what it is will get their just and proper deserts as citizens of Australia who have done their best for their country. The present system of providing maximum profit for nursing homes, maximum assistance to institutional care, is very detrimental to the well-being of the frail aged in our country. We should accept that that needs to be changed.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (10.41)-1 want to speak tonight about the number of reputations of very eminent and very respectable people that have been quite unjustly and improperly smeared in this Parliament over the last few weeks. I am certainly very concerned at the large number of allegations that have been made, the nature of those allegations and the individuals who have been named and, in my view, improperly named. Some people on occasions have referred to this place as the high court of parliament. No court would entertain charges in relation to the reputations of individuals and deal with them in the way in which they are dealt with in this place. No reputation would be dealt with so loosely. No individual would be so maliciously maligned or have his career and his reputation put in danger in

2126 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Adjournment

court proceedings conducted in the way in which this chamber conducts itself.
The reason that this Parliament should not entertain allegations of this sort is quite clear. We cannot hear evidence. We cannot hear the individuals. There are no opportunities for cross examination. There is no opportunity for genuine inquiry. That ought to be clear to every member of this House. It is quite obvious to me that allegations should not be entertained in the way they are. We know that there have been abuses of the forms of this House. There have also been abuses of the State Parliament of New South Wales. The most obvious abuses in New South Wales were the abuses committed by the member for Cronulla, Mr Egan, when he named certain individuals and later had the courage to apologise when he became aware that he was wrong.
The Premier of New South Wales recognises the political dangers in pursuing the course that the Labor Party in this place seems hell-bent on pursuing. He has initiated an inquiry into the concept of privilege and the way in which it ought to be entertained in the future. There is an inquiry being undertaken in this Parliament at this time into privilege. The honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender) is chairman of that committee. I hope that his committee will examine the sorts of matters that are being examined in New South Wales about the extent to which we can allow the abuse of privilege to go on.
I say this recognising that we can all make mistakes at times. I am conscious of the fact that very often we feel that for good and sufficient reasons we ought to speak in the Parliament. I have thought very carefully about the number of occasions on which I may have been accused of using or misusing the Parliament and privilege in some way. I recognise that there are important matters which ought to be raised in the Parliament and which sometimes can be raised only in the Parliament to be brought to public notice. I did that myself on one occasion in relation to a firm of door to door salespeople which had come to the notice of the Trade Practices Commission in New South Wales. Action had not been able to be initiated before this group started in my electorate and I felt that the constituents were entitled to know of its activities. But I thought very carefully about it and made due inquiries before I pursued that matter.
1 also raised the matter of an article of Mr Laurie Oakes as a matter of privilege. 1 was castigated by the Press for raising it in the Parliament, but a reference to the Privileges Committee was the only form of redress available. I was

incredulous at the extent to which the Press defended the reputation of Mr Oakes in the face of that inquiry. 1 am equally incredulous now at the way in which the Press is prepared to report comments that are made in this House from time to time. I encourage honourable members to read a transcript of the report on AM yesterday in relation to Mr John Reid and Mr Moore, who was involved in a matter by the innuendo and smear in this place in relation to him. Mr Moore's statement made it clear that there was no truth in the nature of the allegations and imputations made against Mr Reid's character and his own. There are many public spirited people who are prepared to serve governments of either political persuasion, but few people will be prepared to serve governments in the future if their reputations can so loosely be put on the line by the sort of smear and innuendo that has gone on in the last few weeks. 1 am ashamed to be a member of a House that allows these sorts of allegations to be made by people who are not prepared to apologise when they are proven wrong.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.46)-1 indicated earlier today in this House my view that no safe method for the disposal of radioactive wastes from nuclear installations exists or is ever likely to exist. The nuclear industry apologists had previously pinned their faith on borosilicate glass as a medium for containing radioactive waste, but this synthetic glass has been found to be totally unsuitable. When the borosilicate glass is buried in an appropriately deep hole, it is unable to retain the radioactive waste because of the combined effects of the heat associated with great depth and the heat caused by the radioactivity. In those circumstances the glass rapidly disintegrates and so it has to be kept in surface storage for 40 years before being buried. Nor does the nuclear industry or the Government tell us that spent fuel rods must be kept in cooling ponds for periods ranging from months up to 10 years to allow the very intense radioactivity to decay to a level where the waste can be separated and prepared for its incorporation into either the borosilicate glass or Synroc.
I would like to have pursued a line of questioning in the earlier debate which asked how the Government proposed to answer the problem of providing cooling ponds for the very high level radioactive waste before it is incorporated into Synroc. Professor Ringwood, the inventor of Synroc, has said that Australia must be realistic

Adjournment

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2127

about its position as a uranium miner and exporter. The Government is consider~ng the establishment of a uranium enrichment industry, and Professor Ringwood believes that we should manufacture the nuclear fuel rods and lease them to other countries on the condition that they are returned after use. High level radioactive waste would then be removed from the spent fuel rods, solidified into Synroc and buried in suitable geological environments. That is what Professor Ringwood is advocating.
Is the Government contemplating the establishment of such an industry? If so, where are the cooling ponds to be located? How much will they cost to maintain? Are the costs to be met by the taxes of the Australian wage and salary earners, as are the present costs of developing Synroc? Wealthy Australians are avoiding paying their tax, so they will not have to pay for the hidden
costs of the nuclear industry. But the average wage and salary earner is paying. The priorities of the Government in national development are very clear. All possible help must be given to multinational mining corporations whose profits are heavily subsidised and where the capital investment for every job created is in the order of several hundreds of thousands of dollars. In contrast, when I investigated the support given for the development of ethanol as an alternative fuel, I found that in the past three years the Government has provided only a miserable $3.5m or so spread over a whole range of research projects. These research projects are directed at finding a feasible and economic method of producing ethanol from farm crops. But the Government is neglecting this important research area. Ethanol can be produced from cereals or sugar crops. I ask the Minister: Why is the Government not providing more funding in this most promising area of alternative fuel development?
Mr Leo McLeay-They do not care.
Mr MILTON-As the honourable member for Grayndler said, it does not care. As has been pointed out by research scientists working on ethanol production, Australia has the physical capacity to produce a major part of its liquid fuel requirements as ethanol from agriculture. As a provider of jobs the farming industry is far more important and far less capital intensive than the mining industry so surely this is an area which the Government should not be neglecting. Whilst it is not denied that the present high cost of producing ethanol relative to petroleum means that it is not presently economically competitive, it seems to me that the Minister is highly irresponsible in not demanding that the Government take more cognisance of the value of ethanol production to

Australia, not only as a potential provider of export income but also because of its strategic importance in view of the inevitable decline in our
reserves of petroleum.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (10.51)- Tomorrow in the Paterson electorate there will be the opening of the Ulan open cut coal mine and the completion of the Ulan-Sandy HollowMuswellbrook railway. Tribute must be paid to Mr G. B. White, the chairman of directors of Ulan Coal Mines Ltd, for his courage, foresight and great ability in completing these two great projects which are of immense value, not only to the Hunter Valley and the MuswellbrookMudgee area but also to Australia. The completion of the railway line means that coal can be moved from Ulan to Newcastle. It can also be moved in the other direction to Port Kembla and Sydney if necessary. The rail link between Muswellbrook and Ulan is 150 kilometres. The cost of the rail line was $70m and the cost of the mine $170m. The capacity of the mine which will be opened tomorrow is 4.2 million tonnes of coal a year. It will employ 480 people. During the rail and mine construction around 600 people were directly employed on the site, of which 39 per cent were local. These two projects will not only provide great employment but also will assist the economies of Mudgee, Muswellbrook and the surrounding area.
White Industries owns 60 per cent of Ulan Coal Mines Ltd and the other 40 per cent is owned by Mitsubishi Development Pty Ltd. They are two great projects for which Mr G. B. White has been responsible. They will be of great benefit to Australia, the coal mining industry and to the area which I have mentioned. The Premier of New South Wales will be there at 12.30 p.m. tomorrow to perform the opening ceremony for these two great projects. Once again, they reflect great credit, not only on Mr White but also on his board of directors, working in co-operation with Mit-
subishi, which will benefit by the sale of coal from the mine. It will be a very great pleasure for me personally to be there tomorrow to witness the opening of those two great projects.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (10.54)-The question of the international airport at Adelaide was raised last night. It was stated quite clearly by me and previously by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) that it was a political stunt. I do not have a crystal ball. In fact, I did not expect the news that came out today. I said last night that it was a political stunt engineered for the sake of the Tonkin Liberal Government which is about to be disposed of. Lo and behold I was correct. There was a banner headline in the Advertiser today

2128 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Adjournment

saying 'State election November 6'. It came earlier than I had expected but it ties in with all the matters I raised last night; that is, that a junket is being organised via Qantas Airways Ltd-
Mr Kent-An indecent rush.
Mr SCOTT-It was an indecent rush, as the honourable member for Hotham said. It was a political stunt organised to highlight the opening of the international airport. I quoted from a Press cutting to show quite clearly that the airport was not ready. In fact, the guests who will be there at the weekend, including the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) who is at the table, will have to wear Wellington boots. They will be walking through wet cement. Some of them can talk under wet cement but on this occasion they will not be able to talk their way out of what has occurred.
Last night I also mentioned the opening of the international hotel in Adelaide which is timed for 5 November. Again, this ties in with the chosen election date. One could refer to it as the execution date of the Tonkin Liberal Government. The reason I rise tonight, with all due respect to the Minister for whom I have some respect, is to make quite clear my position on the Adelaide international airport so that he will not fall into the trap of accusing me of being opposed to it. My views are on the record. I said last night and I say again that anybody who wants to accuse the member for Hindmarsh of being opposed to the international airport and the facilities it will give to the people of Adelaide had better be prepared to say the same thing outside the Parliament. My views are quite clear. Mr record stands. It is in Hansard and in the documents that went before the Public Works Committee. I feel it is important enough to take a few minutes to quote exactly what I said. I refer to Hansard of 17 February 1982. I said:
. . . I want to outline briefly to the House the points that I put to previous hearings of the Public Works Committee. They were as follows:
(I) That the Federal and State Government's declare the site for a new airport with international facilities outside the inner metropolitan area of Adelaide; that a definite commitment is entered into to develop such airport; and that a commencement date be announced.
(2) That provision be made for the noise-proofing of residential homes, hospitals and schools within a certain perimeter-similar to the legislation covering Heathrow Airport in London.
(3) That there be no lifting of the curfew; and that an assurance regarding this be given immediately by the Government.
Another matter referred to those points. At the Public Works Committee hearing when I made that submission evidence was given that the committee set up to establish a new airport for

Adelaide-I think the transcript of the hearing stated this-was within six weeks of making a decision. That occurred almost six months ago. That is the point that I and the residents around the airport have been making. We do not want to be tied with the airport. We are not airport Luddites. That was made clear. We are not opposed to it but we want some consideration for the people who live around it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr FALCONER (Casey) (10.59)-1 take this opportunity to emphasise the need for some further information to be made available on South West Tasmania and alternative power schemes for Tasmania before any steps are taken to build the proposed Gordon-below-Franklin power scheme. I realise that this is a sensitive matter which, from the point of view of many Tasmanians, involves such factors as States rights and commitments that both major parties in Tasmania have entered into. I put the view that there are very severe doubts that there is a mandate for a Tasmanian State Government to proceed with the construction of the Gordon-below-Franklin power scheme. Even though the present Liberal Government in Tasmania was elected with the construction of the scheme as part of its policy, the construction of that scheme was also part of the policy of the present Labor Opposition. So either party could have claimed a mandate for it. I do not believe that the people of Tasmania have been given an effective choice as to whether or not they want dams to proceed in the South West Tasmanian area.
I am normally prepared to look at a trade-off between the construction of such facilities as dams or other major works which might be needed for the service of human populations against the need to preserve the environment for this and future generations, but I wonder whether we have yet received the appropriate and adequate information on which to make a rational decision on this matter. I had hoped that by now the Senate Select Committee on South West Tasmania, which is examining this matter, would have reported. I understand from inquiries that I have made that it may not report for some weeks yet, The disturbing thing is that the bulldozers appear to be moving in now to construct access roads. Therefore some damage might be done to the area before information is made available.
I wish to get some clarification on a number of competing claims that are made about the South West Tasmanian area and about the proposed

Adjournment

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2129

power scheme itself. For example, there are widely varying estimates of the total cost of the scheme. As I understand it the latest estimate from the Tasmanian Government is that the power scheme will cost $453m. Critics of the scheme claim that it might cost $1 ,000m. I am not sure that we have yet received adequate information on the real cost of the scheme. Furthermore, there is very real doubt about the accuracy of the estimates of the projected power needs of Tasmania that have been presented by the Hydro Electric Commission. Whilst the Senate Committee to which I have referred has not yet reported one can say that evidence given to that Committee in public suggests that the Hydro Electric Commission estimates have been overstated. I think we ought to have that point clarified.
We ought also to look at the costs of other options for power generation in Tasmania. It seems to me that a hydro-electric commission by its very name is likely to produce propositions for the development of hydro-electric schemes without looking adequately at other possible options. I think that this is something that needs to be examined further. There seems to be a preference-an inbuilt bias one might saywithin the Hydro-Electric Commission for looking to the development of further hydro-electric schemes as the solution to the State's power needs.
Finally, I say that we need accurate information about the extent of the damage that will be done to South West Tasmania by any dam in that area. A letter that I received from the Hydro Electric Commission employees stated that only one per cent of the area would be occupied by the dam, but it is apparent from a map of the area that the dam which is to be a long dam running north and south will split the area and that access roads will split it further. So there are questions as to the degree of damage to the area resulting from construction of the dam. I favour the preservation of the South West Tasmania area. I do not believe that an adequate case has yet been made for the construction of the dam.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (1.4)-The honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer) was somewhat shaky in his comments as to which side he will be on in the end. I appreciate that he will support the conservation stance and that he is opposed to the ecological vandalism that the Tasmanian Government intends to commit. I hope that he will use his influence in the Government-he is a member of the Government parties-to stop-

Mr Coleman-And the Labor Party in Tasmania.
Mr KENT-No, it is a Federal responsibility too. We have to stop the ecological vandalism. I
call honestly on honourable members on the other side of the House to get together and stop whatever party is in office in Tasmania from committing ecological vandalism. It is easy to make a 5minute spech in this House in an endeavour to get the conservationists' vote when one depends on a 2 per cent margin or a one per cent margin as does the honourable member for Casey to retain his seat. I have not often heard him announce that he is on the side of the conservationists. He has not spoken on this matter before. Now his doom is looming; he is coming to his end. Now that an election is coming up he wants to make up the one per cent or 2 per cent that he needs to keep his seat. I do not think the people will believe him. He will have to serve his apprenticeship before people will believe that he is really on the side of the conservationist. He really needs over the two or three years of his term to continue to condemn in this House the ecological vandalism tht the Tasmanian Government proposes to commit. Why does the Tasmanian Government propose to commit this vandalism? It is for 100 megawatts or 180 megawatts. It is ridiculous. It can get the power from anywhere. I have seen hydro-electric projects of 2,500 megawatts. One can argue that if we need such a large amount of power we should go ahead and dam a river, but this should not be done for 180 megawatts. We should not spoil the wilderness, that beautiful wilderness that we have in South West Tasmania. It is not equalled anywhere else in the southern hemisphere. 1 was fortunate enought to visit that area a few years ago and see the wilderness. I hope that future generations will see it. 1 hope that the honourable member for Casey will join other conservationists to stop those bulldozers going into that area, spoiling it and losing it for generations to come.
Mr ROCHER (Curtin) (11.7)-1 take this opportunity to inform the House of a deficiency in the regulations governing the importation and use of medical products-a deficiency which endangers the sight of a proportion of those people who undergo eye surgery. A constituent of mine, a distinguished ophthalmic surgeon, has been trying since the beginning of this year to import a quantity of a product called healon for use in his practice. The Department of Health has refused permission. When my constituent first asked for the reason for this refusal he was told that there was a risk that the product contained disease viruses which could endanger the national herd even though it was sterile. As the principal constituent

2130 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Adjournment

of healon is extracted from cocks' combs, this seems plausible until we learn that healon is readily available to Australian veterinarians who use it on arthritic racehorses, of all things. Veterinary healon is not sterilised. So much for that argument. Undeterred, the Department of Health continued to refuse permission on the grounds that healon had not been approved by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee and that my constituent's proposed use of the substance did not come within the guidelines for clinical use of experimental drugs on individual patients.
The first objection is correct. Healon has not been approved, although I understand that its manufacturers have submitted an application. The process of approval takes many, many months. The second objection is the shonky one. Healon is not a drug at all and it is quite impossible for its use in eye surgery to conform to the guidelines as interpreted by the Department of Health. Healon is a viscous fluid. Its chemical name is sodium hyaluronate. It occurs naturally within the eye as one of the three main components of the viteous humour which fills the eyeball between the lens and the retina. All its uses are based on its physical properties. lts chemical ones are relevant only to the extent that because it occurs naturally in the eye it is free from harmful effects. That is why I said it is not a drug. I cite as an example intraocular lens implantation. In this procedure the eyeball is opened by an incision at the edge of the white and the lens-not the front surface, the cornea, but the internal lens-is removed and replaced with an artificial one. One problem, I am told, is that when the incision is made and the watery fluid, the aqueous humour, which fills the anterior chamber of the eye, is allowed to escape, the chamber can collapse so that there is very little distance between the lens and the extremely delicate internal surface of the cornea. Healon can help here in two ways. First, because it is viscous it can be put in place of the aqueous humour to help maintain the shape of the anterior chamber while the new lens is inserted. Second, a coating of healon on the surface of the artificial lens, as it is being inserted, acts as a shield against mechanical damage which might be caused to the cornea if the lens touched it. This procedure and others in intraocular surgery can be accomplished without healon. Healon is an insurance, an extra safety factor. If some tiny thing

goes a fraction wrong on the operating table, healon is literally a sight-saver.
The guidelines for experimental drugs require their use on each individual patient to be authorised, in advance, by the Department of Health. As my constituent points out, if healon is needed, it is needed then and there on the operating table and it is not possible to keep the patient under anaesthetic for a week or two while authorisation is sought. It is absurd even to contemplate. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard an extract from a cable sent by Dr John Gilmour of the Scientific Advisory Board of the American Intraocular Implant Society.
Leave granted.
The cable read as follows-
Healon . . . was approved for clinical use by the United States Food and Drug Administration in November 1979. This preparation has been widely used in the United States since then without adverse reaction. Healon is of high molecular weight and acts as a protector of internal cells of the eye which can otherwise be severely damaged in difficult intraocular surgeries . . . This is a sight saving repeat sight saving preparation and should be made immediately available . . . for difficult intraocular surgical procedures.
Mr ROCHER-I urge the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton) who was in the chamber a few minutes ago-I will draw this matter to his attention again-to take'a personal interest in this matter. If he cannot accept that healon is not a drug-as I am advised it is not-I ask that he speed up the approval procedure for this very important commodity which, as I have already indicated, could very well prove to be a sigh t-saver.
Motion (by Mr Coleman) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 11.12 p.m.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 14 October 1982; pursuant to statute:
Explosives Act--Explosives Regulations-Order under Sub-Regulation 67 (I).
Telecommunications Act-Australian Telecommunications Commission-By-laws---Telecommunications (Charging Zones and Charging Districts) -Amendment No. 27.
Telecommunications (Community Calls)-Amendment NO,2!.

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2131 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 4813)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

(I) In 1981-82 what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable gentleman's question is as follows:

(I) and (2)-

Grants to International Conferences Held in Australia

Organising Body

Conference

Grant

Faculty of Music, University of Melbourne Australian Academy of Science The Australian Mushroom Growers Association Australian Association for the Mentally Retarded
Wildlife Disease Association Australian Hospital Association The Asian Federation of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Australian Institute of International Affairs Australian Federation of Family Planning Associ-
ations United Nations Association of Australia Organising Committee for the Conference Maritime Archaeology Association of Australia Australian Catholic Nurses' Guild

First International Music and Technology Conference-Melbourne, August 1981
Thirteenth International Botanical CongressSydney, August 1981
II th International Scientific Congress on the Cultivation of Edible Fungi-Sydney, August 1981
Second South Pacific Conference of the International League of Societies for the Mentally Handicapped-Melbourne, August 1981
4th International Congress on Wild Life DiseasesSydney, August 1981
22nd International Hospital Federation CongressSydney, October 1981
6th Asian Congress of Obstetrics and GynaecologyMelbourne, October 1981
International Conference on Australia, Asia and the Media-Canberra, October 1981
East and South-East Asia and Oceania Regional Seminar on Family Planning and the Disabled PersonSydney, November 1981
International Media ConferenceSydney/Melbourne/Canberra, November 1981
International Conference on Women and FoodSydney, February 1982
International Conference on Maritime ArchaeologyAdelaide, March 1982
12th World Congress of Catholic Nurses-
Melbourne, AI'ril1982

$ 2,000 10,000 10,000 9,000
4,000 26,000 5,000
*819 5,000
9,000 2,000 7,000 5,000

* A grant of $3,000 was approved but the organisers of the Conference advised that $819 would be required.

Organisation

Grants-in-Aid

Australian Family Association Australian Institute of Political Science Australian Institute of Public Administration-
National Council Australian Capital Territory Group Kamarn Bre~ders Foundation Royal Humane Society of Australia

Grant
$ 10,000
3,500
7,500 2,500 25,000 10,000

Income Tax: Burden on Low-income Groups
(Question No. 4864)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:

(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the National Times of 25-31 July 1982 in which Professor Matthews, former Chairperson of the Committee of Inquiry into Inflation and Taxation, is quoted as saying that our highly centralised taxation system has resulted in major distributional shifts in favour of the rich and to the disadvantage of low-income groups generally.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the Parliamentary Library study, 'Unequal burdens-Personal income changes since 1975', which, according to a Sydney Morning Herald report of 8 July 1982, found that changes made to the personal income tax system since 1975 have placed a greater relative burden on lower and middle income earners.
(3) Have changes to the taxution system placed a greater burden on lower and middle income earners; if so (a) what is the change in the incidence of personal income tax between 1975-76 and 1981-82 for the family income groups used in the Parliamentary Library study and (b) what steps will he take to ease the personal taxation burden carried by low income earners.

2132 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) It is not possible to generalise about the distributional effects of changes in the income tax system since 1975: many of the changes (e.g. in the zero-threshold) have in fact favoured lower income earners.
To assess the distributional effects, the Parliamentary Library study focuses on the percentage changes in average tax rates in different income categories. While I do not question the arithmetical accuracy of their results, certain reservations can be made.
First, the measure they have used can produce a somewhat misleading impression. Under any progressive income tax scale even small numerical changes in average tax rates tend to yield relatively large percentage changes in tax paid at low income levels. An alternative, and generally more appropriate, way of measuring changes in personal income tax burden over a period of time is to compare changes in real disposable income for taxpayers at various multiples of average weekly earnings.
Secondly, I find it surprising that the Parlimentary Library study should have chosen 1975-76 as the base year for its comparisons. It is notorious among statisticians that the alleged 'results' of such studies can be totally distorted depending upon the base year chosen. In this case, any comparison with 1975-76 as the base year must have regard to the very large budgetary deficit applying at that time and the urgent priority given by this Government to reducing this deficit, as part of its general approach to bringing the growth of the money supply under control with a view to reining back inflation. Inevitably, pursuit of that priority objective has limited the scope for tax reductions over that period.
Over a longer-term period the results are quite different. For example, between the mid-1960s and 1981-82 those at the lower end of the income range (on AWE or less) have generally achieved higher percentage increases in disposable income than those at the top end (e.g. on two or three times AWE). The effect of the 1982-83 Budget measures will also be to provide significant tax reductions to those receiving lower taxable incomes.

Bankruptcies in Division of Lilley

(Question No. 4868)

Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:

(I) How many bankruptcies by small firms have occurred
in the Electoral Division of Lilley in each year since January 1976.

(2) What was the average business life of these firms.

(3) How many people were laid off (a) overall and (b) in each year, as a result of these bankruptcies.

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Based on an examination of the files in the Official Receiver's Office in Brisbane it appears that the number of business bankruptcies, under Part VI of the Bankruptcy Act 1966 where the estates are being administered by the Official Trustee in Bankruptcy and where the residential address of the
bankrupt as shown on the bankruptcy petition was within the Electoral Divisions of Lilley for the following periods is as follows:

1976

15

1977

13

1978

14

1979

8

1980

19

1981

21

1.1.82-19.8.82

4

Total

94

These figures do not include bankruptcies where the bankrupts carried on business in the Electoral Division of Lilley but where the residential address shown on the bankruptcy petition was outside that Division. While it does not include bankruptcies where the estates are administered by a trustee other than the Official Trustee in Bankruptcy, the number of estates administered by private trustees prior to I January 1982 is statistically insignificant.
(2) and (3) This information would not necessarily be available form the Official Receiver's files and, in any event, could not be produced without a significant commitment of staff resources.
Commonwealth Ethnic Schools Program
(Question No. 4898)
Mr Maher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
( I ) What is the name and address of each eligible school receiving funds under the Commonwealth Ethnic Schools Program within the Electoral Division of Lowe.
(2) How many pupils in each school are deemed eligible school pupils for purposes of funding.
(3) Does the Government propose to increase the rate of $30 per eligible school child.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The name and address of each eligible school receiving funding under the Commonwealth Ethnic Schools Program within the Electoral Division of Lowe is set out hereunder. Because ethnic education authorities receiving funding may, sometimes, be located outside an electorate but operate schools within it and vice versa, Column 2 in the attached list shows school/class locations within the electorate.
(2) Details of the eligible pupils in each class/school are shown for 1981 and 1982 (funding so far this year) together with the aggregate grants approved.
(3) In 1983 the rate of up to $30 per eligible pupil will be retained pending Government consideration of a report from the Commonwealth Schools Commission on proposals for the Program in 1984 and beyond. The Commonwealth Schools Commission report will take into account the recent survey of part-time ethnic schools sponsored by the Commission and undertaken by Associate Professor Marlene Norst of Macquarie University.

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2133

COMMONWEALTH SCHOOLS COMMISSION ETHNIC SCHOOLS PROGRAM Electoral Division of Lowe
1981 Information (Total Grants in 1981)

Organisation Name and Address
Albanian Cultural Society 'Agimi', II Napier Street, Drummoyne, N.S.W. 2047
Lebanese Ethnic School, 2 Acton Street, Croydon, N.S.W.2132
The General Council of The Community of Hasroun, G.P.O. Box 3371, Sydney, N.S.W. 2001
Central Council of Croatian Ethnic Schools of N.s.W., 15 Prospect Road, Summer Hill, N.S.W. 2130
Schools of the Greek Orthodox Parish and Community of Burwood and Districts, P.O. Box 106, Burwood, N.S.W. 2134
Australian Greek Citizens of Concord Parents and Citizens Association, 10 Gracemere Street, Concord West, N.S.W. 2138
Greek Orthodox Church and School Community, 21 Henry Street, Leichhardt, N.S.W. 2040
Co-As-It School Committee, Casa D'ltalia, 2 Mary Street, Surry Hills, N.S.W. 2010
Sydney Latvian Society Ltd, C/o 32-34 Parnell Street, Strathfield, N.S.W. 2135
St Alexander Nevsky Russian School-Parents' Committee, P.O. Box 130, Homebush, N.S.W. 2140
St Nicholas School of Russian, P.O. Box 344, Strathfield, N.S.W. 2135
Burwood Saturday Turkish Ethnic School Parents Association, 11/63 Albert Crescent
Turkish Ethnic School, C/o Homebush West Public School, Exeter Street, Homebush West, N.S.W. 2140
Greek Orthodox Community of N.S.W. Ltd, Cnr Oxford and South Dowling Streets, Paddington, N.S.W.2021
Ella Community Centre, 58A Dalhousie Street, Haberfield, N.S.W. 2045
Turkish Ethnic School Parents Association, c/o Homebush West Public School, Exeter Road, Homebush West, N.S.W. 2140
St Alexander Nevsky Russian School Homebush Parents' Committee, P.O. Box 130, Homebush, N.S.W.2140
St Joseph's Maronite Church, 2 Acton Street, Croydon, N.S.W. 2132
The General Council of the Community of Hasroun, 79 Lower Fort Street, Millers Point, N.S.W. 2000
Australian Greek Citizens of Concord P&C Association, 172 Concord Road, North Strathfield, N.S.W.2137
Sydney Latvian Society Ltd, 32-34 Parnell Street, Strathfield, N.S.W. 2135
Central Council of Croation Ethnic Schools of N.S.W., 15 Prospect Road, Summer Hill, N.S.W. 2130
The Greek Society of Strathfield and District, P.O. Box 24, Strathfield, N.S.W. 2135

Location of School Burwood PS, Railway Parade Croydon PS, Young Street Homebush Boys HS, Bridge Road Homebush PS, Rochester Street
Burwood PS, Conder Street Concord PS, Burwood Road Strathfield North, Concord Road Croydon PS, Young Street Enfield PS, Beaumaris Street Homebush PS, Rochester Street 10 Gracemere Street, Concord West
Drummoyne HS, Thompson Street St Mary's PS, Broughton Street, Concord Holy Innocents PS, Queen Street, Croydon Dobroyd Point PS, Waratah Street St Mark's PS, Tranmere Street, Drummoyne St Joseph Convent, Liverpool Road, Enfield Five Dock PS, Henry Street 32-34 Parnell Street, Strathfield Homebush PS, Rochester Street Strathfield North PS, Concord Road Burwood PS, Conder Street Homebush West PS, Exeter Street
Croydon PS, Young Street Drummoyne HS, Thompson Street 58A Dalhousie Street, Haberfield Homebush West PS, Exeter Street
Homebush West PS, Exeter Street
Croydon PS, Young Street Homebush Boys HS, Bridge Road Strathfield North PS, Concord Road
32-34 Parnell Street, Strathfield Homebush PS, Rochester Street
Burwood PS, Conder Street

No. of Students
53
234
60
39
90 41 23 29 61 26 130
85
49 38 40 29 72 105 93 262
172 32
38
36 18
12 33
251
243
161 116
84
29
36

2134 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Organisation Name and Address
Greek Orthodox Community of N.S.W. Ltd, Cor Oxford and South Dowling Streets, Paddington, N.S.W.2021
Hungarian Council of N.S.W. c/o G. Mailath, President, Lot 18, Wills Road, Macquarie Fields, N.S.W. 2564
Australian Romanian Association, G.P.O. Box 374, Sydney, N.S.W. 2001
St Nicholas School of Russian, Cnr Correys and Cumming Avenues, North Strathfield, N.S. W. 2137
Burwood Saturday Turkish Ethnic School-Parents Committee, 11/63 Albert Crescent, Burwood, N.S.W.2134

Location of School Croydon PS, Young Street
Homebush West PS, Exeter Street
Burwood PS, Conder Street Strathfield North PS, Concord Road Burwood PS, Conder Street

No. of Students
26
66
31 175 40

Excise on Beer and Spirits Sold to Staff at Government House
(Question No. 4909)
Mr Maher asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
Are beer and spirits sold to staff members at Government House free of excise; if so, what loss to revenue has occurred in respect of this concession in each year since 1970.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The only member of staff at Government House to whom items from official stocks of liquor have been available is the Official Secretary. Some spirits have been issued to the Official Secretary for official hospitality in accordance with arrangments which were made in 1974 but which have been discontinued since the introduction on I July 1982 of expenses of office allowance for Second Division officers.
Homebush Bay, Sydney: Proposed Bicentennial Park
(Question No. 4920)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
Will the Government give financial support to the Bicentennial Park proposed for Homebush Bay, Sydney.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am unable to say whether the proposal for a Bicentennial Park to be established at Homebush Bay will receive financial support from the Commonwealth. The Australian Bicentenial Authority is fully aware of the proposal but it would seem to be primarily a State and local government matter. Nevertheless, it is one of many items being considered for inclusion in the overall Bicentennial program.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Administrative Services
(Question No. 4950)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers

(a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr Newman-The answers to the honourable member's question are as follows:
(I) The distribution and co-ordination of questions on notice is the responsibility of the Parliamentary Questions Officer within the Department who allocates each question to that area of the portfolio with responsibility for the subject matter. A response is prepared by an officer in the relevant area and approved by the divisional head. Following endorsement of the proposed answer by a Deputy Secretary it is sent for the Minister's approval.
(2) 380.
(3) 3.056 months.
(4) (a) 141; (b) 100; (c) 18; (d) 3; (e) I.
(5) 61. Only one question has been on the Notice Paperfor 12 months or more. The reason for the delay is continuing negotiations with the State of New South Wales.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for The Capital Territory
(Question No. 4952)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2135

(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questioris being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The arrangements for the answering of questions on notice are:
(a) Examination of the answer within the Minister's office-the Private Secretary
(b) (i) examination of the question-Parliamentary Question Officer
submission of the answer to the Minister-the Secretary of the Department
(b) (ii) preparation of the answer-the relevant Division Head.
(2) From 25 November 1980 until 25 August 1982, including those dates, forty four questions have been asked on notice by senators and two hundred and eighteen by members.
(3) I hold the view that an arithmetic average has little or no meaning in a matter such as this and refer the honourable member to part (4) of this answer. Many more questions would have been answered in less than three months if their appearance in Hansard had not been delayed by the Parliamentary Recess.
(4)-
(a) of the forty four questions asked by senators:
(i) one was withdrawn
(ii) three were the responsibility of other Ministers
(iii) one was included in an answer co-ordinated by the Prime Minister
(iv) one was included in an answer co-ordinated by another Department
(v) seventeen were answered in less than three months
(vi) thirteeen were answered in three-six months
(vii) four were answered in six-nine months
(b) Of the two hundred and eighteen questions asked by Members:
(i) two were withdrawn
(ii) five were the responsibility of other Ministers
(iii) three were included in an answer co-ordinated by other Ministers
(iv) one hundred and two were answered in less than three months
(v) seventy one were answered in three-six months
(vi) six were answered in six-nine months
(vii) sixteen were answered in nine-twelve months
(viii) eight were answered in over twelve months
(5)-
(a) As at 25 August 1982 four questions asked by senators since 19 August 1982 are currently still on notice.
(b) As at 25 August 1982 five questions asked by members since 17 February 1982 are currently still on notice.

(c) As at 25 August 1982 there are no questions from either House on notice for more than twelve months.
Oil Spillages: Pollution Risk of Oil Tankers
(Question No. 4969)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the London based International Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO) is recommending the compulsory installation of crude oil tank washing (COW) which is credited with improving the safety and reducing the pollution risk of oil tankers.
(2) Since oil spillages around Australia's coastline are a serious problem, will he investigate COW and its use on vessels using Australian waters.
(3) have his departmental officers viewed any of the more than 140 films on marine safety and pollution prevention that Videotel offers; if not, why not.
(4) Are there any methods under consideration to improve marine safety and pollution prevention in Australian waters; if so, what are the details.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. I am aware that the London based International Maritime Organisation (IMO), formerly IMCO, is recommending the compulsory installation of crude oil tank washing (COW). IMO have produced a publication on crude oil washing systems and this has been circulated to all interested authorities in Australia.
(2) COW is already practised in some Australian ports including Kwinana, Brisbane and Sydney. It is also under consideration for use in Port Stanvac and Melbourne.
(3) Yes. Several video cassettes and films produced by various firms are held by my Department and used internally, and loaned externally, for training and information purposes.
(4) Matters under consideration or being dealt with include the following:
(a) the preparation of some 15 parts of Marine Orders which will enable Australia to implement the provisions of the 1974 Safety of Life at Sea Convention as amended by the 1978 Protocol;
(b) implementation of Codes for the Construction and Equipment of Ships Carrying Liquefied Gas and Dangerous Goods in Bulk, the Code of Safe Practice for Solid Bulk Cargo and the Code for the Construction and Equipment of Mobile Offshore Drilling Units, which have been prepared by the International Maritime Organisation. Consideration will also be given to the Code for Special Purpose Vessels when it is finalised;
(c) revision of the regulations relating to loading and unloading safety measures;
(d) implementation of the 1973 MARPOL Convention and its 1978 Protocol including those Annexes dealing with oil and noxious chemicals;
(e) under the National Plan to Combat Pollution of the Sea by Oil a 5 year program is being developed in conjunction with the States and Northern Territory to improve the availability of pollution prevention measures, and oil recovery equipment, and ensure that operators are fully trained in their use;

2136 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(f) surveillance of Australian coastal waters has recently been reviewed and steps are under consideration to improve the possibility of detection of pollution as part of the improved surveillance organisation.
Department of Administrative Services: Employment of Mr Rauno Aaltonen
(Question No. 4974)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) Was a Mr Rauno Aaltonen employed by his Department as a consultant.
(2) For what purposes was Mr Aaltonen employed and over what period.
(3) What was the cost of Mr Aaltonen's services.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Mr Aaltonen, who is acknowledged as one of world's foremost authorities in the training of drivers in the techniques of high risk crisis evasion, has been engaged on several occasions as a Chief Instructor and Consultant.
(2) Mr Aaltonen conducted special driving courses for police drivers, escorts and other authorised participants, who were to be involved with the personal protection of VIPs. Between May 1979 and May 1982 the services of Mr Aaltonen have been engaged on four occasions, each of seven days' duration.
(3) The cost to the Commonwealth over the period has been $24,714.
Interest Rates
(Question No. 4980)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a statement made by the Queensland Deputy Premier and Treasurer, Dr Edwards, reported in the Courier-Mail of 22 March 1982, in which he said that the high rate of interest was one of the most destructive forces to business and the private sector. and that Federal politicians had to come to terms with the interest rate problem in a dynamic and hard-hitting fashion.
(2) Is the present interest rate for most commercial enterprises between 17 per cent and 20 per cent and is this the most destructive force to business and the private sector.
(3) Does he intend to deal with interest rates in a dynamic and hard-hitting fashion.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware of the statement attributed to the Queensland Deputy Premier and Treasurer, Dr Edwards, referred to by the honourable member.
(2) It is not possible to provide exact figures on interest costs for commercial enterprises, but available data suggest a range of about 15 per cent to 20 per cent for short term commercial interest rates. Such high interest rates are undeniably detrimental to private sector activity but they reflect a number of more fundamental influences arising both at home and abroad. It could well be said, for example, that the most destructive force to business and the private sector at present is wage rates which are inconsistent with adequate profitability and employment growth.

(3) There are no easy solutions to the problem of high interest rates. A reduction in inflation is a prerequisite to a sustained reduction of interest rates. The Government's policies will continue to be directed to this objective.
Sales oflnformation
(Question No. 4987)
Dr Blewett asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 August 1982:
Is he able to say whether information-service companies obtain statistical information from the Australian Bureau of Statistics in order to sell that information to the public for profit; if so, (a) which companies do so, (b) what sort of information is obtained and sold, and (c) why is the information not readily available to the public without the need for information-service companies.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Agencies of many kinds participate in the dissemination of official statistics. They include not only the news media and libraries but also commercial organisations engaged in market research and business advisory services, together with companies providing computer data services. It is assumed that the question relates principally to the last mentioned group.
The Australian Statistician has provided the following information in response to the specific points raised in the question:
(a) Several companies are known to be providing wide ranging computer-based statistical information services for subscribers on a nation-wide basis. Others provide more specialised or more localised services. The Australian Bureau of Statistics does not have a complete listing of the companies involved.
(b) Almost all of the ABS statistical information maintained by these companies is obtained on magnetic tapes supplied by the ABS at prescribed rates. These tapes contain quarterly time series releases covering a wide range of current statistics, selected data from the population censuses, data from the agricultural censuses, finance and certain other data relating to local government authorities, and input-output tables.
(c) While the ABS does not provide public access to its own computing network, the tape services referred to, and any of the statistics they contain, are readily available from the ABS for a modest charge to any organisation of persons desiring them. In most cases the same services are publicly available on microfiche also, and much of the data is included in printed publications. However, the commercial networks often provide a service designed to meet specific client requirements, including analysis and interpretation of official statistics and data from sources other than the ABS.
Foreign Ownership and Control Statistics
(Question No. 4989)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 August 1982:
(I) Further to his answers to question Nos 4074 (Hansard, 6 and 7 May 1982, page 2538), 4458 (Hansard, 6 and 7 May 1982, page 2547), 2976 (Hansard, 16 February 1982, page 112) and 3276 (Hansard, 16 February 1982, pages 115-6), can he now say when the Australian Bureau of Statistics will resume the collection of statistical information in relation to (a) the level of foreign ownership and control of (i) general insurance business, (ii) life insurance business, (iii) finance

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2137

companies, (iv) mining industry, (v) accredited advertising agencies, (vi) tourist accommodation establishments and (vii) manufacturing industry, (b) foreign control in or of (i) manufacturing industry, study of large enterprise groups, (ii) minerai exploration, (iii) finance companies, (iv) life insurance business, (v) general insurance, (vi) registered financial corporations and (vii) the mining industry and (c) research and experimental development-private enterprises.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the Australian Mining Industry Council's Policy for 1982 and, in particular, the policy that the foreign participation statistics should be reintroduced and should separately record foreign ownership and control and that the measurement of foreign control should use the same criteria as the Government's foreign investment policy which recognises that both 'naturalised' and 'naturalising' companies are, by agreement with the Government, Australian controlled.
(3) If so, and further to his answer to question No. 4074, what decisions has the Commonwealth Statistician made on the definitions and methodologies to be used in any new studies of foreign ownership and control and, in particular, has the Statistician accepted the argument of the Mining Industry Council that a 'naturalised' or 'naturalising' company for the purposes of foreign investment guidelines, should be regarded as Australian controlled for statistical purposes:
(4) Has he or any other Minister made representations to the Statistician on such matters; if so, what was the nature of the representations.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (3) I refer the honourable member to Press release No. 182, issued by Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Guilfoyle as Acting Treasurer on 7 September 1982. That statement read:
RESUMPTION 'OF FOREIGN OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL STATISTICS
In January 1982 the Treasurer announced that he had requested the Australian Bureau of Statistics to reintroduce the studies, discontinued in 1978, of the extent of foreign ownership and control in sectors of the Australian economy.
The Statistician has now advised me that he has examined a number of matters related to the resumption of such studies, including a review of experience with the earlier studies, the views of potential major users of the figures, the range and frequency of possible studies and the most appropriate concepts, definitions and measures to be used. He has also given attention to how to accommodate work on these statistics within the resorces available to the ABS and without disrupting other high priority statistics.
As a result of this examination, the ABS is to recommence a program of foreign participation studies. In order to retain simple and objective criteria for classifying companies, the concepts, definitions and measures used for the new series will be similar to those used in previously published statistics of foreign ownership and control. The main change will be that, as far as possible, separate aggregates will be published for the following categories which would otherwise come within the statistical definition of foreign controlled:
naturalised and naturalising companies;
joint Australian/foreign controlled enterprises.
Steps are being taken to staff positions in the Bureau in order to carry out these studies. The first publication, which is planned for release in the second half of 1983, will relate to foreign ownership and control of the mining industry and selected mineral processing industries for the year ended 30 June 1982. Work will also be started on the the preparation of

foreign participation statistics for other sectors including manufacturing and possibly agricultural industries.
(2) Yes.
(4) No.
Tax Free Profits on Sale of Property
(Question No. 5013)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
With reference to his answer to question No. 4278 (Hansard, 18 August 1982, page 662) relating to the judgment of Gibbs, C. J., Mason, J. and Murphy, J. in the case of the Commissioner of Taxation v. Whitford's Beach Pty Ltd, will he instruct the Commissioner for Taxation to take proceedings against profit-making schemes and undertakings involving the purchase of property and its resale in the manner used by companies which have produced high tax free profits similiar to those referred to in recent High Court judgements; if not, under what provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act is he precluded from issuing such an instruction.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There is no need to instruct the Commissioner about this. Having made the assessment that was contested in the Whitford's Beach case and having had the faith in it to support and defend it through the Courts to an ultimately successful and hard-won conclusion, the Commissioner assures me that it is quite unlikely that he will now ignore the decision and its implications. The existence of the decision is, in fact, the best indicator there could be that there is no need to direct the Commissioner in this matter.
Diplomatic Recognition of The Federal Republic ofGermany and The German Democratic Republic
(Question No. 5014)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
Which countries have accorded diplomatic recognition to (a) the Federal Republic of Germany and (b) the German Democratic Republic (Hansard, 8 March 1979, page 855).
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question, according to the information currently available, is as follows:
(a) In respect of the FRG-all countries except: Albania, and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
(b) In respect of the GDR-all countries except: Andora, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Republic of Korea, Western Samoa, Swaziland, EI Salvador, Dominican Republic, Tonga, Monaco, Israel, Bahrain, Brunei, Ivory Coast, Malawi, Honduras, Paraguay, Trinidad and Tobago, Holy See, Oman, Bhutan, Bahamas, South Africa, Barbados, Guatemala, Haiti and Qatar.
Trade Tonnage Carried by Australian Flag Vessels
(Question No. 5044)
Mr Morris asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
What was Australia's overseas trade tonnage carried by sea expresssed as (a) exports, (b) imports and (c) a total, for each year since 1970 in terms of (i) tonnages and percentages carried by Australian Flag Vessels (ii) tonnages and percentages

2138 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

carried by Flag Vessels of each other country involved, in each case showing the general cargo tonnage, the bulk cargo tonnage and the total tonnage carried.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Statistician has advised that the Australian Bureau of Statistics does not collect information which distinguishes the type of cargo carried on vessels according to whether it is bulk or other cargo. The tables below show details of overseas cargo loaded (exports), discharges (imports) and total cargo handled (exports and imports) at Australian ports by Australian registered vessels and all vessels according to the 'type' of vessel on which the cargo was transported, during the period 1970-71 to 1980-81.
The tables do not provide separate figures for each other country involved for vessels that are not Australian Flag Vessels. The Statistician has advised that the compilation of these additional details would constitute a substantial task for which resources are not available.
Table 1
Overseas Cargo Loaded at Australian Ports, 1970-71 to 1980-81

Type of vessel-

Total all vessels
revenue
tonnest

Australian registered vessels
Revenue Percentage tonnest of total

Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers

'000 1970--71
6,816
93,835
2,172

'000

328

4.81

265

0.28

5

0.23

Total

102,822

598

0.58

Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers

1971-72 6,619
99,289
3,223

308

4.65

264

0.27

18

0.56

Total

109,131

589

0.54

Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers

1972-73 7,722
122,689 2,999

359

4.65

205

0.17

5

0.17

Total

133,410

569

0.43

Liners
Tramps/Bulkships Tankers

1973--74 7,423
142,512 3,608

269

3.62

89

0.06

7

0.19

Total

153,542

365

0.24

Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total

1974-75 7,146
157,385 3,261
167,793

236

3.30

77

0.05

9

0.28

323

0.19

Liners Tramps/Bulkships

1975--76 6,755
147,943

316

4.68

68

0.05

Type of vessel-
Tankers Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Tankers Bulkships Other
Total
Tankers Bulkships Other
Total

Total all vessels
revenue ton nest

Australian registered vessels
Revenue Percentage tonnest of total

'000

'000

3,938

17

0.43

158,637

401

0.25

1976-77

6,354

370

5.82

157,189

1,786

1.14

3,533

167,076

2,156

1.29

1977-78

5,369

384

7.15

156,853

3,192

2.04

4,477

166,699

3,576

2.15

1978--79

6,154

450

7.31

156,928

3,638

2.32

4,220

167,301

4,088

2.44

1979-80

3,695

75

2.03

174,686

5,652

3.24

10,300

527

5.12

188,681

6,254

3.31

1980--81

3,627

165,360

6,365

3.85

10,426

511

4.90

179,413

6,876

3.83

Note: Figures have been rounded and discrepancies may occur between sums of the component items and totals.
- From 1979-80, because of definitional problems, the type of vessel classification of 'liners, tramps/bulkships and tankers' was replaced by 'tankers, bulkships and other'.
t Quantities are expressed in revenue tonnes, the basis on which freight is charged. Revenue tonnage is obtained by adding mass (tonnes weight) and volume (cubic metre) units.

Table 2
OVERSEAS CARGO DISCHARGED AT AUSTRALIAN PORTS, 1970-71 TO 1980-81

Type of vessel *

Total all vessels
revenue tonnest

Australian registered vessels
Revenue Percentage tonnest of total

Liners Tramps/Bulkships

'000

'000

1970-71

6,294

373

5.93

5,291

11

0.21

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2139

Type ofvessel*
Tankers Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total
Tankers Bulkships

Total all
vessels revenue
tonnest

Australian registered vessels
Revenue Percentage tonnest of total

'000

'000

14,894

52

0.35

26,479

436

1.65

1971-72 6,015
5,169 13,191

491

8.16

8

0.15

21

0.16

24,375

520

2.13

1972-73

6,435

473

7.35

6,064

12,721

25,220

473

1.88

1973-74 8,406
8,617 13,673

511

6.08

70

0.81

19

0.14

30,696

600

1.95

1974-75 7,909 8,771 13,242

488

6.17

59

0.45

29,922

548

1.83

1975-76 7,866
6,599 12,418

779

9.90

185

2.80

5

0.04

26,884

968

3.60

1976-77 8,108 6,799 13,422

802

9.89

232

3.41

28,330

1,034

3.65

1977-78 5,734
7,180
14,065

532

9.28

420

5.85

26,978

952

3.53

1978-79 7,160
7,603
13,872

860

12.01

181

2.38

75

0.54

28,636

1,115

3.89

1979-80 14,635 5,546

554

3.79

102

1.84

Other

10,847

889

8.20

Total

31,028

1,545

4.98

Tankers Bulkships Other

1980-81 13,291 6,167
13,022

246

1.85

135

2.19

949

7.29

Total

32,480

1,330

4.09

Note: Figures have been rounded and discrepancies may occur between sums of the component items and totals.
* From 1979-80, because of definitional problems, the type of vessel classification of 'liners, tramps/bulkships and tankers' was replaced by 'tankers, bulkships and other'.
t Quantities are expressed in revenue tonnes, the basis on which freight is charged. Revenue tonnage is obtained by adding mass (tonnes weight) and volume (cubic metre) units.
Table 3
TOTAL OVERSEAS CARGO HANDLED AT AUSTRALIAN PORTS, 1970-71 TO 1980-81

Type of vessel*
Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers

Total all vessels
revenue
ton nest

Australian registered vessels
Revenue Percentage ton nest of total

'000

'000

1970-71

13,110

701

5.35

99,126

276

0.28

17,066

57

0.33

Total

129,302

1,033

0.80

Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers

1971-72 12,634
104,458
16,415

799

6.32

272

0.26

39

0.24

Total

133,507

1,109

0.83

Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers

1972-73 14,157
128,753
15,720

832

5.88

205

0.16

5

0.03

Total

158,630

1,042

0.66

Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers
Total

1973-74 15,829
151,129 \7,280
184,239

779

4.92

159

0.11

26

0.15

964

0.52

Liners Tramps/Bulkships Tankers

1974-75 15,055
166,156
16,503

725

4.82

77

0.05

68

0.41

Total

197,715

871

0.44

Liners Tramps/Bulkships

1975-76

14,622

1,095

7.49

154,543

253

0.16

2140 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Type ofvessel*
Tankers Total

Total all vessels
revenue ton nest

Australian registered vessels
Revenue Percentage tonnest of total

'000

'000

16,356

21

0.13

185,521

1,370

0.74

Liners TrampsjBulkships Tankers
Total

1976-77

14,463

1,172

8.10

163,988

2,018

1.23

16,955

195,406

3,190

1.63

1977-78

Liners

11,013

916

8.25

TrampsjBulkships

164,033

3,612

2.20

Tankers

18,543

Total

193,678

4,528

2.34

Liners TrampsjBulkships Tankers
Total

1978-79

13,314

1,310

9.84

164,531

3,819

2.32

18,092

75

0.41

195,937

5,203

2.66

Tankers Bulkships Other
Total

1979-80

18,330

629

3.43

180,232

5,754

3.19

21,147

1,416

6.70

219,709

7,799

3.55

Tankers Bulkships Other
Total

1980-81 16,918

246

1.45

171,527

6,500

3.79

23,448

1,460

6.23

211,893

8,206

3.87

Note: Figures have been rounded and discrepancies may occur between sums of the component items and totals. * From 1979-80, because of definitional problems, the type of vessel classification of 'liners, trampsjbulkships and tankers' was replaced by 'tankers, bulkships and other'. t Quantities are expressed in revenue tonnes, the basis of which freight is charged. Revenue tonnage is obtained by adding mass (tonnes weight) and volume (cubic metre) units.
Concord Repatriation Hospital: Admission of General Patients
(Question No. 5056)
Mr Maher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 14 September 1982:
( I) What restrictions are placed upon the admission of general patients to Concord Repatriation Hospital.
(2) Are general patients holding pensioner medical cards or health care cards given precedence over other general patients seeking admission.

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The primary purpose of Repatriation General Hospitals is to treat eligible Repatriation beneficiaries. Community (non-entitled) patients may only be admitted to a Repatriation General Hospital where spare capacity exists after the needs of entitled beneficiaries have been met and up to a maximum of 20 per cent of average daily beds occupied.
(2) No. Where practicable, precedence is given to nonentitled veterans, but priority for admission of non-entitled patients is based on medical need.
Vietnam Veterans: Exposure to Defoliants
(Question No. 5059)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 14 September 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to an article headed 'Veterans warned deal could be dangerous, published on page 5 of the Gold Coast Bulletin of 18 August 1982.
(2) Is it a fact, as alleged in the article, that a Vietnam veteran living in the Ipswich, Qld, area has been offered a 125 per cent TPI pension in return for his signing an agreement that he had not been exposed to defoliants in Vietnam.
(3) Have any other Vietnam veterans been asked to sign such an agreement; if so, how many have (a) been asked and (b) signed.
(4) On what basis, and by whom, was any agreement drawn up.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) No.
(3) No.
(4) No agreement has been drawn up.
Royal Military College, Duntroon
(Question No. 5060)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 September 1982:
(I) Have four students been seriously disadvantaged and have they suffered an injustice as a result of personal differences between two academics at the Royal Military College, Duntroon.
(2) Were four Economics lIA students at the 1981 annual examinations led to believe that they had passed the subject, but failed as a result of their marks being secretly adjusted.
(3) Is it a fact that as a result of this irregularity one student cannot qualify in the minimum time and has to complete an extra year at the taxpayers' expense.
(4) Is he able to say whether the four students have sought the assistance of the New South Wales Ombudsman in order to obtain justice, their protests having been dismissed by the College authorities.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) The Faculty of Military Studies, located at the Royal Military College, Duntroon, is governed by an Agreement between the University of New South Wales and the

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2141

Minister for Defence. An integral part of that Agreement is that the University accepts responsibility for all aspects of the academic work of the College. It follows, therefore, that I am not in a position to comment on the matters canvassed in the Question, nor would it be appropriate for me to seek to intervene in those matters.
However, I understand that four cadets have sought assistance from the New South Wales Ombudsman about some issues connected with their academic results.
Industrial Fellowships
(Question No. 5084)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
Did the Australian Science and Technology Council in its October 1980 report, 'Interaction Between Industry, Higher Education and Government Laboratories', recommend the implementation of a 3 year pilot program of industrial fellowships; if so, what action has the Government taken on that recommendation.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes, the Australian Science and Technology Council (ASTEC) did recommend in its report, 'Interaction Between Industry, Higher Education and Government Laboratories' (1980), that a pilot program of industrial fellowships be established.
In the climate of restraint on public expenditure, the Government decided in the 1981-82 Budget context not to implement this particular recommendation. The Government recognises the considerable benefits to be gained from increasing levels of interaction between industry and tertiary institutions, and is actively encouraging such interaction through a range of existing programs and activities.
Co-operative Research Grants
(Question No. 5086)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
Did the Australian Science and Technology Council, in its October 1980 report, 'Interaction Between Industry, Higher Education and Government Laboratories', recommend the establishment of a pilot program of co-operative research grants under the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act; if so, what action has the Government taken on that recommendation.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes, the Australian Science and Technology Council (ASTEC) did recommend in its report, 'Interaction Between Industry, Higher Education and Government Laboratories' (1980), that a pilot program of co-operative research grants be established under the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act.
However, ASTEC's recommendation was received too late to be considered by the Government in the course of preparing amendments to the IR&D Incentives Act which took effect on I July 1981. Moreover, as existing provisions of that Act allow for co-operative research to be undertaken through the contracting of research to approved institutions, the Government considered that it was more appropriate to encourage the use of this mechanism rather than to establish a separate pilot program at this time. Accordingly, in July 1981, I wrote to all vice-chancellors of universities and principals of colleges of advanced education to draw their attention to the

relevance of provisions of the IR& D Incentives Act to the research activities of tertiary institutions. I have asked my Department to assess the effectiveness of this mechanism.
Donations of Works of Art
(Question No. 5087)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
Does his Department maintain a record of donations of works of art and other cultural material made under the Taxation Incentives for the Arts Scheme; if so, for each donation, (a) who was the donor, (b) what was the value of the donation and (c) who were the valuers.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question on Notice No. 4224 (Hansard, page 681,18 August 1982).
Operation of Visual Display Units
(Question No. 4406)
Mr McMahon asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board Memorandum 81/418 entitled Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment
(b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties, and (ii) do operators spend on other duties, and
(c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete, and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Department and the statutory authorities within my jurisdiction, is as follows:
(a) Within my Department and the statutory authorities in my portfolio, all operators of visual display units and screen based equipment are aware of the need for breaks from operating such equipment. The steps taken vary with each employing body but in each case the operators are encouraged to vary their daily work programmes and spend some time on tasks away from the equipment. Circulars have been issued and, in some cases, the special requirements are covered in training courses.
(b) (i) There are no areas in which a pre-determined percentage is applied to time spent on operating duties. In every case there are other duties operators are expected to perform; (ii) Time spent on actual duties varies between each of the Authorities and the Department. The maximum time spent operating equipment in anyone case is between 70 per cent and 80 per cent but the average is generally less than this.
(c) (i) In the Department and most relevant Statutory Authorities no keystroke quota has been set. However, at Telecom, performance expectations in terms of key stroke rates depend on the experience or skill level of operators and are influenced by the very large range of message types used. The levels of performance expected range from 50,000 to

2142 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

65,000 keystrokes per day on average for a Data Processing Operator Grade 2 and from 40,000 to 55,000 keystrokes per day on average for a Data Processing Operator Grade I; (ii) Actual performance at Telecom achieves these expectations. At Australia Post the number of key strokes completed per working day would vary according to the type and complexity of the work involved. Between 40,000 and 90,000 keystrokes per day are achieved by staff entering data into computer based systems. An estimated 50,000 keystrokes per day are achieved by experienced word processing operators.
Performance statistics are not kept for the other Authorities.
Chemical Warfare Sprays: Testing
(Question No. 4710)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to allegations made by Mr Ray Jones, MLA, on page I of the newspaper Cairnsweek, of 13 June 1982, that a number of Queensland Railways workmen had been used as human guinea pigs to test the effects of chemical warfare sprays in far north Queensland during the I 960s, and further, that a number of those workmen are now either dead, or suffering cancer or other illnesses.
(2) Has he, his Department, or any organisation under his control made any investigation of any aspect of this matter, if so, what are the details of any investigations.
(3) Is he able to confirm that these railway workmen (a) took part in these tests and (b) have suffered, or are suffering, the conditions alleged by Mr Jones.
(4) Does the Commonwealth now accept any liability in this matter; if so, what is the extent of that liability; if not, why not.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable members's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The matter has not been investigated by me or by anyone under my control since such issues are outside the jurisdiction of my portfolio.
(3) No.
(4) In the absence of more detailed information it would be inappropriate for me to offer any comment on the question of Commonwealth liability.
Public Telephones: Conversion to Operate on 20c Rate
(Question No. 4721)
Mr Free asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) How many public telephones have been converted to operate on the new 20c rate for local calls.
(2) How many are still to be converted.
(3) What is the estimated cost of the conversion.
(4) When is it expected that conversion will be completed.
(5) How long will it be before the estimated cost of conversion is recovered through the increased charge.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows, based on

advice from the Australian Telecommunications Commission:
(I) About 42,600 coin telephones had been converted to 20c operation by 14 September 1982. Of this number, 16,200 were Redphones (local call leased instrument) and most of the remaining 26,400 units were Greenphones, which are used primarily as STD public telephones.
(2) Approximately 33,700 at 14 September 1982.
(3) $3.13m.
(4) The end of November 1982 (the conversion programme commenced on I July 1982).
(5) Approximately 3 months.
Television and Broadcasting Stations: Complaints
(Question No. 4742)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(1) What was the nature of, and against which television and broadcasting stations were, the 1I per cent of the 568 complaints received by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal during 1980-81 which were found to be justified.
(2) What action was taken against the television and broadcasting stations concerned.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal, is as follows:
(1) The Australian Broadcasting Tribunal has advised that the complaints in question related to isolated incidents mostly on metropolitan commercial and public stations and were not part of a pattern on one particular station.
(2) In all cases where the Tribunal considered that a prima facie breach of standards had occurred the Tribunal took steps to ensure that the station concerned had made appropriate arrangements to prevent recurrences. The matter was recorded for reconsideration by the Tribunal at the time the station licence was renewed.
Reasons for decisions published by the Tribunal in connection with each public inquiry into the renewal of licences include a reference to all breaches examined during the hearing.
Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 4800)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(1) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (i) Advance Australia; (ii) Customs Co-operation Council-Contribution; (iii) World Tourism Organisation-Membership.
(2) (i) $500,000; (ii) $78,069; (iii) $55,877.

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2143

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 4805)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) and (2) The following non-government organisations received grants or payments to the value specified in the 1981-82 financial year.

Organisation

Amount

Australian Crime Prevention Council Commonwealth Legal Advisory Service

Marriage Counselling Organisations-

Marriage Guidance Council of NSW

Marriage Guidance Council of Victoria

Marriage Guidance Council of Queensland

Marriage Guidance Council of South Australia

Marriage Guidance Council of Western

Australia

Family and Personal Counselling Service

Hobart

.......

Canberra Marriage Counselling Service

Marriage Guidance Council of the Northern

Territory . . . . . . .

Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Sydney

Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Victoria

Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Queensland

Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Adelaide

Catholic Marriage Guidance Council of West-

ern Australia

Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Hobart

Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Canberra

Anglican Marriage and Family Counselling

Centre Sydney

Anglican Marriage Guidance Council Mel-

bourne

.....

Citizens Welfare Service of Victoria . .

Family Life Movement of Australia Sydney

United Church Marriage and Family Coun-

selling Service Sydney

Adelaide Central Mission Marriage, Coun-

selling and Education Service

Cairnmillar Institute Victoria

$ 28,000
7,081
525,000 354,000 270,000 171,000
312,00
120,000 133,000
56,000 99,000 122,000 53,400 25,000
28,000 24,000 10,300
95,000
89,000 176,000 174,000
49,300
51,000 13,000

Total
Pre-marital Education Marriage Guidance Council of NSW Marriage Guidance Council of South Australia Marriage Education Institute Melbourne Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Sydney Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Brisbane Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Adelaide Catholic Marriage Guidance Council, Perth Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Hobart Catholic Family Welfare Bureau Canberra Family Life Movement of Australia Sydney Citizens Welfare Service of Victoria . . .

2,950,000
2,000 3,000 9,000 6,700 5,000 5,000 2,200 1,000 1,000 10,700
400

Organisation

Amount

Anglican Marriage Guidance Council Melbourne . . . . . . . . . .
Anglican Marriage and Family Counselling Centre Sydney
Anglican Marriage Preparation Course Brisbane

$ 2,000 1,000 1,000

Total
Legal Aid-to supplement voluntary and community legal aid schemes
New South Wales Macquarie Legal Centre Marrickville Legal Centre Redfern Legal Centre
Penrith Legal Centre Tenants Union of NSW Inner City Legal Service Victoria Fitzroy Legal Service Nunawading Legal Service
Tenants Advice Service Springvale Legal Service Doveton and District Legal Service Caulfield Legal Service North Frankston Legal Service West Heidelberg Legal Service North Melbourne Legal Service Western Suburbs Legal Service Western Region Community Legal Service St. Kilda Legal Service . . . . . Flemington Community Legal Service Collingwood Legal Service Legal Unit Action Resources Centre
Sunshine Legal Service Queensland
Caxton Street Legal Service Queensland Law Society Youth Advocacy Centre South Australia Parks Legal Service
Bowden-Brompton Legal Service Norwood Legal Service Law Society of South Australia

50,000
25,000 25,000 50,000
5,000 8,000 11,000
60,000 30,000 5,000 20,000 16,000 5,000 4,500 20,000 5,000 15,000 5,000 11,000 1,000
500 2,000 1,000
24,000 1,000 8,000
12,000 12,000 12,000 6,000

Total

400,000

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department ofCommunications
'. (Question No. 4814)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The non-Commonwealth organisations paid in 1981-82 are as follows:

2144 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Organisation

Amount

International Telecommunications Union

Asia-Pacific Telecommunity

Australian Caption Centre

Radio for Print Handicapped Grants-

Public Broadcasting Association of Australia

Australian Council for the Radio Print Hand-

icapped . . . . . . . . . . . .

Exclusive Radio Print Handicapped Stations-

2 RPHSydney

3 RPH Melbourne . . . . . .

4 RPH Brisbane

..... .

Print Handicapped radio for the A.C.T.

7 RPH Hobart . . . . . . . .

Foundation for Radio for Print Handicapped

Inc, Western Australia

Public Broadcasting Stations-

2 NCR-FM Lismore

3 CCC-FM Castlemaine

8 TOP-FM Darwin

2 MCE-FM Bathurst

4ZZZ-FM Brisbane

2 XX Canberra

2 AAA-FM Wagga Wagga

2 NUR-FM Newcastle

5 UV Adelaide

4 TTT-FM Townsville

2 ARM-FM Armidale

2 REM-FM Albury-Wodonga

4 DDD-FM Toowoomba

Radio Skid Row . . . . . .

Radio Eastern Sydney

Grants in Support of Public Broadcasting-

Public Broadcasting Association of Australia

Mallee Community and Educational Broad-

casters Murrayville, S.A.

2 VTR-FM Windsor, N.S.W.

Radio Portland, Vic.

Para Broadcasters, Salisbury, S.A.

3 CC-FM Castlemaine, Vic.

2 AAA-FM Wagga Wagga, N.S.W.

4 TT-FM Townsville, Qld.

3 RRR-FM Melbourne, Vic.

3 GCR-FM Gippsland, Vic.

Townsville FM Broadcasting, Qld.

Darling Downs Broadcasting Society, 4

DDB-FM, Qld.

8 TOP-FM Darwin, N.T.

2 XX Canberra, A.C.T.

$ 1,425,830
78,017 627,000
8,737
6,355
38,400 25,500 50,000 30,500 25,500
10,050
5,000 3,000 3,000
362 1,000 3,000 5,000 5,000 7,000 3,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 1,000 2,000
50,000
10,000 8,850 3,000 3,000 15,410 7,500 7,180 4,000 4,000 10,820
10,000 2,740 2,230

Commonwealth Meat Inspectors
(Question No. 5009)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
( I) Is there a shortage of Commonwealth meat inspectors; if so, is this shortage delaying the re-opening of Pridham's Abattoirs at Ballarat, Vic.
(2) What action is being taken to overcome this shortage to enable Pridham's to re-open and thus provide much needed employment in Ballarat.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The current drought has resulted in a significant increase in production at most establishments throughout

Australia, with a corresponding increase in demand for meat inspection staff.
Pridham (Ballarat) is part of the Protean Group and has not been operational since 26 March 1982. The company originally advised the Department of Primary Industry that it wished to re-open on 30 August 1982, however this date was later changed to 15 October 1982. Protean subsequently requested and the Department agreed, that the 7 inspection staff proposed for Pridham (Ballarat) be redeployed to staff additional operations at another Protean establishment at Geelong.
(2) The Department of Primary Industry has taken every action to ensure that the maximum number of inspectors are available to service the demands of industry. Since July an additional 76 inspectors have been recruited nationally, including 42 in Victoria. A number of inspectors have also been transferred from other States to Victoria and the Department has advertised to assess the market for temporary inspectors. Pridham (Ballarat) has been inoperative for several months and an inspection of the premises will have to be undertaken by the Department prior to recommencing operations. The Department has not been formally requested to undertake such an inspection, nor advised of any likely reopening date.
Australian National Railways Commission Housing at Port Augusta, South Australia
(Question No. 5042)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(I) What progress has been made by the Australian National Railways Commission in offering homes owned by the Commission at Port Augusta, S.A., and other locations to tenant occupiers to enable them to purchase those homes.
(2) What has been the result of the offers made.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Following the finalising of a number of administrative arrangements which had previously prevented the offering for sale of these houses, including obtaining approval by the State Registrar General, the Commission has recently offered to sell over two hundred homes in Port Augusta and Stirling North to the tenants in possession.
(2) The offers will remain open for twelve months. At this stage there have been insufficient responses to determine any result.
Industry Research Associations
(Question No. 5085)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
Did the Australian Science and Technology Council, in its October 1980 report, Interaction Between Industry, Higher Education and Government Laboratories, express the opinion that there was scope for the establishment of up to 5 new industry research associations; if so, which new research associations have been established since the publication of that report.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes, and the report said that the areas of operation of any new research associations would need to be chosen in consultation between government and industry.

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2145

In its response to the Report of the Committee of Inquiry into Technological Change in Australia, the Government announced that it would be increasing its support for new and existing associations. Since this announcement, the Radiata Pine Research Institute has been established and is now receiving government funds. The Government believes that the initiative for the establishment of new research associations should come from industry itself. My Department and CSIRO have been approached by a number of industry groups that have been considering establishing research associations which could be eligible for government support. Expressions of interests have come from several industry sectors including cement and concrete, hydrodynamics, corrosion treatment, and aspects of timber reseaN:h other than that connected with radiata pine.
Review of Commonwealth Functions: Recommendations Related to Department of
Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 5104)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
(I) What are the details of all recommendations made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions which related specifically to the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
(2) What are the details of the implementation ofthose recommendations to date.
(3) What is the designation, classification and location of each of the 5 staff positions which have been abolished in the Repatriation Artificial Limb and Appliance Centres.
(4) How many disability pensions were paid in each State or Territory, for veterans suffering serious service-related mental illness, in each of the last 10 financial years, and what was the cost of those pensions in 1982 prices.
(5) Is he able to say whether any estimate has been made, by State or Territory, of the cost to the State, or Territory, of

taking over those pensions; if so, what are those estimates, by State and Territory, and what are the periods for which those estimates were made.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) Level of staff for Defence Service Homes Scheme to be reduced;
(b) the number of artificial limbs and appliances contracted out for private manufacture to be increased; and
(c) maintenance deductions under section 49 of the Repatriation Act to be abolished and control of these pensions to be handed over the States.
(2) (a) Agreement was reached with the Public Service Board that the staff level of the Defence Service Homes Corporation would be reduced by 27. The reduction achieved by 30 June 1982 was 36;
(b) The number of commercially manufactured limbs increased by 876 or 76.4 % from 1980-8 I to 1981-82; and
(c) Section 49 of the Repatriation Act has been repealed and State Public Trustees or equivalent now have control over pensions paid to veterans suffering serious service-related mental illness.
(3) Woden Valley Repatriation Artificial Limb and Appliance Sub-Centre (Canberra):
I Foreman (Limb Making and Fitting) Grade I; I Senior Limb Maker and Fitter; I Limb Maker and Fitter; and I Clerical Assistant Grade 2.
New South Wal~s Repatriation Artificial Limb and Applicance Centre: I Limb Maker and Fitter.
(4) The number of disability pensions paid in each State or Territory, for veterans suffering serious service-related mental illness and whose pensions were retained by the Repatriation Commission under section 49 of the Repatriation Act, in each of the last 10 financial years is as follows:

Financial year

Qld N.S.W.*

Vic.

SAt

WA.

Tas.

1972-73:1: 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81 1981-82§

131

201

318

53

47

15

134

196

317

50

46

14

129

169

287

46

38

14

120

165

242

42

37

14

109

156

222

40

34

14

112

141

192

40

33

13

98

133

192

36

31

13

94

121

186

34

32

12

90

112

180

32

31

II

* The veterans who reside in the Australian Capital Territory are included in the figures for New South Wales.
t Veterans residing in the Northern Territory are included in the figures for South Australia. :I: A break-down by States of the total numbers for the financial year 1972-73 is unavailable.
§ The figures for the financial year 1981-82 have been estimated.

The cost of the above pensions in 1982 prices for the relevant financial years, based on the current Special (Totally and Permanently Incapacitated) Rates of $133.50 per week for the period I January 1982 to 12 May 1982, $142.05 per
week for the period 13 May 1982 to 10 November 1982, and $148.00 per week for the period II November 1982 to 31
December 1982, is set out hereunder:

Financial year
1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Number
779 765 757 683 620 575 531 503

Total
779 765 757 683 620 575 531 503 479 456
Cost
$m 5.7 5.6 5.5 5.0 4.5 4.2 3.9 3.7

2146 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Financial year

Number

Cost

1980-81 1981-82
Total

$m

479

3.5

456

3.3

44.9

This is the cost of pension only and does not include any administrative costs or overheads.
(5) It is not possible for the Department of Veterans' Affairs to estimate the cost to the State, or Territory, of taking over the trusteeship of disability pensions for veterans suffering from service-related mental illness as this is a State matter.
The Public Trustee (or equivalent) in-each State manages the welfare of persons suffering from mental illness. The veterans in whom the State Government has an interest are those who are the responsibility of the State because of the operation of the State law. In some, but not necessarily all such cases, the Public Trustee is trustee for any other income or assets. The pensions handed over to the Public Trustee are those which, by State law, would in the normal course of events (if there had been no section 49) have been under the trusteeship of the Public Trustee.
Australian National Anthem
(Question No. 5196)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
Will the Government prior to the Commonwealth Games, declare the tune 'Advance Australia Fair' to be Australia's national anthem.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Australia's National Anthem is 'God Save The Queen '. At a national poll held on 21 May 1977 the majority of voters chose 'Advance Australia Fair' as Australia's National Tune. Under the guidelines approved for the playing of the National Anthem and the National Tune, 'Advance Australia Fair' can be played on occasions such as the Commonwealth Games.
Commonwealth Works: Cost of Projects
(Question No. 4766)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What was the (a) description and (b) cost of each construction project carried out by the Commonwealth in each Federal Electoral Division in 1981-82.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I attach details of construction projects undertaken by the Department of Transport and Construction for all Civil departments including CSIRO, the Department of Defence Support and the Department of Defence.
1981/82 WORKS PROGRAM
Works carried out for Civil and Defence Departments by the Department of Transport and Construction in 1981/82, by Federal Electorate.

Electorate
New South Wales Banks Barton Bennelong Berowra Blaxland Bradfield Calare Chifley Cook Cowper Cunningham Dundas Eden-Monaro Farrer Grayndler Gwydir Hughes Hume Hunter Kingsford-Smith Lowe Lyne Macarthur Mackellar Macquarie Mitchell New England Newcastle North Sydney Parramatta Paterson Phillip Prospect Reid Richmond Riverina Robertson Shortland St George Sydney Warringah Wentworth Werriwa
Victoria Balaclava Ballarat Batman Bendigo Bruce Burke Casey Chisolm Corangamite Corio Deakin Diamond Flinders Gellibrand Gippsland Henty Higgins Holt Hotham Indi

Member

Page

Total value of
works ($M)

Mountford Bradfield Howard Edwards Keating Connolly MacKenzie Armitage Dobie Robinson West Ruddock Sainsbury Fife McLeay Hunt Johnson Lusher Brown, R.J. Bowen Maher Cowan Baume,M.E. Carlton Free Cadman Sinclair Jones, Hon. C. K. Spender Brown, J. J. O'Keefe Birney Klugman Uren Anthony Hicks Cohen Morris Morrison, Hon. W. L. McMahon MacKellar Coleman Kerin
Macphee Mildren Howe Bourchier Snedden Theophanous Falconer Harris Street Scholes Jarman Brown, Hon. N. A. Lynch Willis Nixon Child Shipton Duffy Kent Cameron, E. C.

0.521 nil
2 5.207 nil
3 6.164 4 1.884 5 2.265 6 4.764
nil nil nil nil nil 7 12.035 nil nil 8 16.460 nil nil 9 15.544 10 2.091 II 3.886 12 10.379 nil 13 13.670 15 14.579 16 0.560 17 0.248 18 16.003 nil 19 0.265 nil 20 1.549 21 1.922 nil 22 0.042 nil nil 23 0.535 24 2.909 26 2.461 27 22.602 nil
28 0.724 nil
29 7.625 30 14.899 31 11.777 32 14.007 24 0.176
nil nil 35 122.802 nil nil 36 1.072 37 27.456 39 0.688 nil nil nil nil 40 33.505

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2147

Electorate

Member

Isaacs Kooyong Lalor La Trobe McMillan Mallee Maribyrong Melbourne Melbourne Ports Murray Scullin Wan non Wills
Queensland Bowman Brisbane Capricornia Darling Downs Dawson Fadden Fisher Griffith Herbert Kennedy Leichhardt Lilley McPherson Maranoa Moreton Oxley
Petrie Ryan Wide Bay
South Australia Adelaide
Barker Bonython Boothby Grey Hawker Hindmarsh Kingston Port Adelaide Sturt Wakefield
Western Australia Canning Curtin Forrest Fremantle Kalgoorlie O'Connor Moore Perth Stirling Swan Tangey
Tasmania Bass Braddon Denison Franklin Wilmot

Charles Peacock Jones, B.O. Milton Cunningham Fisher Cass Innes Holding Lloyd Jenkins Fraser Hawke
Jull Cross Everingham McVeigh Braithwaite Cameron, D. M. Adermann Humphreys Dean Katter Thomson Darling White Cameron,I.M.D. Killen Hayden Hodges Moore Millar
Hurford Porter Blewett Hall Wallis Jacobi Scott Chapman Young Wilson Giles
Bungey Rocher Drummond Dawkins Campbell Tuckey Hyde McLean Viner Beazley Shack
Newman Groom Hodgman Good luck Burr

Total value of
works Page ($M)
41 0.036 42 0.288 43 7.723
nil 44 0.620
nil 45 8.244 47 3.596 48 46.973
nil 50 0.119
nil nil
nil 51 20.966 52 5.643 53 3.941
nil 54 0.730
nil 55 0.118 56 13.035 57 0.078 58 1.405 59 81.717 60 1\.100
nil 61 14.006 62 9.346 63 0.476 64 0.612
nil
65 1.097 66 0.527 67 23.927 69 2.751 70 21.895 71 2.755 72 24.684
nil 73 1.990 74 2.129 75 0.519
76 10.695 77 1.300 78 0.122 79 0.448 80 58.083
nil 82 7.020
nil nil 83 15.057 nil
nil 84 1.388 85 22.444 86 7.876 87 0.490

Total

value of

works

-El-ec-to-r-at-e -------M-e-m-be-r--------P-ag-e---(-$-M-)

Australian Capital Territory

Canberra

Kelly

88 5.345

Fraser

Fry

91 78.140

Northern Territory Northern Territory Tambling

93 72.242

1981-82 WORKS PROGRAM

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Banks (N.S.W.) Administrative Services-
East Hills Hostel-Replacement of water tanks Defence (Army)-
Padstow-Constuct 6 married quarters

$
105.918 415,000

Total

520,918

Bennelong (N.S.W.)

Health-

North Ryde-Construction of prototype me-

dium anechoic chamber

261,685

Transport and Construction-

North Ryde-Experimental Building Station-

Reconstruction of dynamic weather test

60,124

CSIRO-

North Ryde-Division of Food Research--

Erection of covered area over courtyard for

fruit examination

35,000

Epping-Division of Radiophysics-Erection

of building to house aerial range test equip-

ment

154,000

North Ryde-Minerals Research

Laboratories-Reconstruction of entrance

roads

222,405

North Ryde-Minerals Research

LaboratoriesErection of general purpose

energy laboratory

1,067,638

North Ryde-Minerals Research

Laboratories---'Upgrading of fume extraction

facilities Building 12

367,089

North Ryde-Minerals Research

Laboratories-Upgrading of water supply

services

607,047

North Ryde-Minerals Research

Laboratories-Erection of general purpose

laboratory No.2

1,636,082

North Ryde-Molecular and Cellular Biology

Unit-Alterations to laboratories and

associated services in building 12

795,519

Total

5,206,589

Blaxland (N.S.W.)

Aviation-

Bankstown Airport-Extension of Avro Street 45,000

Bankstown Airport-Upgrading of pavement

drainage

150,000

Bankstown Airport-Construction of parallel

taxiway to runway II R/29L

750,000

Bankstown Airport-Construction of runway

IIR/29L

1,850,000

2148 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

$

Defence Support-

Bankstown-Hawker de Havilland-

Construction of concrete handstanding for

waste storage . . . . . . . . . . 45,000

Bankstown-Hawker de Havilland-Provision

of transformers, buildings 20 and 50 . . . 110,000

Bankstown-Hawker de Havilland-Provision

of electrical sub-station Bankstown-Hawker de

Havilland~E;ec~io~

80,000

of buildings and services for vertical heat

treatment plant . . . . . . . . . 190,000

Bankstown-Hawker de Havilland-

Upgrading of fire protection measures . . 208,370

Bankstown-Hawker de Havilland-Provision

of pollution control measures . . . . . 615,151

Bankstown-Hawker de Havilland-

Upgrading of lighting and electrical power di-

stribution . . . . . . . . . . . 152,400

Bankstown-Hawker de Havilland-

Upgrading of security measures (stages I and

2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301,590

Defence (Army)-

MoorebankFoodstuffs and P.O.L. complex 1,350,000

Moorebank-Upgrade Explosive Storehouse

240,000

Telecom-

Bankstown-Setting up Manual Assistance

Centre

76,000

Total

6,163,511

Bradfield (N.S.W.)

Science and Technology-

Pymble-Erection of analytical laboratories

299,688

Veterans Affairs~-

Turramurra-Lady Davidson Hospital-

Construction of pump lines and sewer mains 314,744

Turramurra-Lady Davidson Hospital-

Erection of new Ward A . . . . . . 1,048,730

Turramurra-Lady Davidson Hospital-

Provision of amenities for kitchen staff . . 66,989

CSIRO-

Warrawee-Division of Entomology-

Conversion of existing rooms to provide in-

sect quarantine facilities

153,631

Total

1,883,782

Calare (N.S.W.)
Administrative ServicesOrange-Erection of Commonwealth offices 1,502,334
Defence SupportLithgo",:,-Small Arms Factory-Upgrading of secunty measures (Stage 2) . . . . . 100,000 Lithgow-Small Arms Factory-installation of fire sprinkler system, building 71 . . . . 280,000 Lithgow-Small Arms Factory-Provision of fire isolation to stairs, building 62 . . . . 52,000 Lithgow-Small Arms Factory-Provision of fire protection measures to tool room building 65 . . . . . . . . . . .' . . 250,220 Lithgow-Small Arms Factory-Provision of fire isolation stairs buildings 52 and 71 . . 80,000

Total

2,264,554

$ Chifley (NSW)

CSiRO-

Wallg~ove-Erection of animal quarantine

station . . . . . . . . . . . . 4,587,861

Wallgrove-Animal Quarantine Station-

Erection of bee quarantine facility

175,970

Total

4,763,831

Farrer (NSW)

Administrative Services-

Wagga Wagga-Erection of Commonwealth

Offices

1,925,064

Aviation-

Albury Airport-Erection of control tower and

briefing office . . . . . .

450,000

Defence Support-

Mulwala-Explosives Factory-Construction

of fume cupboards . . . . . . . . 60,000

Mulwala-Explosives Factory-Erection of

shaker sieve building . . . . . . . . 250,000

Mulwala-Explosives Factory-Erection of ni-

troglycerine and paste preparation plant . 1,350,000

Mulwala-Explosives Factory-provision of

limil treatment to effluent system . . . . 1,000,000

Defence (Air Force)-

Wagga Wagga-RAAF Base-Urgent sleeping

and training accommodation . . . . . 7,000,000

Total

- 12,035,064

Hughes (NSW)

Defence (Army)-

Holsworthy-161 Reconnaissance Squadron-

Upgrade airfield security . . . . . . 50,000

Holsworthy/Liverpool-95 houses

5,000,000

Holsworthy-Stage 2 Development

- 11,267,627

Holsworthy-2 Target System

42,000

Moorebank-Battery Store

100,000

Total

- 16,459,627

Kingsford-Smith (NSW)

Aviation-

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-Provision

of additional anti-panic lighting in inter-

national terminal building (Stage I) . "

55,000

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-Provision

of additional anti-panic lighting in Interna-

tional Terminal Building (Stage 2)

120,000

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-

Con~truction of siteworks, link taxiways and

services . . . . . . . . . . . . 10,900,000

Sydney.(Kingsford-Smith) Airport-

Alteration to passenger process area in inter-

national Terminal Building . . . . . . 250,000

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-

Construction of link taxiways . . . . . 900,000

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-

Connection of boilers . . . . . . . 50,000

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-Provision

of33kw transformer . . . . . . . . 266,263

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport - Extension

of domestic apron . . . . . . . . . 1,709,622

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2149

Total

estimated

-D-ep-a-rtm-e-n-t a-n-d-pr-oj-ec-t------------------c-os-t

$

Sydney (Kingsford-Smi\h). Airport-Provision

of engineering services to the northern inter-

national freight apron

450,000

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-

Relocation of aerobridge and erection of

holding room

. . . . . . . . . 648,900

Sydney (Kingsford"Smith) Airport-

Upgrading of fire protection system, Inter-

national Terminal Building . . . . . . 109,784

Industry and Commerce-

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-

Reconstruction of facilities for Customs de-

tector dogs

84,000

Total

. 15,543,569

Lowe (NSW)
Veterans' AffairsConcord-Repatriation General HospitalErection of eye clinic . . . . . . . Concord-Repatriation General HospitalUpgrading of power supply system ConcordRepatriation General HospitalUpgrading of fire protection . . . . . Concord-Repatriation General HospitalReconstruction of admission section Concord-Repatriation General HospitalAlterations to Ward34, Psychiatric Unit Concord-Repatriation General HospitalUpgrading of air-conditioning in nuclear medicine and pathology departments Concord-Repatriation General HospitalProvision of ash extraction system for boiler house

150,000 832,634 444,761 325,866 186,865
53,000
97,540

Total

2,090,666

ELECTORATE: Lyne (NSW)
Defence (Air Force)Williamtown-RAAF BASE-Improvement to apron floodlighting Williamtown-Field Training Flight Williamtown-RAAF Base-Upgrade CEPH Williamtown-RAAF Base-Security Control Centre . . . . . . . . . . . . Williamtown-RAAF Base-EDP Com Centre

120,000 1,400,000
816,843
640,000
908,831

Total

3,885,674

ELECTORATE: Macarthur (NSW)

Defence (Navy)-

HMAS Albatross-RAN Air Station-

Facilities for precision approach radar

155,000

HMAS Albatross-RAN Air Station-Replace

runway 08/26 threshold lighting

50,000

HMAS Albatross--RAN Air Station-

Building monitoring system (Stage 2)

270,000

HMAS Albatross-RAN Air Station-Install

radar . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,726,207

HMAS Albatross-RAN Air Station-Water

riticulation

. . . . . 940,627

HMAS Albatross-RAN Air Station-Security

measures

185,632

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

$

HMAS Albatross-RAN Air Station-

Corrosion control facility

458,474

HMAS Albatross-RAN Air Station-- New

ordnance workshop

. . . . . 810,000

HMAS Albatross-RAN Air Station--Link

taxiways 4 and 21

375,268

HMAS Albatross-New Hangar

5.407,302

Total

. 10,378,510

ELECTORATE: Macquarie (NSW)

Aviation-

Penrith-Receiver Station-Connection to

main water supply

75,000

Defence Support-

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory--

Erection of training facility

35,000

St Mary Munitions Filling Factory-Erection

of office accommodation for Quality Evalu-

ation Laboratories

600,000

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory-

Construction of effluent treatment facilities,

buildings B3 and 57

70,000

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory--

Construction of concrete traverses

180,000

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory-

Erection of explosives removal facility

500,000

St Marys--Munitions Filling Factory--

Provision of air-conditioning units in labora-

tories A3 and C22

. . . . . 570,000

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory-

Construction of concrete hardstandings,

Kingswood magazine area

300,000

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory-

Provision of air-conditioning, buildings 562,

506 and 624

. . . . . . . . . 450,000

St Marys-GWESF-Modelling range boom

140,000

St Marys-GWESF-Construction of a storage

and transit building . . . . . . .

480,000

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory-

Upgrading of security measures

321,662

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory-

Provision of new burning ground

79,083

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory-

Installation of water tanks and booster

pumps . . . . .

160,000

St Marys-Munitions Filling Factory--

Replacement of Building No. F45

253,393

Defence (Army)-

Kingswood-RAN Armament Depot--

Intermediate maintenance facility

300,000

Kingswood-Torpedo/Missile Facility

7,124,702

Kingswood-Nonconductive flooring work-

shop . . . . . . . . . . . .

82,020

Kingswood-Isolation/non explosives store

551,455

Kingswood-133 Signal Squadron-Provision

of fixed fire protection

100,000

Defence (Air Force)-

Kingswood-8 Married quarters

480,000

Kingswood-Construct 4 married quarters

192,858

Kingswood-Security systems

374,343

KingswoodNew lecture room

250,000

Total

.13,669,516

2150 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Total

estimated

Department and project

cost

~------~~---------------------

$

Mitchell (N.S.W.)

Defence (Navy)-HMAS Nirimba-Provision of change rooms,
classrooms and sleeping accommodation

595,000

HMAS Nirimba--Junior sailors accomm-

odation

1,239,144

HMAS Nirimba-Civilian amenities building

287,029

Defence (Air Force)--

Richmond--RAAF Base-Provision of a new

in-flight kitchen

.....

425,000

Richmond--RAAF Base--Pollution control

200,000

Richmond-RAAF Base-Relocation NDB &

ATC

495,000

Richmond-RAAF Base-Flight simulator

630,000

Richmond -- RAAF Base-33 Flight HQ buil-

ding

268.940

Richmond-RAAF Base-New base services

centre

.....

535,000

Richmond-RAAF Base--Anti-corrosion

facility

9,904,000

Total

. 14,579,113

New England (N.S.W.)
HealthTamworthExtension of hearing centre
CSIROArmidaleDivision of Animal ProductionUpgrading of site services and erection of library

110,000 450,000

Total

560,000

Newcastle (N.s.W.)
Administrative ServicesNewcastle ----Common wea Ith CentreUpgrading of fire protection
Newcastle-Commonwealth CentreProvision of emergency warning and intercommunication system . . . . .
HealthCarrington-Construction of quarantine garbage disposal unit
Total

40,000 50,000 157,668 247,668

North Sydney (N.S.W.)

Health-

Chatswood-Erection of National Acoustic

Laboratories and Ultrasonic Institute

. 15,802.957

Defence (Army)Willoughby--Construct 3 married quarters

200,000

Total

. 16,002,957

Paterson (N.S.W.) Defence (Army)-
Singleton-5 married quarters
Total

265,000 265,000

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Prospect (N.S.W.)
CSIROProspect-Division of Animal ProductionUpgrading of air conditioning in small animal colony, building 14 . . . . . . . . Prospect-Division of Animal ProductionUpgrading of electricity supply Prospect-Division of Animal ProductionErection of animal genetics research laboratories and offices

$
150,000 193,809 1,205,390

Total

1,549,199

Reid (N.s.W.)

Home Affairs and Environment-

Villawood--Modifications to fumigation

chamber and construction of gas bottle stores

Villa wood-Archives Repository-

Construction of microfil storage vault

Defence Support-

Lidcombe-Government Aircraft Plant-

Refurbishment of test cells

.....

Defence (Air Force)-

Regents Park-2 Stores Depot-Additional

storage for hazardous substances

Villawood-2 Stores Depot-Equipment test f-

acility

52,000 164,970
550,000
400,000 755,000

Total

1,921,970

Riverina (N.S.W.)
AviationBroken Hill Airport-relocation of access road

42,134

Total

42,134

St George (N.S.W.)
HealthHurstville-Erection of Hearing Centre

535,437

Total

535,437

Sydney (N.S.W.)

Administrative Services-

Sydney-Grace Building-Alterations for in-

stallation of computer facilities for the De-

partment of Veterans' Affairs . . . . .

Sydney-Grace Building-Modernisation to

sprinklers system . . . . . . . . .

Sydney-Commonwealth Centre-Alterations

to partitioning and associated works, 17th

Floor

. . . . . . ..

Sydney-Commonwealth CentreUpgrading

of fire protection

Sydney-Grace Building-Upgrading of fire

protection

Sydney-Grace Building-Alterations to par-

titioning and associated works 10th and II th

Floors

........

Sydney-Wembley Chambers-Upgrading of

fire protection

......"

Sydney-Commonwealth Centre-Alterations

for installation of new computer facilities

320,000 50,000
158,667 209,737 381,163
712,830 52,935 72,633

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2151

Total

estimated

-D-e-pa-r-tm-e-n-t-a-nd--pr-o-je-c-t ----------------------co-s-t

$

Sydney-Grace Building-Alterations to par-

titioning and associated works 5th Floor

169,776

Sydney-Grace Building-Alterations for in-

stallation of computer facilities

226,944

Health-

Sydney-Commonwealth Institute of Health-

Upgrading of fire protection measures

47,000

Sydney-Commonwealth Institute of Health-

Alterations to partitioning and upgradng of

laboratories, stage 2

296,584

CSIRO-

Glebe-Division of Animal Health-

Construction of fire isolation measures in lab-

oratory buildings

70,000

Defence (Navy)-

Sydney-Hydro Office-Modifications for the

auto chart

70,000

Cockatoo Island-Replace cyclone exhaust

joiner shop

71,000

Total

2,909,269

Warringah (N_S.W.)
Defence (Navy)Chowder Bay-Filtration arrangements Chowder Bay-Replace wharf
Defence (Army)Mosman-Construct 20 married quarters

150,000 1,330,966
980.000

Total

2,460,966

Wentworth (N.S.W.)

Defence (Navy)-

Garden Island DockyardModernisation

(Stage 2, Phase A)

. . . . 22,000,000

Garden Island Dockyard-Building Monitoring

Service . . . . . . . . . .

120,000

HMAS Watson-Replace domestic boilers

180,000

Defence (Army)-

Watsons Bay-Construct 2 married quarters

162,000

Dovers Heights-Construct 2 married quarters 140,000

Total

. 22,602,000

BaIaciava (Vic.)
CSIROHighett--Division of Mechanical EngineeringErection of research support Building

724,227

Total

724,227

Batman (Vic.)
HealthYallambie-Installation of linear accelerator
Veterans' AffairsHeidelberg-Repatriation General HospitalModernisation of ward 2 and alterations to ward 4 accommodate I.C and renal unit Heidelberg-Repatriation General HospitalReplacement of boiler Heidelberg-Repatriation General HospitalUpgrading of fire protection MacleodRepatriation Hospital-Alterations to ward 2 . . . . . . . . . . .

220,000
1,346,415 915,525 301,705 41,582

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Defence (Army)WatsoniaWorking, living and area facilities

$ 4,800,000

Total

7,625,227

Bendigo (Vic.)

CSIRO-

Seymour-Division of Animal Health--

Erection of one 3-bedroom house

55,000

Defence Support-

Bendigo-Ordnance Factory-Erection of new

electroplating building ' " _ _

480,000

Bendigo-Ordnance Factory-Replacement of

transporter crane tracks . . . . . . _ 145,000

Bendigo-Ordnance Factory-Modifications

to air conditioning system, Meteorology Sec-

tion . . . . _

70,000

Defence (Army)-

Puckapunyal-Heating of barracks

290.000

Puckapunyal-Airconditioning training

kitchen '" _ . . . .

1,600,000

Puckapunyal-Works for Armoured Centre . 12,000,000

Puckapunyal-Refuelling facilities

119.298

Puckapunyal-Water reticulation

139,800

Total

. 14,899,098

Bruce (Vic.)

CSIRO-

Clayton-Division of Earth Resources-

Installation of four fume cupboards

45,000

Clayton-Division of Chemical Technology-

Erection of laboratory complex __ . . 11,447,880

Clayton-Division of Materials Science-

Extension of David Revett Labora-

tory /Library

284,297

Total

.11,777,177

Burke (Vic.)

Administrative Services-

Melbourne AirportErection of office block

662,126

Aviation-

Melbourne Airport-Erection of maintenance

and administration building (Stage I)

413,285

Melbourne Airport-Extension of domestic

terminal building and apron

1,153,736

Melbourne Airport-Provision of anti-panic

lighting and exit signs in terminal building

95,000

Melbourne Airport-Erection of new area ap-

proach control centre and equipment room 1,000,000

Melbourne Airport-Provision of additional

water storage . . . . . . _ . . . 250,000

Melbourne Airport-Extension of domestic

terminal building and apron _ . . . . 5,300,000

Melbourne Airport-Construction of taxiway

and provision of engineering services to heavy

freight and executive jet aircraft area

2,000,000

Melbourne Airport-Extension of Inter-

national Departure Hall (Stage I)

525,000

Melbourne Airport-Construction of covered

walkway to remote aircraft parking positions 450,000

Health-

Melbourne Airport--Erection of combined

quarantine facilities building

810,000

2152 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Total

estimated

-D-ep-a-rtm-e-n-t a-n-d -pr-oj-ec-t------------------c-os-t

$

Industry and Commerce-

Melbourne Airport--Erection of kennel com-

plex for customs detector dogs . . . . , 382,399

Defence Support-

Monegeeta-EDEVehicle concrete test slope 90,000

Defence (Army)-

Broadmeadows-Melbourne Transport Unit-

Construct working facilities

875,000

Total

. 14,006,546

Casey (Vic.)
Administrative ServicesNunawading-Eastbridge Migrant CentreErection of recreation building
Defence (Army)Healesville-School of Army HealthInstallation of thermal alarm system, in building No. I

126,480 50,000

Total

176,480

Corio (Vic.)

CSIRO-

Belmont-Division of Textile industry-

Erection of textile machinery development

building

. . . . . . . . . 620,000

Geelong-Erection of Australian National Ani-

mal Health Laboratory

. . . . . 117,698,000

Defence Support-

Avalon-Government Aircraft Factories-

Erection of toilet block, building I

60,000

Avalon-Government Aircraft Factories-

Provision of avionic and associated equip-

ment test facility

. . . . . . 1,900,000

Avalon-Government Aircraft factories-

Construction of aircraft fuelling facilities

324,900

Defence (Army)-

Queensclitf-ArmyStatfCollege (Stage I)

2,200,000

Total

. 122,802,000

Flinders (Vic.)

Defence (Navy)--

HMAS, Cerberus-Site investigation for new

wharf . .. . . . . .

HMAS, Cerberus-Temporary berthing

facilities

.....

HMAS, Cerberus-Physical Education Centre

50,000
96,800 924,834

Total

1,071,634

GelIibrand (Vic.)
Administrative ServicesSunshineErection of Commonwealth Offices
Defence SupportFootscray-Ammunition Factory-Upgrading of security measures (Stage 2)
Footscray-Ammunition FactoryConstruction of additional parking facilities
Footscray-Ammunition FactoryInstallation of evaporative cooling units in small arms ammunition section

943,358 60,000 125,000
480,000

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

$

Footscray-Ammunition Factory-Alteration

of buildings and services for installation of

computer-aided design and manufacturing

facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . 80,000

Footscray-Ammunition Factory-

Modifications to main factory entrace

42,000

Footscray-Ammunition Factory-

Modifications to HI reticulation system

49,500

Footscray-Ammunition Factory-Provision

of evaporative cooling system to MCA sec-

tion . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206,118

Footscray-Ammunition Factory-Upgrading

of fire protection measures (Stage I)

167,697

Footscray-Ammunition Factory-Upgrading

of security measures

. . . . . . II 1,482

Defence (Navy)-

Williamstown Naval Dockyard-Upgrade

monitoring system

...."

65,000

Williamstown Naval Dockyard-

Modernisation (Stage 2) ......10,457,907

Williamstown Naval Dockyard-

Administration Building . . . . . . 4,378,501

Williamstown Naval Dockyard-Siteworks

2,450,270

Williamstown Naval Dockyard-Upgrade

radio workshop . . . . . . . . . 104,663

Williamstown Naval Dockyard-Tunnel exten-

sion and boiler house . . . . . ,

7,314,181

Defence (Air Force)-

Tottenham-I Stores Depot-Refurbish Air-

mens sleeping quarters

420,000

Total

- 27,455,677

Gippsland (Vic.)

Science and Technology-

East Sale-Replacement of balloon filling

facility . . . . . .

Defence (Air Force)-

East Sale--RAAF Base-Airfield works for

ATCSR . . . . . .

East Sale-RAAF Base-Aircraft servicing

support annex

..... .

East Sale-RAAF Base-Upgrade dutson

range

........

East Sale-RAAF Base-Control tower

65,000
100,000 300,000 100,000 122,822

Total

687,822

Indi (Vic.)

Defence (Army)-

Bandiana-Construction of General Engineer-

ing and Ancillary Trades Workshop

1,250,000

Bandiana-Headquarters Building

778,772

Bonegilla-Electrical works

- 30,391,078

Bonegilla-Electrical reticulation

- 1,084,906

Total

- 33,504,756

Isaacs (Vic.)
CSIROAspendale-Division of Atmospheric Physics-Connection to sewerage system

36,000

Total

36,000

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2153

Total estimated
-D-ep-a-rtm-e-n-t a-n-d-pr-o-jec-t------------------c-os-t $ Kooyong (Vic.)

Employment and Industrial Relations~ Camberwell~ Extension of OCES
Defence (Air Force)~ Frognall~MQ for AOC Support Command

188,000 100,000

Total

288,000

Lalor (Vic.)

Defence Support~

Deer Park~Albion Explosives Factory~

Upgrading of power supply

120,000

Deer Park~Albion Explosives Factory~

Provision of air conditioning, acid section

30,000

Deer Park~Albion Explosives Factory~

Upgrading of security (Stage 2)

100,000

Deer Park~Albion Explosives Factory~

Conversion of oil fired equipment to natural

gas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250,601

Deer Park~Albion Explosives Factory~

Modifications to RDX boiler house

185,000

Deer Park~Albion Explosives Factory~

Upgrading of security measures

41,186

Defence (Air Force)~

Laverton~RAAF Base~Connection of on-

base married quarters to main gas .

70,000

Laverton~RAAF Base~Urgent sleeping

accommodation . . . . . . . . . 2,350,000

Laverton~RAAF Base~New medical facil-

ities . . . . . . . . .

710,160

Point Cook~RAAF Base~Construction of

Mess Centre . . . . . .

1,083,919

Point Cook~RAAF Base~Accommodation

694,557

Point Cook~RAAF Base~NCO sleeping

quarters . . . . . . . . . . . . 289,389

Point Cook ~ RAAF Base~ Water storage tank 278,200

Point Cook~RAAF Base~New PABX buil-

ding . . . . . . . . .

120,000

Point Cook~RAAF Base~Urgent sleeping

accomodation

1,400,000

Total

7,723,012

McMillan (Vic.)
Defence (Army)~ Newborough~Construct reserve training centre

620,000

Total

620,000

Maribyrnong (Vic.)

Aviation~
Essendon Airport~Replacement of air conditioning unit in control tower
Essendon Airport~Conversion of building 44 to workshop and store . . . . . . .
Essendon Airport~Provision of heating in Hangar 2 . . . . . . . . . .
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs~ Maribyrnong~ Erection of detention centre
CSIRO~
Maribyrnong~Division of Animal Health~ Provision of prototype facility for ANAHL sewerage sterilisation . . . .

35,000 300,000 212,099 1,352,865
58,000

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Maribyrnong~Division of Animal Health~ Upgrading of steam generators

$ 78,000

Defence Support~

Maribyrnong~Minerals Research Laboratory~Airconditioning for computer, building 229 . . . . .

45,000

Maribyrnong~Minerals Research Laboratory~Physics Division Building . . 2,300,000

Maribyrnong~Ordnance Factory~Upgrading

of lighting in woodshop

..."

74,000

Maribyrnong~ Explosives Factory--

Alterations and additions for provision of

rocket motorfacilities

. . . . . 1,500,000

Maribyrnong~Ordnance Factory~

Alterations to building 76 for spray painting

facilities . . . . . . . . . . .

210,000

Maribyrnong~Ordnance Factory~

Installation of new main switchboard,

Administration building

.....

30,000

Defence Support~

Maribyrnong~Ordnance Factory~

Rehabilitation of sub-station No.3

65,000

Maribyrnong~Ordnance Factory~

Construction of facilities for 155mm amm-

unition . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,150,000

Maribyrnong~Explosives Factory~

Upgrading security measures

113,515

Maribyrnong~Ordnance Factory~

Alterations to building No. 28 for confer-

ence/training facilities . . . . . . . 215,700

Maribyrnong~Ordnance Factory~ Upgrading

of workshop heating (Stage I)

310,612

Maribyrnong~Minerals Research Laboratory~Alterations to building 436

193,798

Total

8.243,589

Melbourne (Vic.)

Administrative Services~
Melbourne~Commonwealth Centre~
Alterations for installation of additional computer facilities for the Department of Social Security . . . . . . . .
Melbourne~Commonwealth Centre-- Alterations to partitioning and associated works, 6th and 7th floors
Melbourne~ Treasury Place~Provision of additional ministerial and cabinet accommodation . . . . . . . . . . . .
Melbourne~ Treasury Place~Upgrading of toilets and air handling plant

66,623 92,894 958,392 283,836

Attorney-Generals~
Melbourne~45l Little Bourke Street~ Refurbishing of Conciliation and Arbitration Commission Building
Employment and Industrial Relations~ Fitzroy~Extension of OCES

1,871,664 215,055

CSIRO~
East Melbourne~Division of Scientific Services~ Alterations to building I
Defence (Central)~ Melbourne~350 St Kilda RoadModifications on 5th floor

58,000 50,000

2154 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

TelecomMelbourneCollins Tower-- Fitting out

$ 1,500,000

Total

3,596,464

Melbourne Ports (Vic.)

Transport and Construction-

Port Melbourne-Central Investigation and

Research Laboratory-Extension of elec-

trical/fire protection laboratory

650,000

Port Melbourne-Conversion of administrative

block to Regional Materials Laboratory

108,437

Port MelbourneErection of regional labora-

tory (stage 2)

. . . . , 62,872

CSIRO-

Port Melbourne-Division of Atmospheric

Physics-- Erection of Analytical Services La-

boratory

.....

375,000

Defence Support-

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-Extension to drawing store

100,000

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-Installation of thermal insulation

and temperature control equipment in cafe-

teria

. . . . . . . . . . 240,000

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-- Extension of effluent disposal sys-

tem to plating shop

. . . . . , 125,000

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-Alterations to apprentice training

facility

. . . . . . . . , 300,000

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories--Improvement to canopy shop

600,000

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-Construction of car park (stage

2)

..........

345,000

Fishermens Bend--Government Aircraft

Factories-- Renovations to building 43

1,800,000

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

FactoriesProvision of project planning

facility . . . . .

220,000

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-Upgrading of fire sprinkler sys-

tem

. . . . . . . . . . 250,000

Fishermens Bend-Commonwealth Aircraft

CorporationProvision of engine test cell 1,900,000

Fishermens Bend--Aeronautical Research

Laboratory-Construction of a computer

building . . . . . .

950,000

Fishermens Bend-Commonwealth Aircraft

Corporation--Provision of thermal insu-

lation to Bellman hangars 1,2 and 3

40,969

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-Erection of new carpentry shop 472,030

Fishermens Bend--Government Aircraft

FactoriesProvision of replacement boiler

and associated works . . . . . . . , 660,000

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

FactoriesReplacement of steam reticu-

lation system . . . . . . . . . . 135,000

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-Construction of structural bond-

ing facility

. . . . . . 16,000,078

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft
FactoriesUpgrading of buildings 2 and 36 i, 127,054

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

$

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-Upgrading of corrosion inhibiting

primer spray booth

. . . . . . 54,515

Fishermens Bend-Government Aircraft

Factories-Upgrading of security measures

. 92,960

Defence (Central)-

St. Kilda Road-Airconditioning to offices

103,000

St. Kilda Road-Alterations to partitioning

2,746,530

Victoria Barracks-Site preparation

- 16,634,380

Spencer Street-Outfitting of offices

880,000

Total

- 46,972,825

Scullin (Vic.)
Veterans' AffairsBundoora-Repatriation Hospital-Extension of occupational therapy building

118,721

Total

118,721

Brisbane (Qld)

CSIRO-

Cannon Hill-Division of Food Research-

Provision of stand-by generating set

168,000

Cannon Hill-Division of Food Research-

Erection of experimental animals slaughter

facility

468,259

Defence (Army)-

Stafford-Married Quarter-24 Ringrose

Street

44,000

Enoggera-District Support Unit-Extend

Fire stations

97,000

Enoggera-Stage 2A

7,152,541

Enoggera-Stage 2B

7,188,875

Enogerra-Stage 2C

5,483,000

Enoggera-DSU Indoor Target Range

113,677

Enoggera-33 Dental Section--Extensions

150,767

Bulimba-I Base Workshop Battalion-

Construction of vehicle wash and transport

office

100,000

Total

- 20,966,119

Capricornia (Qld)

Aviation-

Rockhampton Airport-Erection of new trans-

mitter building . . . . . . . . . . 58,000

Double Island Point-Erection of power house 111,835

CSIRO-

Rockhampton-Division of Animal

Production-Erection of beef cattle labor-

atory

5,472,856

Total

5,642,691

Darling Downs (Qld)

Defence (Army)-

Cabarlah-7 Signals Regiment-Provision of

vault

120,000

CabarlahFacilities for 7 Signals Regiment 1,945,623

Dawes--QC training unit depot

440,000

Oakey-Workshop facility

1,306,465

Oakey-Connection to natural gas

49,500

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2155

Department and project

Total
estimated cost

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Defence (Air Force)Toowoomba7 Stores Depot-Water Supply
Total

$ 79,682 3,941,270

Fadden (Qld)
AviationArcherfield Aerodrome-Extension of taxiway and provision of services to north hangar area Archerfield Aerodrome-Construction of concrete runway end pads
Defence (Army)- Canungra-Increased weir capacity Canungra-Improve entrance Acacia Ridge-Upgrade facility
CSIROIndooroopilly-Long Pocket LaboratoriesUpgrading of roof area, building I
Total

95,000 140,000 300,000 45,000 54,838
95,000 729,838

Leichhardt (Qld) Aboriginal Affairs---
Thursday Island-Erection of two 3-bedroom
houses
Administrative Services-Cairns-Upgrading of accommodation, Abbott
Street . . . . .
AviationCairns AirportImprovements to levee system
Cairns Airport-Erection of control tower and powerhouse . .
Cairns Airport-Construction of access road, carpark engineering services and drainage in terminal building area
Primary IndustryKarumba-Erection of house and office accommodation
Transport and ConstructionDuyfken Point-Erection of light tower and cylinder store
Piper Island-Erection of light tower

$
110,458 40,100 100,000 500,000 160,861 67,333 260,000 166,000

Griffith (Qld)
Administrative ServicesBrisbane-Taxation Building-Provision of smoke exhaust system Brisbane-Commonwealth CentreParliamentary accommodation
Total

70,057 48,000 118,057

Herbert (Qld)

AviationTownsville Airport-Construction of siteworks

and engineering services for proposed TAA

cabin services and air cargo facility

85,000

Townsville Airport-Upgrading of facilities for

international air services (stage I)

5,711,590

Health-

TownsvilleProvision of accommodation for

yellow fever suspects . . . . . . . . 49,000

Townsville-Extension of Pathology Labora-

tory building

583,374

Transport and Construction-

Garbutt-Redevelopment of workshop com-

plex

113,917

Defence (Army)Townsville-District Support Unit-Extend

fire station

97,000

Townsville-120 houses

5,350,000

Lavarack BarracksPhase B, Stage 2

900,000

Defence (Air Force)-

Townsville-RAAF Base-Police dog section

Administration building

145,000

Total

. 13,034,881

Kennedy (Qld) Employment and Industrial Relations-
Longreach-Erection of one 3-bedroom house
Total

77,750 77,750

Total

1,404,752

Lilley (Qld)

Aviation-

Brisbane Airport-Extension to International

Terminal Building

. . . . . . . 2,800,000

Brisbane Airport-Redevelopment-

Additional dredging/reclamation works . 16,000,000

Brisbane AirportRoads engineering service,

to freight apron

310,000

Brisbane AirportExtension of domestic

apron

. . . . . 606,51 I

Brisbane Airport--Investigation for major d-

evelopment . . . . . .

. 961,427

Brisbane Airport-Redevelopment Phase I

(Stage I)

. . 59,200,000

Brisbane Airport-Upgrading of domestic ter-

minal area roads and services (Stage I)

280,600

Defence (Army)-

Banyo-II Supply Battalion--Provision of

fixed fire protection and 37 house reels

370,000

Banyo-II Supply Battalion-Steam cleaning 126,800

Meeandah-Fixed fire protection

1,061,541

Total

.81,716,879

McPherson (Qld)

Aviation-

Coolangatta AirportExtension of fire station

40,000

Coolangatta Airport-Strengthening of run-

ways, taxiways and associated works . . . 4,800,000

Coolangatta Airport-Erection of terminal

building, hardstanding and taxiway . . . 5,794,000

Coolangatta Airport-Improvements to drain-

age system

466,095

Total

11,100,095

Moreton (Qld) Veterans Affairs-
GreenslopesRepatria tion Gen eral Hospital-Alterations to wards 14 and 15 for psychiatric unit . . . . . . . . .

302,250

2156 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Total

estimated

-D-e-pa-r-tm-e-n-t-a-nd--pr-o-je-c-t ----------------------co-s-t

$

Greens lopesR epa tria t ion General

Hospital-Erection of multi-storey ward block and kitchen . . . . . . . . . 12,695,609

Green slopes - Repa tria tion General

Hospital-Extension of medical records

department . . . . . . . . . . . 115,327

Greens lopes - Repa tria tion Genera I

Hospital-Alterations to wards 17, 18 and 19 115,577

Defence (Army)-

Yeronga-Military hospital accommodation

777,467

Total

. 14,006,230

Oxley (Qld)

Defence (Air Force)Amberley-Camera collinator

Amberley-Modify fire protection systems in 3AD maintenance hangar

Amberley-Modifications to taxiway widths and junction of taxiways A and B
Amberley-AYTUR Storage

Amberley-TF30 test rig facility

Amberley-Extend F/ A System

Amberley-482 Squadron-Additional techni-

cal facilities

....... .

Amberley-340 Squadron-TF30 overhaul
Administrative ServicesWacol Migrant Centre-Erection of demountable offices for OCES . . . . . .

Wacol Migrant Centre-Erection of new kitchen/dining complex

63,000
80,000
133,000 3,700,000 1,183,910
45,083
1,240,000 1,760,000
40,658
1,100,000

Total

9,345,651

Petrie (Qld) CSIRO-
Samford-Division of Tropical Crops and Pastures-Erection of grass crossing house
Total

476,313 476,313

Ryan (Qld) Social Security-
Tari nga - Kingsholme Rehabilitiation Centre-- Provision of emergency power supply
Total

61,203 61,203

Adelaide (SA)
Employment and Industrial RelationsEnfield-Extensions ofOCES
Home Affairs and EnvironmentCollinswood-Archives RepositoryUpgrading of fire protection measures
Defence (Army)Hampstead--4 Training Group and 4 Cadet Group-Construction of classrooms and lecture rooms

115,562 101,000 880,000

Total

1,096,562

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Barker (SA)
Administrative ServicesMurray Bridge-Erection of Commonwealth Offices

$ 526,890

Total

526,890

Bonython (SA)

Defence Support-

Salisbury-DRC-Provision of fencing to St

Kilda radio station . . . . . . . . 75,000

Salisbury-DRC-Modifications to HY /LY

reticulation . . . . . . . . .

60,000

Salisbury-DRC-Sonar transducer test

facility for underwater engineering

130,000

Salisbury-Building for microwave radar deve-

lopment . . . . . .

450,000

Salisbury-Modifications to building 14 for

P ABX

.....

202,368

Salisbury-Construct low temperature con-

ditioning chamber . . . . . . . . . 88,181

Salisbury-Fire prevention and detection to 7

buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . 42,986

Salisbury-Building 106-Air conditioning

99,404

Salisbury-Modifications to HY/LY electrical

reticulation . . . . . . . . . . . 50,000

Defence (Central)

Salisbury-DRC-Internal upgrading to build-

ing 114, 102/104 and 107

330,000

Defence (Army)-

Penfield-Upgrading of security

118,835

Smithfield-Provision of vehicle coverage

146,619

Penfield-Provision of ammunition storage

building . . . . . . . . . .

65,050

Edinburgh-Erection of fire station

394,499

Edinburgh-Base Development-Stage 1 . 10,083,733

Edinburgh-Base Development--Stage II

8,117,836

Edinburgh-Provision of additional fuel

storage facilities . . . . . . .

102,525

Edinburgh-Refurbish Building 482

222,000

Edinburgh-Erection of Administration

Building

........ .

304,000

Edinburgh-Rehabilitation of Building 485

246,484

Defence (Air Force)-

Edinburgh-Installation of compression

chamber

. . . . . . . . . 130,000

Edinburgh-RAAF Base-Floodlighting of

main apron

. . . . . 150,000

Edinburgh-Provision of HF transmitting

facilities at Smithfield

42,000

Edinburgh-P3C Simulator building

875,000

Edinburgh-30 houses

1,400,000

Total

. 23,926,520

Boothby (SA)
Defence (Army)Woodside-Rapier facilities Woodside-Modifications to Rapier compound Woodside 40 houses

588,235 363,257 1,800,000

Total

2,751,492

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2157

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

$ Grey (SA)

Administrative Services-

Port Lincoln-Erection of Commonwealth

Offices

826,521

Transport and ConstructionSouth Neptune IslandErection of light tower

68,255

Defence (Air Force)Woomera - Airfield development

. 21,000,000

Total

.21,894,776

Hawker (SA)

Veterans' AffairsDaw Park-Repatriation General Hospital-

Erection of new ward

.....

Daw Park-Repatriation General HospitalAlterations and additions to pharmacy

Daw Park-Repatriation General Hospital-

Alterations and additions to radiology

department . . . . . . .

Daw Park-Repatriation General Hospital-

Alterations to Patriotic Fund Hall

Daw Park-Repatriation General HospitalModifications to ward 4, block B and demolition of wards 9 and 16 . . . . . . .

Daw Park-Repatriation General HospitalReplacement of NO.3 boiler

Defence (Army)Keswick Barracks-Erection ofQ. Store

Keswick Barracks-Building 196-

Environmental control

1,200,000 250,000
149,000 151,280
203,442 68,021 689,888 43,047

Total

2,754,678

Hindmarsh (SA)

Aviation-

Adelaide Airport-Erection of electrical and

radio maintenance centre

660,000

Adelaide Airport-Strengthening of domestic

aprons and taxiways and extension of dom-

estic terminal building

. . . . . 8,849,000

Adelaide Airport-Erection of international

facilities

. . . . . . 10,900,000

Adelaide Airport-Erection of operations

centre . . . . . . . . . .

3,202,297

Adelaide Airport-Extension of runway 5/23 355,150

Adelaide Airport-Extensions of HV power

supply to helicopter area

53,000

Adelaide Airport-Construction of taxiway

fillets and extension of terminal building

665,000

Total

. 24,684,447

Port Adelaide (SA)
AviationParafield Airport-Erection of control tower
HealthTorrens Island-Animal Quarantine StationProvision of secure egg hatching facilities
CSIROWoodville-Division of Material ScienceAlterations to building 3 . .

386,915 490,000 426,883

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

WoodviIleDivision of Manufacturing Technology-Alterations to building 2

$ 686,702

Total

1,990,500

Sturt (SA)

Social Security-

Felixstow-St Margarets Rehabilitation

Centre-Alterations to and extension of

treatment and training facilities (Stage 2)

625,000

Felixstow-St Margarets Rehabilitation

Centre-Erection of storeroom

73,569

Felixstow-St Margarets Rehabilitation

Centre-Alterations to and extension of

treatment and training facilities (Stage I)

1,342,000

CSIRO-

Glen Osmond-Division of Horticultural

ResearchErection of glasshouse

88,000

Total

2,128,569

Wakefield (SA)

Aviation-

Tapley Shoal-Construction of new beacon

structure . . .

Transport and Construction-

Lower Light-Construction of access road to

remote receiver station

. . . ..

Defence (Army)-

Port Wakefield-Proof and Experimental

Establishment-Construction of explosives

storehouse . . . . . . . . . . .

Port Wakefield-Proof and Experimental

EstablishmentProvision of additional

marking of danger areas to seaward

64,423 40,000
350,000 65,000

Total

519,423

Canning (WA)
AviationJandakot Airport-Alterations and additions to amenities building . . .
Defence (Navy)Rockingham-20 Residences HMASStirling-New Armament Wharf HMASStirling-New Armament Depot HMASStirling-Oil Fuel Installation

40,000
522,500 3,281,356 4,183,626 2,667,371

Total

. 10,694,853

Curtin (WA)
Veterans' AffairsHollywood-Repatriation General HospitalInstallation of air conditioning in ward 17 Hollywood-Repatriation General Hospital-- Modernisation of wards 5 and 7 Hollywood-Repatriation General HospitalUpgrade electrical reticulation
Defence (Army)Karrakatta---Upgrade water reticulation Karrakatta-Provide transportable buildings Swanbourne-New training facilities

70,000
559,428
86,446
45,000 129,053 410,000

Total

1,299,927

2158 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Forrest (WA)
Defence (Army)- Coolilup-New rifle range

$ 121,885

Total

121,885

Fremantle (WA)
Social SecurityMelvilleProvision of air conditioning to residential buildings, vocational buildings and dining rooms . . . . . . . . . .
Defence (Navy)HMAS Leeuwin-Boatshed and berthing for small craft

105,942 342,298

Total

448,240

Kalgoorlie (WA)

Administrative Services-

Kalgoorlie-Extensions to Commonwealth

offices

. . . . . 440,000

Industry and Commerce-

North-West Area-Cyclone upgrading to Cus-

toms House

...... .

106,000

Science and Technology-

CarnarvonExtension to radar building

35,000

North-West Area--Provide air conditioning to

residences

. . . . . . . . . . 282,474

Broome-Cyclone upgrading to meteorological

station . . . . . . . . . . . . 46,529

Port Hedland-Cyclone upgrading to meteoro-

logical station

. . . . . . .. 43,614

Transport and Construction-

Port Hedland Airport-Provision of mainten-

ance compound, equipment shelter and

washdown facility . . . . . . . . . 180,000

Port HedlandReplacement of standby powe-

rhouse

......

95,000

Port Hedland-New buoy depot

367,795

Port HedlandReplace coil house

54,200

Port Hedland-Replace Decca station buil-

dings

.......

338,500

Port Hedland--Replace powerhouse

512,210

Port Hedland-Alterations and additions to

workshop

69,148

Port Hedland-New residence

70,264

Moore River-Erection of light tower and

powerhouse . . . . . . . .

330,000

Turner RiverReplace Decca station buildings 000,000

East Island-New light tower . .

164,900

Gantheaume Point-Fabrication of new light-

house tower .

......

Gantheaume Point-Erection of light tower

and powerhouse . . . . . .

120,000

Carnarvon-New powerhouse

423,008

North-West Area-Airconditioning to res-

idences

. . . . . . . . . 1,412,244

CSIRO-

Kununurra -Erection of six I-bedroom flats

272,800

Kununurra-New grain handling building

258,125

Kununurra-Erection of two 2-bedroom flats

121,589

Defence (Air Force)-

Derby South-New airfield . . . . . .47,000,000

Learmonth-Additional fuel storage

1,334,380

Derby-Site investigations for proposed airfield 205,323

$

Learmonth-Apron works and operational f-

acilities

3,800,000

Total

. 58,083, I03

Moore (WA)

Defence (Air Force)Caversham-New facilities

Pearce-RAAF Base-New bore in existing field

Pearce-RAAF Base-New bore at 3TU

Pearce-RAAF Base-Avionics SectionBuilding for 2FTS

Pearce-RAAF Base-New Long Range Maritime Patrol Base (stage I) . . . . .

Pearce-RAAF Base-New Motor Transport

Section.

.....

Pearce-RAAF Base-Additional fuel storage

Pearce-RAAF Base-Upgrade security at 3TU

393,248
35,000 35,000
650,000
5,369,977
193,583 283,159
60,000

Total

7,019,967

Swan (WA)

Administrative Services-

Perth Airport-Erection of police station and

detention facilities

. . . ..

703,945

AviationPerth Airport-Extension of 02/20 runway

1,000,000

Perth Airport-Erection of flight terminal operations centre

55,000

Perth Airport-Construction of commuter air-

craft taxiway and engineering services

900,000

Perth Airport-Erection of air operations

centre

. . . . . . 3,900,000

Perth Airport-Extension of domestic terminal

building, aprons and provision of engineering

services

. . . . . . 4, I00,000

Perth Airport-Alterations and additions to in-

ternational terminal

. . . . . 718,342

Perth Airport-Alterations and additions to

workshop

. . . . . . . ..

41,487

Perth Airport-Extensions to domestic terminal and provision of engineering services (stage I) . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,950,028

Perth Airport-Provide engineering services to

freight area

. . . ..

723,470

Perth Airport-Extensions to domestic apron

680,000

Industry and CommercePerth Airport-Extensions to Customs House

285,000

Total

. 15,057,272

Braddon (Tas.)
Science and TechnologyCape Grim-Erection of Australian baseline air pollution station . . . . . . . . .

1,221,208

Answers to Questions

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2159

Department and project

Total estimated
cost

Transport and ConstructionBluff Hill Point-Erection of light tower and power house

$ 167,000

Total

1,388,208

Denison (Tas.)

Administrative Services-

Hobart-Commonwealth Centre-Alterations

to partitioning and associated work

43,000

G lenorchyErection of stores building

494,889

Attorney-Generals-

Hobart-Erection of Commonwealth Courts

building

8,800,000

Health-

HobartErection of National Acoustic

Laboratories State Headquarters and hearing

centre . . . . . . . . . .

593,997

Science and Technology-

Hobart-Erection of twenty 2-bedroom flats

434,806

KingstonErection of new headquarters and

laboratories for Antarctic Division

1,221,208

Veterans' Affairs-

Hobart-Repatriation General Hospital-

Upgrading of fire protection measures, wards

and paramedical building

106,498

CSIRO-

Hobart-Division of Fisheries Research and

Oceanography-Erection of laboratory

complex

. 10,750,000

Total

. 22,444,398

Franklin (Tas.)

Aviation-

Hobart Airport-Strengthening of runways,

taxiways and aprons and provision of ad-

ditional apron parking

. . . . . 5,000,000

Hobart Airport-Extension of maintenance

building . . . . . . . . . . . , 62,000

Hobart Airport-Upgrading of facilities for in-

ternational air service . . . . . .

850,000

Home Affairs and Environment-

Bellerive-Erection of Archives Repository

1,964,195

Total

7,876,195

Wilmot (Tas.) Aviation-
Launceston Airport-Extension of maintenance building
Science and TechnologyLake Augusta-Erection of show training facilities
Total

65,000
425,206 490,206

Canberra (ACf)
ParliamentParliament HouseProvision of suite for the 4th Party Leader and two Senator's rooms Parliament HouseModification to fire protection facilities (Stage 4) . . . . . .

110,000 120,000

Parliament House-Refurbishing of public

toilets in Kings Hall and rooms (L 76 and L23

(Stage I) . . . . . . . . . . .

Parliament House-Provision of aircondition-

ing to Members' Bar and Management offices

Parliament House-Provision of aircondition-

ing to main pantry

Parliament House-Alterations to main

kitchen . . . . . . . . .

Parliament House-Provision of additional

Committee Rooms and renovations to

Senators' and Members' accommodation

Hotel KurrajongUpgrading of power supply

Hotel Kurrajong-Modification to Parliamen-

tary Library accommodation . . . . .

Kingston-Printing Office-Alterations to par-

titioning and associated works for Parliamen-

tary Reporting Staff

Administrative Services-

Kingston-Printing Office-Alterations to par-

titioning and associated works

Kingston-Printing Office-Alterations to

printing and associated works (Stage I)

Kingston-Printing Office-Modifications to

waste paper handling system

Kingston-Printing Office-Conversion of oil

fired equipment to natural gas

Aviation-

Canberra AirportProvision of additional

storage and booster pumps for fire fighting

services

Canberra AirportProvision of fire services to

terminal building and apron . . . . .

National Development and Energy-

Orroral Valley-Lunar Laser Ranger Station-

Building modification for installation of new

equipment

FyshwickExtension of core and cuttings la-

boratory

.....

Primary Industry-

Kingston-Bureau of Animal Health-

Modification to building . . .

Transport and Construction-

PhillipErection of district office and depot

(Stage I)

......... .

Fyshwick-Extension of water supply depot

and sewerage depot (Stage I)

Defence (Navy)-

HMAS HarmanReplace diesel generators

HMAS Harman-Conversion to natural gas

Defence (Air Force;-

Fairbairn-RAAF Base-Other ranks

accommodation

......

Fairbairn-RAAF Base-Heat store, building

183 . . . . . . . . .

Fairbairn-RAAF Base-New training facil-

ities

Fairbairn-RAAF Base-Conversion to natu-

ralgas

76,000 32,000 45,000 36,000
61,000 43,000 90,000
140,000
560,000 420,061 255,000 78,797
200,000 60,000
63,000 380,000
496,249
150,000 135,000 117,226 155,000
962,029 39,840
209,984 310,000

Total

5,345,186

Fraser (ACT)
Capital TerritoryJervis Bay-Murray's Beach-Construction of breakwater/jetty . . . . . Jervis Bay-Botanic Gardens AnnexUpgrading of water supply
Transport and ConstructionDicksonUpgrading of fire protection measures at depot (Stage I)

40,000 40,000
33,000

2160 REPRESENTATIVES 14 October 1982

Answers to Questions

CSIRO--

Black Mountain-Modification to site heating

system

,,,,,,,

200,000

Black MountainUpgrading of conference

room facilities

, , , , , , , , 68,000

Campbell-Erection of office block

1,880,000

Black Mountain-Division of Entomology-

Erection of high security quarantine inse-

ctary

"""

,""

815,658

Black Mountain-Division of Land Use

Research-Erection of workshop and garage 562,450

Black Mountain-Division of Plant Industry-

Erection of Crop Adaptation Laboratory

2,771,049

Black Mountain-Division of Plant Industry-

Erection of glasshouse services building and

potting shed (Stage I)

179,960

Black Mountain-Relocation of site services

and access road

,,,"

252,005

Black Mountain--Conversion of oil fired equip-

ment to natural gas (Stage I) " ' "

102,215

Black Mountain-Conversion of oil fired equip-

ment to natural gas (Stage 2)

110,000

Black Mountain-Division of Computing

Research-Erection of computer hall and

upgrading of existing buildings

943,165

Black Mountain-Division of Entomology--

Erection of accommodation for Australian

National Insect collection

,',"

984,787

Gungahlin-Division of Wildlife research-

Erection of biology laboratory and research

support building " " ,

923,998

Gungahlin-Division of Wildlife Research-

Erection of animal house

999,740

Defence (Central)-

Russell-- Buildings A-K data cables

142,158

RussellUpgrade perimeter protection

154,860

Russell-Rehabilitate security alarms (Stage 2) 519,833

Russell-Australian Defence Forces Academy 65,040,115

Defence (Navy)-

Belconnen Naval Transmitter Station-Fire

protection to building 43 " " , ' , 55,000

Jervis Bay-New Communications building

500,000

HMAS Creswell-RAN Professional Training

Establishment-construction of 12 houses

540,000

Defence (Army)-

RMC Duntroon-Linkroad Jubilee to Bruche 108,740

RMC Duntroon-Conversion to Natural Gas 173,000

RMC Duntroon-Convert 070 to laboratory

Total

, 78,139,733

Northern Territory (N.T.)

Aboriginal Affairs-

Bagot-Erection of nine houses

376,000

Attorney-Generals-

Alice Springs-Erection of Law Courts build-

ing , , , , ,

3,166,280

Administrative Services-

Alice SpringsErection of seven 3-bedroom

houses

266,000

DarwinErection of twenty 3-bedroom houses 936,000

Darwin-Erection of eighteen 3-bedroom and

two 4-bedroom houses

1,038,710

Darwin-Erection of twenty 3-bedroom and

four 4-bedroom houses , , , , ,

1,072,420

Katherine-Erection of five single-bed units , 259,500

Nhulunbuy-Erection of one 4-bedroom and

two 3-bedroom houses and five single-bed

units Aviation-

550,420

Darwin Airport-Upgrading of fire detection

and protection systems in terminal building

84,305

Alice Springs Airport-Construction of ad-

ditional taxiway

174,453

Nhulunbuy-Structural upgrading of seven -

buildings ,

177 ,005

Tindal Aerodrome-Erection of new power-

house building

65,260

Health-

Darwin Airport-Provision of macerator/

sterilizer

120,000

Alice Springs Airport-Provision of macer-

ator/ sterilizer

55,200

Science and Technology-

Tennant Creek--Erection of balloon filling

facility , , ' , , ' , ' , , ' , 100,000

Transport and Construction-

New Year Island-Erection of light tower and

acetylane cylinder store

,','"

270,000

Defence (Navy)-

Darwin-Stokes Hill-Tanker wagon facilities 100,000

HMAS Coonawarra-31 houses

1,846,568

Larrakeyah-Erection of 10 houses

468,758

Darwin-Construction of 31 houses

1,950,000

Darwin-Patrol Boat Base

,20,793,045

Humpty Doo-Erection of transmitter building 5,959,169

HMAS Coonawarra-Transport complex

523,70 I

Shoal Bay-Receiving StationUpgrade secu-

rity

,' ,,,,

53,876

Shoal BayReceiving StationFacilities

292,000

HMAS CoonawarraPhysical security

39,968

Humpty Doo-Physical security , , ,

99,000

Defence (Army)--

Darwin-HQ 7 Military District-

Construction six 3-bedroom married quarters 330,000

Darwin-Cyclone proof sixteen married

quarters

,,,,,,,"

200,000

Darwin-Transport accommodation

266,572

Nhulunbuy-Construction of one 4-bedroom

married quarter

, , , , , 90,000

Larrakeyah Barracks-Upgrade water retic-

ulation

,,,,"

217,595

Larrakeyah Barracks-New Administration

building

, , , , , , 905,499

Larrakeyah BarracksPicquet facilities

141,386

Larrakeyah Barracks-Reconstruction of roads

(Stage 2)

,,,,,,,"

261,000

Defence (Air Force)-

Darwin-RAAF Base-New linemen's work-

shop

, , , ' , , ' , 100,000

Darwin-RAAF Base-Armament workshop

80,000

Darwin-RAAF Base-Technical services

workshop " " ' , ' , ' "

65,000

Darwin-RAAF Base-Motor Transport Sec-

tion " , " " , ' , ' "

500,000

Darwin-RAAF Base-Replace in-flight

kitchen, ration store and butcher's shop , , 960,000

Darwin-RAAF Base-Works for Tactical

Fighter Force

, , , ' ,17,000,000

Darwin-RAAF Base-Fourteen houses

663,883

Darwin-RAAF Base-Works to support

RECAP

1,147,659

Darwin-RAAF Base-Extension and alter-

ations, building 66 , , , , , , ,

510,066

Darwin-RAAF Base-Site investigation

30,000

Darwin-RAAF Base-Hangar and access

pavements , , , , , , , , , , , 4,460,000

Darwin-RAAF Base-Upgrading of emerg-

ency power

" , , , , , , , 350,000

Darwin-RAAF Base-Taxiway and lighting

improvements , , , , ,

85,000

Tindal-Hardstands and cabling , , , , , 38,540

Answers to Questions
Defence SupportAlice Springs-Jindalee (Stage 2) Total

14 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2161
. 3,351,794 .72,241,632


