House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 129, 1982 Thursday, 21 October 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Incorporation ofMaterial in Hansard

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2339

Thursday, 21 October 1982.
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a;m., and read prayers.
ARMENIAN PEOPLE
Notice of Motion
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) condemns genocide as the most abhorrent of international crimes;
(2) condemns the atrocities inflicted by the Government of Turkey on the Armenian people during World War I; and
(3) is of the opinion that the aspirations of the dispossesed Armenian people should be recognised.
COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT REGIONAL MEETING
Notice of Motion
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House condemns the wastage of public money by the Government in contributing half the cost of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting held in Fiji recently and notes that this Conference has been described by the New Zealand Prime Minister, Mr Muldoon, as 'useless, an event where leaders come together and have a couple of talking sessions, a few good meals, go away on a retreat, have a swim and go home . . .'
RAOUL WALLENBERG
Notice of Motion
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) notes the recent statement of the British Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, at the House of Commons exhibition in honour of Raoul Wallenberg, the Swedish 'hero of the Holocaust', who disappeared in the Soviet Union after World War II;
(2) welcomes her announcement that the British Government will assist in international inquiries to establish what has happened to Raoul Wallenberg and her call on the Soviet authorities to co-operate in these inquiries; and
(3) urges the Australian Government to support Mrs Thatcher's initiatives.
INCORPORATION OF MATERIAL IN HANSARD
Mr SPEAKER-This statement arises out of increasing numbers of requests by members for the incorporation of unspoken material in Hansard. On 10 May 1978 in a statement to the House I said:
I do not encourage the incorporation of anything into the Hansard record other than things such as tables which need to be seen in visual form for comprehension.

Underlying my attitude then, and of the House since Federation, is the aim of keeping Hansard as a true record of what is said in the House. Recently there has been a tendency for this commendable aim to be broken down. Other significant factors against excessive incorporation of unspoken material into Hansard are:
A member's speech is lengthened beyond his entitlement under the Standing Orders.
The incorporated material may contain irrelevant or defamatory matter or unparliamentary language.
Other honourable members will not be aware of the contents of the material until production of the daily Hansard next morning when a speech may be discovered to have matter not answered in debate and so appear more authoritative. Similarly, a succeeding member's speech may appear to be less relevant and informed than it would have been if he had known of the unspoken material before making his speech.
I should remind the House that the final responsibility for inclusion of unspoken material in Hansard rests with the Speaker. I do not propose a completely inflexible system. For example, the Treasurer must receive special consideration on Budget night. However, I think that the House has an obligation to itself to keep the Hansard record as near as possible a true record of what is said. I seek the co-operation of all members, not least Ministers and the Opposition front bench. I have directed the occupants of the chair to pay particular attention to this statement.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence on this matter. I note with interest that you do not regard that decision, which I think has a lot of merit, as being inflexible. I should like to think that you would also regard it as being proper that transcripts of evidence given in court, which are a matter of record, and also judges' decisions, where those may effect a debate in the Parliament, could be incorporated. In other words, matters of record, particularly in judicial proceedings-that is, evidence given by a witness as to what he might think could affect members of Parliamentshould be able to be incorporated, as should judgments and determinations by judicial authorities. I regard that as essential because I have in mind something which I think might occur later today.
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the honourable gentleman that I disagree with the point he has made. As I emphasised in the statement, Hansard ought to be a record of what is said in this chamber. I have particularly in mind that very

2340 REPRESENTATIVES 2I October 1982

Questions without Notice

often members on either front bench, when asked for leave to incorporate, feel it necessary to grant leave otherwise it might appear that they are obstructing the course of the House. I think the process should not be the incorporation in Hansard but the granting of leave to table the document so that the document may be available to all. I emphasise that whilst I will not be inflexible, I am not willing to have Hansard become the repository of what a member chooses to judge as worth putting in Hansard, because that obstructs the whole purpose of Hansard as being an accurate record of what is said in the chamber.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, could I have your indulgence? May I, after I have had a look at what you have said in a more considered way, raise the matter with you if necessary? It is a very important proposition you are putting to us. I can accept some of the points you are taking. In fact, I have found it rather extraordinary on one or two occasions that people have sought to have incorporated in Hansard extracts of speeches they had made in this Parliament on earlier occasions. I can see that problem. On the other hand, there is a legitimate function in having certain documents from time to time incorporated in Hansard, because tabling, as I understand it, does not provide privilege which could sometimes be necessary. I wish, if it is desirable, to have the opportunity to raise the matter with you later. I presume that you accept that point.
Mr SPEAKER-Of course. The honourable gentleman may do so.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
INDUSTRY PROTECTION
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. I refer to recent statements by the Prime Minister, and earlier statements, of course, at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting in Fiji on the need for a reduction of the level of protection for Australian industry.
Honourable members---Hear, hear!
Mr LIONEL BOWEN--I notice the plaudits from the crowd opposite. I also refer to the serious problems now facing many industries in Australia because of the rapid growth of imports and dumping, for example in steel and metal products, where it has now been established that the Koreans are subsidising steel at the rate of $100 a tonne. The Queensland pineapple industry is under attack from imports from another place. The Tasmanian pulp and paper industry is also in

serious circumstances. Given those illustrations, could the Prime Minister indicate exactly what industries he had in mind in which protection could be reduced in accordance with his statements? What are the likely employment impacts of any such reduction?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Deputy Leader of the Opposition will be well aware that when we announced the industry package on 19 July we said that because of current economic circumstances it would not be appropriate to have unilateral reductions in protection. The honourable gentleman will know that there had been an Industries Assistance Commission report relating to those matters. Of course, in that decision of 19 July we announced substantially improved depreciation provisions. We announced for the first time broad-based depreciation provisions for income-producing buildings. Those measures were broadly and widely accepted by all Australian industry because all Australian industry was to benefit. However, we made it quite plain that there would not be unilateral reductions in protection so far as Australia is concerned.
We would be very deficient in our responsibilities to Australia if we were not as a government and, I would hope if we were not as a parliament, concerned at the growing moves towards increased protectionism in many countries around the world. A meeting of trade Ministers at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ministerial meeting is being held in a very few weeks' time. One of the matters that will be under discussion at that meeting is some initiatives that Australia took which would be designed to achieve a general standstill or ceasefire in relation to protection and then a winding back of protective devices, whether that was protection in its traditional form or in the form of export subsidies. Those matters are up for consideration.
I think it is worth noting that Australian exports run into quantitative or non-tariff barriers in many fields. It may be that up to 50 per cent of Australian exports are affected by non-tariff barriers of one kind or another. But if our industries are to be excluded from more and more overseas markets and if that is to be the general trend of trade relationships between nations in the period ahead of us, then I suggest that the capacity of the major industrial countries to get out of the present recession will be very much reduced. In those circumstances we would be likely to see increasing levels of unemployment going way beyond the present 30 million to 32 million in member countries of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.

Questions without Notice

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2341

So whatever has been said needs to be put against the background of the decisions we took on 19 July and the multilateral discussions taking place at the GATT ministerial meeting. The nature of the Australian proposals was supported by all countries at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting, including New Zealand, Malaysia, Singapore and all the others as can be seen from the communique that was published at the end of the meeting. But there is no question of unilateral reductions in tariff. I hope that that provides the kind of assurance that the honourable gentleman wanted.
STOCK FEED GRAIN
Mr EWEN CAMERON-Can the Minister for Primary Industry inform the House what stock feed grain is being considered for importation? Will imported grain be available for direct use in drought affected areas or will it need to be processed?
Mr NIXON-The Government has agreed to an amendment to the Wheat Marketing Act to permit the Australian Wheat Board to import stock feed wheat if that proves to be necessary. It is one of the arms that we are introQucing simply to give enough flexibility to the various agents so that the very serious drought needs of farmers and graziers can be met. Consideration is being given to the prospect of importing some wheat. I point out to the House that if wheat does come into the country it will need to be milled at the point of entry. No grain as such can be transported into country areas in its natural form. It has to be milled to ensure that any weed seeds or diseasebearing grains are crushed and, therefore, are not able to be transported into the country areas. These are matters, of course, for my colleague the Minister for Health
As the honourable member for Indi will know every protection and precaution is taken to ensure that there is no prospect of disease being carried forward by grain importation. Those are the steps that will be undertaken. The only grain which we have been requested to import at the moment is sorghum. I understand that sorghum has very serious quarantine difficulties and importation is therefore unlikely to proceed. Consideration is being given to the importation of some wheat.
STEEL INDUSTRY
Mr LES JOHNSON-Is the Prime Minister aware that raw steel production went down by 25 per cent in the last year and that steel imports now consume up to 32 per cent of the domestic market? Is he aware that by December this year 8,200 jobs will have been lost at the steel works

and coal mines of Wollongong, Newcastle and Whyalla-some 1,800 by imminent retrenchment? Since today is Wollongong's day of mass protest against policies responsible for mass unemployment, I ask: Will the Prime Minister reverse his decision and substantially reduce import quotas? Further, will he inform Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd that this concession depends upon the withdrawal of all retrenchment notices by BHP in the steel industry and its coal mines?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I believe that everyone in this House would be concerned that people are being retrenched under current circumstances no matter what the industry might be. The decision that the Government had to take in relation to the steel industry was a complex one. It was not just a simple question of the level of protection for Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd because BHP is supplying what is a raw material for many other Australian industries. If those industries were going to be forced to pay much higher prices for the basic steel that they will use in fabrication and production, then they themselves would be in a position where they were not able to compete with imports and would need higher levels of protection. If protection in relation to BHP were too high, then one would have consequential claims for increased protection running through a large part of Australian industry. That would obviously create a difficult situation, one in which it would be even harder for Australian industry to compete in markets overseas. The main future of Australian manufacturing industry must surely not be just to supply the local Australian market but also to be able to compete internationally.
I think it is a great tragedy that the kinds of concerns that were inherent in the honourable member's question were not expressed through last year when the pressure for shorter hours and for higher wages contributed so much to the present problems and difficulties in the steel industry. That came at a time when world recession was obviously making it all the more important for Australia to maintain its competitive position. Putting all these particular factors together, the final Government decision was one which, in fact, gave considerably more protection to BHP than the Industries Assistance Commission or the Temporary Assistance Authority had recommended. The Government indicated at the time the decision was made that it believed it should not go further than it did, but it went very much further than the Temporary Assistance Authority in its recommendations had indicated it ought to go.

2342 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Questions without Notice

TELEPHONE DIRECTORY PAPER
Mr BURR-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications. Has the Government made any decision regarding the letting of contracts to produce telephone directory paper? In view of the difficult employment opportunities in Tasmania, will any contracts be let to Tasmanian paper manufacturers.
Mr N. A. BROWN-It is true that over the last few weeks I have been giving consideration to some recommendations from the Board of Telecom Australia with respect to the awarding of contracts for paper for telephone directories for next year. In the past there has been a particular problem in this regard to the extent that it has not been possible regularly to locate locally produced supplies of paper. On this occasion two Australian manufacturers and one New Zealand manufacturer submitted tenders. As I said, I have given consideration to the recommendations from the Telecom Board. I have very recently approved three quite substantial contracts for the supply of paper for telephone directories. One of those contracts is to Associated Pulp and Paper Mills Ltd at Wesley Vale in Tasmania. That is a contract for the supply of 12,001 tonnes of paper at a cost of just under $11 m. A contract of a similar size to Australian Newsprint Mills Ltd also, has been approved. That price also is over $10m. There is a smaller contract to a New Zealand manufacturer. I have no doubt that the awarding of the contracts, particularly that to the Wesley Vale mill, will make a substantial contribution to enabling those works to continue and will be a very substantial contribution to providing continued employment for people who live and work in that area.
RECRUITMENT OF TRADESMEN
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Is the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs aware that until about two months ago tradesmen recruited overseas by Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd arrived in Australia to work at that company's steel plants in Newcastle and Whyalla? Is the Minister aware also that some of those tradesmen have already been retrenched or are under threat of being retrenched by BHP? Does the Minister propose that his Department continue to assess immigrants according to the Occupational Demand Schedule which, by admission of his own departmental officers, is hopelessly out of date and which lists most categories of metal trades workers as being in short supply in all States at a time when metal tradesmen are being sacked all over the country?

Mr HODGES-The question raised by the honourable member for Burke is a very important one. It is given detailed attention by my Department in conjunction with the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations. The fact is that many industries in this country require labour often at short notice. Therefore, unless we recruit labour overseas at an early date we will frustrate the efforts of those industries to cater for the upsurge in activity. The Occupational Demand Schedule is provided twice yearly by the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations. But recently I have requested my Department to obtain more frequent reports from the Department and those reports are being provided. We have to appreciate, of course, that the more frequent reports may not be as accurate as the six-monthly reports are. Nevertheless, they are an indication of the demand for various skills throughout Australia.
I think it is worth saying that we do not force people in this country to travel from one area to another when their particular trade or profession is in demand in another area; in other words, we do not require people to travel to areas where they can obtain employment. Indeed, if they so desire they can go on the dole. Therefore, it is necessary either to bring people from other parts of Australia at their will or to provide skills from overseas. I assure the honourable member for Burke that every consideration is given to the very points that he is making.
COMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE
Mr JULL-Is the Minister for Communications aware of concern being expressed in the community that the Government is soon to award a 30-watt transponder on the HACOSS II communications satellite to the major television networks-namely, the 7, 9 and 10 networks? Has the Minister received indications of interest from other independent parties in these transponders? Will he guarantee that the interests of all parties will be considered before any decision on the allocation is made? Is a decision on the aliocation of the transponders soon, in fact, to be announced?
Mr N. A. BROWN-The answer to the part of the honourable member's question which asked, in effect, whether consideration would be given to the interest of ali parties before a decision is made on this matter is yes. I wish to dispel any suggestion that any decisions at all have been made on this matter. As the House wili be aware, the Government decided some time ago to make a very substantial advance in the whole communications field by establishing a national satellite

Questions without Notice

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2343

system which will consist initially of three satellites. Contracts have been considered and other important steps have already been taken. The decisions that have been made are with respect to a number of'the 30-watt transponders on the sattellite which, of course, will be used for distributing Australian Broadcasting Commission programs throughout Australia, particularly in those remote areas that do not at present receive television.
The question remains, of course, as to the use to which the remaining 30-watt transponders and, indeed, the other smaller transponders on the satellite will be put. I have received a number of representations from the interests that the honourable member refers to. It is true that consideration will be given to those. It is true also-I wish to emphasise this-that representations have been made by other parties with cases that are substantial. Those cases will be examined. Indeed, only a couple of days ago the honourable member for Maranoa introduced a delegation to me. I think the honourable member will correct me if I am wrong-we spent about two hours discussing the alternative proposal based on a completely novel use of the proposed satellite system to bring commercial television and other services to people, particularly in remote areas. I must emphasise that those representations are being given very careful consideration. No decision has been made. I will shortly be preparing material to put before the Cabinet. When that is done the Cabinet will make a decision. But I can assure the honourable member that whatever decision is made, it will achieve the original purpose of the satellite system, that is, to provide vastly enhanced communication, entertainment and information services to people in the whole of the country.
GOVERNMENT INFORMATION UNIT
Mr COHEN-My question is directed to the Minister for Administrative Services. I refer to Budget Estimates which indicate that this year the Government Infomation Unit will cost $1.4m, a rise of more than $1 mover 1981-82. Can the Minister say why such a large increase is occuring? Will he assure the House that no officers of the Government Information Unit have been or will be involved directly in work for the Liberal Party of Australia?
Mr NEWMAN-The functions of the Government Information Unit have been made clear on many occasions in this House and in the other place. It provides a ministerial Press relations service for Ministers who do not have Press secretaries. As I know the honourable member knows, unlike other governments this Government does

not have a proliferation of ministerial Press secretaries. Most of us depend on the GIU for that service. As to the Unit working for the Liberal Party, obviously with that definition of what the Government Information Unit does, it does not. It works for the Government and its Ministers.
As to the large increase in the appropriation, I take it that the honourable member is citing the correct figure. I do not have any dispute about that. I point out to the honourable member that the figure has basically risen because in previous appropriations certain expenses-telephone expenses and so on-were absorbed by Minister's offices, to which staff were attached. I felt that was not proper and I wanted a full and clear explanation of what was being spent on the GIU. The system was changed so that all those expenses would be revealed.
DROUGHT RELIEF MEASURES
Mr MacKENZIE-I direct my question to the Minister for Primary Industry. What measures are available to assist drought affected small business operators in Australia? Are these measures available in all States except New South Walesthe worst affected State? Has the New South Wales Government given any indication to the Minister of its position on assisting small business, its position in relation to Commonwealth proposals for a stock slaughter subsidy or its position on the application of the stock freight subsidy interstate? Why did the Commonwealth advance $lOm interest free to New South Wales over 2t months ago when that State has allocated only 10 per cent of that advance for drought relief measures and none of it has gone to small business? Will the Minister withdraw this advance from New South Wales forthwith unless the New South Wales Government gets on with the job of providing at least the same level of drought assistance as every other State provides?
Mr NIXON-I have to say that it is a very good question. I think it highlights the paucity of the New South Wales Government's approach to the whole drought problem. It is being totally miserable and miserly. For some reason the New South Wales Government fails to understand that in the countryside there are people who desperately need this aid. The core aid program provides, for up to $40,000 to be made available as carryon loans to small business. That announcement was made several weeks ago-indeed, months ago now. I regret to say that I do not think the New South Wales Government has yet picked that up as an aid to small business. It seems determined not to assist small business even though, across the

2344 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Questions without Notice

border in Queensland, the Queensland Government is providing aid to small business through this core aid program. I regret also that the New South Wales Government does not seem to be willing to pick up the slaughter subsidy of $3 a head which we announced as being available to the States. Again it does not seem to understand the difficulty farmers and graziers are faced with in dealing with the hundreds of thousands of starving sheep. The Victorian Government likewise is very slow to the barrier on that one, even though there have been strong representations by the farmers and graziers associations in both States seeking the introduction of the slaughter subsidy.
We made $IOm available. New South Wales has claimed for the last three years that in respect of the drought its Budget is unable to meet the needs of drought areas and therefore the New South Wales Government is unable to find the first $IOm required under the arrangement. The Commonwealth made an offer of $IOm interest free in this financial year so that that claim could not be made. I would not want my colleague the Treasurer to pull back that money; it is better left there. I hope, though, that the New South Wales Government, recognising the generosity we have shown towards this problem of drought, will start to be more generous itself. If the honourable member's figures are right and only some 10 per cent of that $IOm has been used, all I can say is that that speaks for itself about the approach taken by the New South Wales Government.
SOUTH WEST TASMANIA
Dr BLEWETT-I direct my question to the Prime Minister. Is it a fact that the Commonwealth has substantial constitutional powers that could be used to preserve South West Tasmania from further environmental depredation? Does the Government accept any obligation to use those powers to preserve South West Tasmania?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I have nothing to add to what I have already said on this subject.
ROXBY DOWNS
Mr STEELE HALLI ask the Minister for Trade and Resources: Are the Minister and his Department fully aware of the enormous potential that Roxby Downs holds for future exports of minerals from this country? Has he any estimates of future production and can he give an outline of provisions which will be necessary for services such as roads, ports and infrastructure to support the large population which will live in the immediate vicinity and in other areas which will be involved in supply activities?

Mr ANTHONY-I am well aware of the interest of South Australian members, particularly the honourable member for Boothby, in the massive Roxby Downs project. I am pleased to inform the House that a draft environmental impact statement has been released for public viewing and is open for comment until 25 November. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment will examine the final EIS and make recommendations to me. The draft EIS shows that Roxby Downs has at least 2,000 million tonnes of mineralised material. For planning purposes, production capacity has been set at 150,000 tonnes of copper a year, 3,000 tonnes of uranium oxide a year, 3,400 kilograms of gold a year, and up to 23,000 kilograms of silver a year.
The annual value of production could range from $442m to $658m per annum. The capital cost of the project in 1981 terms will be $1 ,400m. During the construction stage between 9,300 and 18,600 jobs will be created directly and indirectly in South Australia. The production work force will be 2,400, but the total employment generated in the long term will be between 5,700 and 8,300. A township of 8,000, rising to 9,000, will be established with planning envisaging a town population of approximately 30,000 people. It is quite obvious that the economic benefits for South Australia, and indeed the nation, will be enormous. What needs to be understood by the people of South Australia is that this whole project could be in jeopardy if there were a change of government in South Australia. The economics of it are quite clear. Unless uranium is mined the project will not go ahead. Uranium is a very important part of the overall production activity.
As we all know, the Labor Party is opposed to the development of uranium in this country and wants to close the uranium industry down. I think with such an enormous project and with the economy of South Australia being in such an uncertain situation as it is at the moment there is nothing offering more hope and more potential to that State than the Roxby Downs project. I hope that when people go to the polls in South Australia they will take full note of what that decision would mean if they unwisely opted to vote for the Australian Labor Party.
Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I think the Deputy Prime Minister should have indicated that it will be eight years before there is any employment whatsoever at Roxby Downs and that the unemployment in South Australia will need to be cleared in the next three years.

Questions without Notice

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2345

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. That is not a point of order but a point of argument.
UNEMPLOYMENT: HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
Mr UREN-My question is directed to the Minister for Industry and Commerce as Minister responsible for part of the Government's housing policy. Is the Minister aware that unemployment in the housing and construction sector has increased by 67 per cent from 21,000 in July 1981 to 36,000 in July 1982? Is he also aware of the projections of the Australian Federation of Construction Contractors of a 17 per cent fall in new investment spending over the next 12 months and of the projections of further decline in the home building industry made by the Housing Industry Association and the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry? In view of the evidence suppied by the Bureau of Industry Economics and other groups about the fast and widespread flow-on employment effect of investment in housing and construction, and now that the Minister has a chance to influence government policy, can we expect a stimulus to be given to the housing and construction industry as he advocated when he was on the back benches of the Government supporting the Government?
Mr PEACOCK-I can indicate a viewpoint. I believe that an improvement in housing activity is expected for the remainder of this financial year. I recall that a Housing Industry Association forecast for 1982-83 is for the commencement of 26,800 new dwellings, which is an increase of over 10 per cent on 1981-82. The decline in activity that had be.en evident in the past seems to have been arrested and unquestionably some recovery is forecast in the second half of this financial year. Much of the credit is due first to the measures announced in March of this year, and, secondly, to the further funds that were made available by the Loan Council, but more particularly to the provisions put forward in the Budget-which so many Opposition members seem to have forgotten about. They have their real impetus in November. Of course, over and above that are the tax cuts themselves which will give individuals a greater opportunity to make contributions towards housing repayments. The fact is, therefore, that there is in place improvement in the housing area.
When we look on the other side and ask what the Australian Labor Party's housing policy is the reality is that it has not even been announced. The Labor Party has indicated that it is rethinking its position and has not put a policy forward. I would

hazard the guess that, as with so many other issues, when the Australian Labor Party claims it is rethinking a matter that means it is merely rearranging its prejudices.
1982-83 BUDGET
Mr CADMAN-My question is addressed to the Treasurer. He will be aware of the many Budget decisions affecting families, pensioners and home buyers which come into effect on I November. Has there been any change in the Budget strategy due to recently revised estimates?
Mr HOWARD--As my colleague the Minister for Industry and Commerce reminded the House a moment ago, many of the Budget measures which will be of particular benefit to Australian families are due to come into operation on I November. Although it is only a short time since the Budget it is worth reminding the House and, through the House, the Australian community, of benefits which will, for example, provide to average families earning some $300 a week benefits to the tune of up to $20 a week in some cases but, on average, about $17 a week. The measures involve cuts in personal income tax; in the case of single income families an increase in the dependent spouse rebate; in the case of all families, with single or double income, increases in family allowances; and, in the case of that vast army of Australians paying off their homes, a rebate on home interest payments.
Although there has been proper caution about the consequences on home interest rates of the recent falls in official interest rates, there is no doubt that the anxiety of many Australians about possible further increases in home interest rates have at least been put to one side for the time being. The general climate for housing generally has improved enormously. I believe that many of the predictions made about housing interest rates by the Australian Labor Party have been demonstrated to be manifestly untrue. Let me give the best example of all. We were told by the National President of the Australian Labor Party, Mr Wran, on the eve of the Lowe by-election, that housing interest rates would reach 18.5 per cent by September of this year. I inform the House that it is now 21 October and they are nowhere near 18.5 percent.
HOUSING: RELEASE OF STATUTORY RESERVE DEPOSITS
Mr HAYDEN-My question is directed to the Minister for Industry and Commerce. It refers to his comments about additional money made available for housing in the Budget. Does he recall in the Treasurer's Budget Speech, more than two

2346 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Questions without Notice

months ago now, a firm undertaking to arrange for the release of funds equivalent to one percent of statutory reserve deposits, that is, a figure of about $400m, from the Reserve Bank for housing purposes? Has that amount of money been released yet? If not, why not, and when will it be released?
Mr PEACOCK-It is essentially a question for the Treasurer. As I understand it, under section 21 of the Banking Act it is the responsibility of the Reserve Bank to determine the statutory reserve deposit ratio applicable to the trading banks. As a consequence, the Government's request for a release of one percentage point from the statutory reserve deposits for the special purpose of lending for housing is a matter for consideration by the Reserve Bank Board. The terms and conditions on which the banks would make any such funds available would, of course, require subsequent discussion with the banks. At this stage, as I understand it, it is not possible to give the precise timing of any such discussions. However, it would be the Government's wish to see the matter brought to fruition as soon as possible.
DROUGHT AFFECTED INDUSTRIES
Mr LUSHER-My question is directed to the Minister for Primary Industry. It is further to the question asked by my colleague the honourable member for Calare. Does the Minister acknowledge that businesses such as aerial agriculture, contract harvesters, crop sprayers, some rural supply businesses and specialised agricultural machinery suppliers in drought affected country areas are as badly affected, if not more so, by the continuing drought as many farmers and graziers? In view of the refusal of the New South Wales Government to pick up the Commonwealth's offer of carry-on assistance to small businesses, will the Minister consider removing this assistance from the core drought relief package, which is cost shared with the States, putting it on the same footing as the new fodder and interest rate subsidies and having it administered, for example, through the Commonwealth Bank, even if this means changing the arrangements that exist in other States?
Mr NIXON-It would be very easy for the New South Wales Government if the Commonwealth Government were to take over the full administration of the drought problem. The fact is that the New South Wales Government is failing in its responsibility towards the farmers, graziers and small businessmen in drought stricken areas. It is typical of the Australian Labor Party approach. It does not really care about anybody who lives beyond the capital cities. Its policy in this

House is no different from its policy in either Victoria or New South Wales. The Labor Party has no understanding of the requirements of a man, woman or child beyond the metropolitan area. I will not recommend to the Government that we take over full administration of drought control machinery. That is inherent in what the honourable member has proposed. I think it would be far better for the honourable member for Hume to take up the matter with the State colleagues and get a bit of ginger put into the New South Wales Parliament. He should try to stir the Minister for Agriculture, if that is possible. Why that Minister is not removed from the portfolio I do not know. That is a matter for Mr Wran, of course, and I cannot comment on it, but he is certainly failing in this duty in attending to the drought needs of the people of New South Wales. The answer is: No, I am not prepared to recommend to the Government that we remove the assistance from the core programs. I suggest that the honourable member follow my suggestion and get some action taken in the New South Wales Government. He should try to get it to be a bit active.
MELBOURNE CONCERT HALL OPENING
Mr MILTON-Is the Minister for Communications aware that the Australian Broadcasting Commission has refused to give national television and radio coverage to the opening of the Melbourne Concert Hall on 6 November? Would he not agree that the new Concert Hall is a national asset and that the residents of States other than Victoria should be given the opportunity to view the opening? Will he accede to the request of the Victorian Minister of Arts, Mr Race Matthews, that he use his influence with the ABC and urge the management to change its blinkered approach to this memorable event?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I am flattered that the honourable member should suggest that I have such a degree of influence with the ABC that the mention of the subject would result in a change in the decision. I will certainly take up that issue with the Chairman of the ABC and advance the points that have been made by the honourable member, which seem to have quite a deal to commend them. I must emphasise, however, as I do on all matters with respect to the Australian Broadcasting Commission, that it is-I think we all take some pride in this fact-an independent organisation which has responsibility under its present statute and which will, of course, have responsibility under the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act, when the enabling Bill is passed,

Questions without Notice

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2347

for running its own organisation and making its own decisions. It would be very wrong for a government of any political persuasion to interfere and seek to direct the ABC to make decisions of this sort. Nevertheless, the importance of the event to which the honourable member has referred is such that I will certainly discuss it with Professor Kramer and see whether an additional and wider coverage of the event can be given by the ABC.
DEPORTATION ORDER
Mr COLEMAN-Has the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs received a recommendation from the Administrative Appeals Tribunal that he revoke the order to deport both a Fijian Muslim man, convicted of the manslaughter of his four-year-old daughter, and the man's wife, convicted of assaulting the child, causing her grievous bodily harm, and criminally neglecting her? Did the Tribunal in reaching its recommendation state that it took into account evidence that the couple came from a culture in which child-beating and wife-beating are more common than in Australia? Has the Minister reached a decision on the Tribunal's recommendation?
Mr HODGES-The particular case to which the honourable member for Wentworth has referred relates to a decision which was taken by my predecessor, the present Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations. Toe case came before Mr Justice Morling in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and this resulted in a 47 page judgment which is currently before officers of my Department. I point out to the House that the powers of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in relation to deportation orders made under sections 12 and 13 of the Migration Act are such that it can affirm the Minister's decision or recommend that the Minister revoke the deportation order. I emphasise that the judge's decision is recommendatory and not mandatory.
I wish to say one or two things in relation to criminal deportations of persons. They are not taken lightly by me or indeed, I suggest, by my precedessors from either side of politics as Ministers responsible for immigration. Countless man hours are put into the investigation and preparation of detailed cases before they are placed before the Minister. All decisions concerning criminal deportations are taken by the Minister. I am conscious of the deportation powers vested in me and I am aware that the life of the individual is very much in the hands of the Minister.
In saying that I admit that I agonise over many of these cases. The decisions, as I said earlier, are

not taken lightly. I weigh up what is best for Australian society in terms of the protection of decent, honest Australians and I also take into account the previous record of the individual, whether that individual is likely to offend again and what the likely nature of it and its effects on Australian society will be. The courts mete out penalties, and it could be considered a further penalty if deportation is in fact ordered by the Minister. I can only say to the honourable member for Wentworth that I will give deep and careful consideration to the decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, but I can give no guarantee that the recommendation of that Tribunal will be upheld.
AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING COMMISSION: IMPORTATION OF CRANES
Mr MORRIS-When and in what circumstances did the Minister for Transport and Construction first become aware that the Australian Shipping Commission had illegally imported several second hand cargo cranes? Who specifically initiated the importation of the cranes and who authorised their purchase and import? What action has the Minister taken in respect of the importation of each crane? Are they to be exported? If not, why not? Finally, what action has he taken in respect of the illegal importation of the cranes and the decision of the Commission?
Mr HUNT-I have expressed extreme concern to the Chairman of the Australian Shipping Commission on this matter. Amongst other things, I have asked him personally to ensure that the Australian National Line observes all the requirements of the Bureau of Customs in relation to imports. I have also asked the Chairman to advise what action the Commission proposes to take in respect of those officers responsible for any violation of the law and what steps have been taken to ensure that the Commission and its officers abide by the Customs law and other laws. I have also told the Chairman that I have advised my colleague the Minister for Industry and Commerce that ANL should be treated no differently in this matter from any commercial organisation.
As the honourable member should know, Customs issued a writ against the Australian Shipping Commission on 6 September on the matter of the importation of a crane for Webb Dock. I have also called for a full report from the Chairman of ANL, and that report is with me at the moment. I do not think I should take the matter any further because of the sub judice considerations. I think that in those circumstances I perhaps should not comment any further, other than to express my deep concern because approval was not given.

2348 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

General

ADVANCE TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information of honourable members. I present a statement on issues from the Advance to the Minister for Finance for September 1982.
AUSTRALIAN SHIPPERS COUNCIL
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction)-For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Australian Shippers Council for 1981-82.
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COUNCIL
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications and Acting Attorney-General)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report of the Administrative Review Council on sections 38 and 39 of the Australian Federal Police Act 1979.
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW COUNCIL
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications and Acting Attorney-General)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report prepared by the Administrative Review Council on land use in the Australian Capital Territory.
PRIVILEGE ATTACHING TO TABLED DOCUMENTS
Mr SPEAKER-For the information of the House I wish to comment very briefly on the reference made earlier today by the Leader of the Opposition on the question of the privilege attaching to tabled documents. There is a long history attached to this question, largely deriving from issues raised in the United Kingdom case of Stockdale v Hansard (1837). I will not, however, canvass the history of this issue.
Briefly, it may be held that the actual tabled copy of a document would be so intimately a part of the proceedings of the Parliament that it would be absolutely privileged. The difficulties emerge, however, in respect of the distribution of copies. By virtue of the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, the actual parliamentary paper version-the familiar blue-covered 'editions'-of tabled documents is absolutely protected and no action may be entertained. This would clearly not, however, cover the distribution at the time of tabling of copies of a document which may contain actionable material.
This issue came under consideration in 1971 in respect of a report relating to the crown of thorns starfish. Because of doubts as to the protection of persons in distributing copies, the House resolved

to authorise publication of the document in terms of the Parliamentary Papers Act. By this action the House conferred immunity, and this has been repeated on many occasions since then.
The question of the need for privilege to attach to a document arises only when the document contains actionable material. Such material has never been permitted to be incorporated in Hansard. I do not propose that in future such material should be permitted to be incorporated, unspoken, in Hansard.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills has indicated that he wishes to make a personal explanation. Does he claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr HAWKE (Wills) - Yes, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr HAWKE-The events to which I wish to refer relate to an interview on Nationwide on Thursday night of last week, 14 October, and the subsequent purported coverage of what I said on that program in two newspapers on the following day, Friday, 15 October. I refer to the Adelaide News on Friday, 15 October, and to the Sydney Daily Mirror of the same date. The headline in the Adelaide News reads: 'Hawke: Take pay cut to save jobs'. A very much smaller sub-heading above it reads: 'It must be a majority decision by workers'. There is a heading on the inside page 'Hawke; take pay cut'. The Sydney Daily Mirror of the same date has the heading: 'Hawke agrees wage cuts may be needed'. There is a photograph of myself with the caption 'Approval' beneath it.
Government supporters-Hear, hear!
Mr HAWKE-Honourable members opposite should just hold their horses.
Mr SPEAKER--Order! I indicate to honourable members on the Government benches that it is customary not to interject while an honourable member has the indulgence of the Chair to make a personal explanation.
Mr HAWKE-Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I have said, those headlines resulted from the previous evening's Nationwide program. After reading the headlines a number of people in the Labor movement and outside made some comments. I simply say parenthetically that some sections of the Labor movement who are very quick to condemn what they call the filthy capitalist Press have an equal facility for believing what they wish to believe in the same Press. It is appropriate that I read to the House the transcript which I have

Personal Explanation

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2349

from the Parliamentary Library of what was said on the Nationwide program. I refer to the transcript, where the host, one Richard Carleton, said tome:
Mr Hawke, the Union has turned to you and said, the option is a pay cut or getting the sack. Would you tell him to take the pay cut?
This question was asked after I had been shown clips of people in a factory being asked which alternative they would take-reduced hours with an associated pay cut, or the sack. My reply to Richard Carleton I think was fairly specific and is not capable of being misunderstood by an average intelligence, I said:
What I would say is this. That if in this sort of situation by agreement of the workers concerned and in consultation with the workers, the Union and the management, there is agreement that in difficult circumstances this is the best thing that can be done for the most people, then I would say that's what should happen.
The compere came back and did not seem capable of understanding a straightforward answer. So I said again:
Well that's what I am saying, there's got to be an agreement. If the majority of people say that that's what they want in the general good, then I think that's what should apply. But I've got to put this rider in, that we mustn't allow the emergence of this sort of agreed position to meet a difficult circumstance, we must allow that to set our minds away from what is the basic necessity, and that is that Government has got to reverse its economic policy so there is the creation of more job opportunities for more people.
Again there is difficulty in comprehension by the compere. I said:
Well, you're slow in comprehension, Richard, let me say for the third time .
He said:
Well I'm sorry.
I said:
. . . well I can't help that, you'll just have to try and improve, won't you. I will say it for the third time, that it's not for one person to decide--
This includes one member of this House on the other side, and those smart-alecks across the aisle. I said:
I will say it for the third time . . .
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentlemen should not intrude upon indulgence with that sort of comment.
Mr HAWKE-I said:
I will say it for the third time, that it's not for one person to decide, it's for the group of people, and I'm saying if the majority of people in that circumstance decide that their judgment is that it's in the best interest of the most people to do that, then that should be allowed to happen, now that's the third time. I've said it, I can say it another six times but I won't say it any differently.
There was still some difficulty in comprehension. So for the fourth and final time. I said:

Yes well I'm saying not one person can answer it, it's got to be a collective and if there, as your program shows, some didn't like it, some did. In those circumstances I think it ought to be a majority decision and then if the majority decision is that this is the best way of handling it, then I think that that democratic expression of view should prevail.
When one has a circumstance where not on one occasion but on four occasions the position was made clear that I was answering a question as to where workers were faced with an alternative put to them--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has stated the misrepresentation and stated what he actually said. I think the indulgence now lapses.
DEPARTMENT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY
Annual Report
Mr SPEAKER-For the information of honourable senators and members, I present the fourth annual report of the Department of the Par!iamentary Library for the calendar year 1981. The report covers a year of record levels of activity for the client services, total measurable de-
mand being up by some In per cent over the pre-
vious year. Similarly, in the supporting services, some 9 per cent more books and periodicals were processed than the previous year while demand on the alert services was up by nearly 50 per cent.
A Client Assessment Survey carried out during the year sought the reactions of users to specific responses received for information and research requests. The overall result indicated a high degree of satisfaction with the work done but indicated that some attention is needed in ensuring the relevance of documents provided in response to questions.
Planning for automation is well under way with the expectation that electronic means of information retrieval and delivery will be routine in the New Parliament House. In the year under review the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service in particular greatly enhanced its computer capability and commenced the development of a number of major packages. These include a time-series and econometric analysis package, an election results data base and another consisting of the demographic profiles of Federal electorates.
The Parliament's Bicentenary Publications Project, an initiative of considerable national significance, was begun during the year and is administered and funded through the Department of the Parliamentary Library. It arose out of a lengthy consideration by the Library Committee

2350 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Human Rights Commission

concerning the appropriate way in which the Parliament might mark the Australian Bicentenary and the opening of the new Parliament House in 1988. The general framework of the project has been determined as follows: An analytical history of the Australian Parliament since Federation; a narrative history of the people and events connected with the Parliament; a popular book explaining how Parliament works, and a series of smaller and more specialised monographs prepared in conjunction with the major works.
An immense amount of preparatory work undertaken in connection with this project in 1981 enables me to allude to developments in 1982 and to tell honourable members that the author commissioned to write the analytical history is Professor Gordon Reid, Deputy ViceChancellor of the University of Western Australia. He may be remembered by some honourable members in the House as a former Serjeant-at-Arms before he went to academic work. Professor Reid was an officer of the House of Representatives from 1946 to 1958. He was Serjeant-at-Arms from 1955 to 1958. The author commissioned for the writing of the narrative history is Mr Gavin Souter, a senior journalist with the Sydney Morning Herald and the author of a number of successful historical works including Company of Heralds, a history of John Fairfax Ltd. Expressions of interest are currently being sought from authors interested in writing the popular account of how Parliament works. Proposals for the writing of the monographs will be assessed by the advisory board which Mr President and I have set up to advise us on all aspects of the project, and by the publisher to the project when he is appointed.
The year 1981 was a busy one for the Parliamentary Library and I am sure that all honourable members would wish me to thank the Library Committee for its services and to congratulate staff of the Parliamentary Library on their work and achievements.
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications and Acting Attorney-General)-Pursuant to section 30 of the Human Rights Commission Act 1981, I table the report of the Human Rights Commission on the Australian Citizenship Act 1948. I ask leave to make a short statement.
Leave granted.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I mention to honourable members that the report I have just tabled is the

first report of the Human Rights Commission and as such is particularly welcome. I point out also, as the Commission has done, that this is a report on the Australian Citizenship Act as it currently stands. The Government has anounced significant proposed changes to the Act which take into account important human rights aspects. The Government will, of course, be giving careful consideration to the Commission's recommendations. Due to difficulties with printing it has not been possible to table printed copies of the report. It is expected that these will be available next week.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)-by leave-My colleague the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) will be handling this matter but he is temporarily incapacitated. I note with interest the recommendations of the Human Rights Commission. They relate to very important matters such as the definition of the word 'alien'. The Commission recommends that a mentally handicapped person should not be discriminated against and that those in mental hospitals should not have their qualifying period for citizenship suspended. The Commission recommends that the requirement of an adequate knowledge of the English language be consistent with the international covenant. Section 17 of the Australian Citizenship Act which deprives persons of Australian citizenship in certain circumstances should be modified to allow them to retain that citizenship. The Commission recommends that the oath of allegiance provided for should not include renunciation. There are discriminatory aspects of the Australian Citizenship Act in certain respects. The report notes also that there is an impending decision in the High Court of Australia on related issues. This report is of significance to a large number of people in Australia. It is important that the Commission's recommendations be carefully and quickly looked at. I note that the Government intends to do that. It will be advising further as to its actions.
AUSTRALIAN BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES STUDY ADVISORY
COMMITTEE
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Australian Biological Resources Study Advisory Committee report for I July 1980 to 30 June 1981. I seek leave to make a short statement concerning this report.
Leave granted.

Biological Resources Advisory Committee

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2351

Mr McVEIGH-The Australian Biological Resources Study is a national program to study and document the naming, scientific classification and distribution of the Australian flora and fauna which form a crucial and very fragile part of our national resources. The study is planned and coordinated in my Department by the Bureau of Flora and Fauna. Over one hundred scientists and institutions from all States are taking part with the support of Australian Government grants made through the ABRS Participatory Program. Grants are awarded on the recommendation of an advisory committee of eight leading biologists under the chairmanship of Professor Ralph Slatyer. This committee also provides me with advice on priorities for the program. Some current priorities are the production of two important scientific publications, the Flora of Australia and the Zoological Catalogue of Australia. The program also includes the establishment of a network of data bases containing information of major biological collections held in Australian institutions.
The report contains a list of 90 grants awarded in 1980-81, totalling $606,000. This amount represented an increase of 216 per cent in funding over the previous year and an increase of 272 per cent in the number of grants awarded. The Advisory Committee recommended further increases in Government support for this very important program. Despite the need for continuing constraint of expenditure the Government has steadily increased the resources available for the program. In 1982 $800,000 was provided for grants and the Government will keep the level of support under close consideration. I commend the report to the House.
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) -by leave-The Australian Biological Resources Study is an important program co-ordinating taxonomic work on Australia's flora and fauna. It is working on the publication of Flora of Australia and an Australian faunal directory. Such taxonomic work is essential for ecological studies which require proper identification of the myriad of Australian plants and animals. Proper environmental assessment of resource projects can be hampered by the lack of adequate taxonomic data.
This Government finally recognised the importance of this program when it increased funding in 1980-81. This reversed its policy of cutbacks in funding to the program, which received $425,000 in 1975-76 but only $192,000 in 1979-80. The Government has not matched the funding increase to the participatory program with increases in staff levels in the Bureau of Flora and Fauna. The Advisory Committee noted that work in the

fauna and taxonomic sections was seriously impeded during 1980-81 financial year by lack of staff and recommended that junior scientific and technical staff were urgently required for expanding programs. The Government has increased staff levels by only one since 1980-81.
The Bureau has been forced to move between four premises over the past three years. One of these buildings, the Wales Centre, contained no laboratory space or storage facilities for specimens. I hope that the Bureau will be able to settle at its present premises in Acton House and that it will be provided with adequate facilities to carry out its work. I call on the Government to accept the Advisory Committee's recommendations.
REPATRIATION LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
GRIEVANCE DEBATE
South Australian Election-Unemployment-Communications
Satellite: Effect on Aboriginal Community-Newspaper
Reports-Education-Repatriation Commission: War Veterans
Question proposed:
That grievances be noted.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (11.13)-1 want to state a position in connection with the election in South Australia. It has been referred to by a number of Ministers but no doubt they will be afraid to join in the debate on these matters on which I want to touch. The present South Australian Tonkin Government has made it quite clear that it fully supports this Federal Liberal Government led by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). In the 1980 Federal election campaign the Tonkin Government, in a large advertisement, said:
Vote Liberal for South Australia's sake. Under Malcolm Fraser's strong leadership Australia is on a firm course of growth, security and prosperity.
Mr Robert Brown-What a joke.
Mr SCOTT-Do not laugh. The advertisement continued:
To us South Australia is a very important part of Australia.
That is a very profound statement. It went on:
Together a liberal Federal and liberal State Government will work to keep South Australia moving. For South Australia's sake vote Liberal on October 18.
South Australians are moving. They are moving out of South Australia. From the election of the Tonkin Liberal Government in South Australia to

2352 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Grievance Debate

31 December 1981 South Australia lost a net total of 15,600 persons to other States. One should bear in mind that the Tonkin Government was elected on a campaign promising to stop the job rot. That was a vicious campaign financed by the various chambers of industry and commerce in South Australia, which poured hundreds of thousands of dollars into the campaign, saying that the Liberal Government would stop the job rot in South Australia. The South Australian Government's record in that three-year period has shown, in fact, that South Australia now has the highest unemployment rate of any State in mainland Australia.
I want to take time today to list some of the companies that have been affected mainly in the past three months. I do so because the media, which are part of the campaign to try to keep Tonkin in government, refused to publish these figures. They have been given to me by various union sources and they cover in the main unionised work shops. Horwood Bagshaw has laid off 200 employees in the last three months; Kelvinator Australia Ltd has laid off III employees and that brings the total number of employees who have been laid off to over 400; Perry Engineering Co. Ltd has laid off 65 employees in the last six weeks; Shearers has laid off 180 in the last four months; Gerard Industries Pty Ltd has laid off 147 over the last three months; at General Motors-Holden Ltd 220 employees have retired early in the last three months; Atco Homes has laid off 105 employees over the last three months; at Mount Barker Tannery, 100 people have been laid off in the last month; Tubemakers of Australia Ltd at Kilburn has laid off95 employees in the last two months; Thorn Kenwood has laid off 50 employees. That company moved its operations to New Zealand. At Northern Engineering Industries 100 people have been laid off. That company has closed down. Celluloce-Millicent will layoff 150 in the next two weeks. Omark Australia Ltd has laid off 37 in the last four months; various transport companies have laid off 122 drivers; Sapfor Timber Mills Ltd has laid off 75 people since February this year; Dulux Paints Ltd at Port Adelaide has laid off 27 in the last three months; Clyde Engineering (South Australia) Pty Ltd has laid off 25 in the last two months; Trans Australia Airlines has laid off 40 this year; Titan Manufacturing Co. Pty Ltd at Whyalla has laid off 42 in the last three months; J. I. Case (Australia) Pty Ltd, the tractor manufacturer at Murray Bridge, has laid off 83 employees in the last three months; Neilson electrical has laid off 28 in the last three months; Static Gereral Engineering Co. Pty Ltd has laid off 39 in the last

three months; Actil at Cheltenham has laid off 22 people in the last three months; D. Dunlite has laid off 17 in the last three months; Adelaide Steamship Co. Ltd has laid off 35 in the last two months; Lloyds timber has laid off 30 in the last two months; Adelaide and Wallaroo Fertilizers Ltd has laid off 30 in the last five months; Royal Assurance Australia Ltd has laid off 25 in the last six months; W. H. Whylie has laid off 27 and moves are being made for a shorter working week; Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd at Whyalla has laid off 125 this year, plus another 250 jobs will go. Some 4,700 jobs in the public sector have also been lost since the Tonkin Government took over in 1979. Scott Bonnar Ltd at Thebarton in my electorate has dismissed 96 people this month and the plant is closed. The figures I have cited relate mainly to unionised establishments. Some 7,377 jobs have been lost. In addition, several thousand jobs in non-union factories plus thousands of jobs in very small businesses, service stations and shops have been lost.
Thousands of jobs have been lost and the unemployment rate is the highest in mainland Australia. Over 50,000 people are unemployell with no hope of getting work. Over 50,000 peoplr are living on the dole in a State where the Tonkin Government was elected on its promise to stop the jobs rot. Job losses have been greatest among full time workers. In the past 12 months ended August 1982 a total of 12,000 full time jobs were lost in South Australia. This has happened under a government that said it would stop the job rot. In August 1982 a total of 50,400 persons were unemployed in South Australia. The unemployment rate was 8.4 per cent compared with a national rate of 6.7 per cent, under a government which said that it would stop the job rot. The same Government will have to answer to the people in the next couple of weeks and I am quite sure that it will get the answer that it deserves. It will be kicked out of office and we will have the Bannon Labor Government installed.
South Australia's good industrial relations suffered a very severe setback when the Tonkin Government's Minister of Industrial Affairs, Mr Dean Brown took office. Three years of Tonkin Government in South Australia has created more havoc in relations between the trade union movement and the Tonkin Liberal Government, particularly under the Ministership of Dean Brown who may have been too busy trying to get media coverage in order to set himself up to knock off the present Premier. The confrontationist attitude of Mr Dean Brown is paralleled only by that of the previous Federal Minister for Industrial Relations, the Honourable Ian Viner, and we know

Grievance Debate

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2353

what happened to him. Let us look at the record of Mr Dean Brown, Minister of Industrial Affairs in the Tonkin Liberal Government in South Australia. Recently he brought into the South Australian Parliament industrial legislation which, if agreed to, would bring about massive confrontation with the trade unions and, to a degree, with the employers of South Australia. One can only assume from the statements of this Minister that he wants confrontation. Let me explain. In the South Australian Parliament on 16 September 1982 the Minister of Industrial Affairs, Mr Dean Brown, stated:
Despite the good industrial environment in this State it would be foolish to believe that circumstances will remain static. Industrial relations is by its very nature an organic creature. Thus, in order to ensure that the framework operating in South Australia continues to be relevant to contemporary and future conditions, in November 1980 the Government appointed Mr F. K. Cawthorne, I.M., to conduct an independent examination of the Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act. The terms of reference of this exercise were 'to review the Industrial Conciliation and Arbitration Act, 1972-1979 (as it then was), and to report to the honourable the Minister of Industrial Affairs on any requirement for legislative change to meet current and likely future developments in industrial relations'. As I have indicated previously in this place, that report was made to me on a confidential basis.
There was an interim report which got wide coverage and was supported by unions and by employers, but the confidential part of the report Dean Brown refuses to make public. He refuses the call of the Opposition spokesman on industrial affairs in South Australia, Mr Jack Wright, to debate the issue publicly. Quite clearly the Government has something to hide. It is afraid of its industrial relations record. The Government has created havoc and unemployment in that State and will have to answer for that in the next two weeks.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (11.23)-The issue I raise today was alluded to earlier in a question to the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown). The question related to the use of the domestic satellite that will be introduced in 1985 to provide great benefit across Australia for many years. The point I highlight is that the introduction of television to Aboriginal communities in my electorate through the domestic satellite will cause a social revolution in the Northern Territory. In the last few months I have had occasion to speak to a number of organisations about this. I have spoken to the Isolated Children's Parents Association, the Central Land Council in the southern part of my electorate, a

number of other Aboriginal organisations and, of course, many educationists.
I ask honourable members to ponder for a moment on the fact that Aboriginals will be presented with a much wider view of the European lifestyle through television. The values projected will be much different from those of Aboriginal society. Consequently, traditional ways will decrease in relevance, particularly for the young people reacting to what they will see on television. Aboriginals will see successful black Africans and American negros living in circumstances that are totally different from their own. Once this starts happening many young people will question their culture and accept other trends more easily. The changes will be most noticeable a generation from now, and that is why I am raising this issue and posing the question.
So often we have looked at Aboriginal issues based on the past and on the present problem. It appears that nobody is prepared to crystal ball, to look ahead and to ask what the sociological implications and changes will be. The first group of Aboriginals to experience this will be the generation who will grow up entirely with television and will start looking for opportunities outside the communities in which they live. Young Aboriginal children will have learning experiences of the Sesame Street variety, far removed from anything they will have seen in their surroundings. Unlike their parents, they will grow up with more pressures placed on them by our society through television. It remains to be seen how well Aboriginal society will be able to sustain the very important ceremonial events of its lifestyle, yet also move forward into the twenty-first century with the rest of the community.
I believe that the whole Australian community, in particular my electorate in the Northern Territory, should be preparing for these changes that will come in the future. For example, what will be the implications for employment? What will be the reaction of employers? Most businesses plan ahead well, on long term stategies and with a long term time scale. But if we look at the education of Aboriginals today, we see that dramatic changes are happening. The adolescents and the teenagers are being educated largely by our standards and our values in places such as Yirara College in Alice Springs and Kormilda College in Darwin. They are being brought into contact with the types of work experiences that we will be encouraging them to take. I state quite unequivocably that unless employers are preparing to give many young Aboriginals job opportunities by taking them into the work force, we will be leaving these young men and women in a void.

2354 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Grievance Debate

How must government departments react? How should they adapt their programs to be more in tune with the changing economic circumstances of Aboriginals? I hope that the hand-out mentality that so many government departments have perpetuated will disappear. But unless this is worked on constructively and positively and is planned for by government departments, we will see the dead hand of the bureaucracy perpetuating what it has done in the past without any form of vision. I am always critical that government departments seem to be the last to be able to pick up threads of the future direction and future administration in order to plan. It is unfortunate that the white people who have been attracted to positions of authority as community advisers and so on in so many Aboriginal communities tend to be people whom the Aboriginals like, not the people who are best qualified to serve Aboriginals through the agencies which employ them. Many of the whites who have been employed are on salaries that they could not attract if they applied for routine public service jobs in any other community. They would be appointed at much lower levels. But it appears that they are being paid salaries which are too high, to compensate for the disabilities caused by remoteness.
Those public servants, whether they work in Aboriginal communities or in departments in Darwin or in Canberra, must be able to anticipate all of the changes that are happening as Aboriginals receive mining royalties and get involved in business enterprises. Unless the Public Service reacts to this situation we will not be able to attract sufficient young people to take up appropriate positions of Aboriginal leadership. In particular, the Departments of Employment and Industrial Relations and Social Security must assess the changing welfare needs of Aboriginals and look carefully at the types of services that they provide and will be required to provide over the next 10 years. Future education for Aboriginals should capitalise on the satellite and take advantage of the benefits that will be offered. That wiIl mean some very radical and drastic changes for education in remote communities but let us not forget that there wiIl be a television set in every school, in every community haIl, in every home and in every humpy-if those humpies have not been improved by then. That will be one of the provisions.
I have strongly recommended to the Law Reform Commission that it study these changes in Aboriginal lifestyle, particularly in view of the reference that it is currently looking at with regard to Aboriginal customary law. We can no longer believe that Aboriginal customary law is

static and historical. It must adapt, and it wiIl adapt, to the future, particularly as a result of the effects that wiIl be brought about by television. I assert that one of the major things we should be looking at is the proposition that customary law should be viewed as a religion practiced by those who choose without infringement of the rights of others and without contravention of Australian or international law. It may weIl be that Aboriginal customary law will be considered as something like we have in our society, a masonic lodge available for those who elect to join it rather than joining it automatically. I am posing the major consideration at which we should be looking. What will be the impact of the domestic satellite for five, 10 or 20 years on Aboriginal communities throughout Australia? What are the changes that Government must make now, not, as it has with all other Aboriginal problems, after the problems have surfaced and got too serious? The major discrimination that arises in our community is generaIly brought about by behavioural problems and drunkenness. Let us not perpetuate it by adding to it a media mongul.
Mr WALLIS (Grey) (11.33)-In my contribution to this grievance debate I shall, like my colleague the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott), refer to the South Australian election on 6 November. I understand that there was a big black headline in last night's Adelaide News stating: 'ALP tries to stop Pension Rises'. I suppose all those people who support the Australian Labor Party in South Australia wondered whether South Australia is going back to 1979 and whether they are to see a repeat of the filthy role that the Adelaide News played in the last State election. The action of the News in 1979 was to be deplored. The absolute fierceness of its political bias and prejudice came through quite strongly, to such an extent that I could name plenty of people with whom I associated who decided there and then that they would never buy the Adelaide News again and who have not done so. Let us look at what happened in 1979. I have before me an article dealing with the election and the role that was played by the News. It is an impartial article; it is not written with any political bias or from any particular side. The article states:
Much was made by the ALP of the publicity campaign launched by six major employers' groups against the state Labor government.
That is what happened. The six major employers' groups got together and financed fuIl page advertisements in the local newspapers. That, of course, helped to bring down the then Labor Government. The article goes on to state:

Grievance Debate

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2355

The chief concern of the 'coalition' was directed at the government's 'anti-business' policies. For example, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry . . . drew attention to the 'deep and uneasy disquiet, a near-abysmal lack of confidence in SA by people who have made the closest
examina,tion of our economic health-the potential Investors. . . .

The article was quoting what the Chamber of Commerce had to say. The article continues:

While the SA employers' group was cast in the role of the Liberal Party's 'industrial wing' by the left--

I suppose that by 'the left' the author means the left of the political spectrum overall-

the publicity campaign only made explicit their financial support and formalised a connection that no doubt has always existed.

I think that we in South Australia know that that connection always existed but it was never quite so blatantly evident as it was in this election. The
article states further:

It was the media that provided the conduit for the South Australia employers' grievances. Dissatisfaction also centred on the perceived mismanagement of the State's economy and during the last days of the campaign on the bus strike . . .

The bus strike took place in the last few days before the election. The article continues:

There is little disagreement about the bias and unfairness of News Limited during the 1979 election campaign. Even the Press Council, in response to formal complaints laid by the S.A. branch of the ALP, delivered an implicit censure in finding:

That 'the News' was intensely partisan during the S.A. election campaign can hardly be seriously questioned. No-one who wanted to find the best that could be said for the then Labor Government would have consulted 'the News'. The News did not disguise the fact that its object throughout the campaign was to present the case against the Government. Prior to the election a series of headlines appeared in the News. They were as follows:

Sept 4
Sept 5 Sept 6
Sept 7 Sept 10 Sept II Sept 12
Sept 13
Sept 14

Stop the Job Rot. Employers launch Campaign 540 Pay Shock: S.A. Govt. backs Rise More Pay Rise 'Deals' on Way, Agreement by Govt. and Unions, says Lean Trades Hall Coup-Tonkin Union retaliation S.A.'s 'Standstill State' Big Swing to Libs. Labor alarmed at poll shock New Bus Strike Threat. Thousands may be Stranded More Chaos on the Buses. Threats of All-out Strike
Murder Riddle Deepens (including a front-page editorial on why a vote should not be cast for Labor)

Anybody who reads the Adelaide News knows that it uses big black headlines which extend right across the front page. One can see how damaging that can be. I certainly hope that the article in last night's News, in which it was claimed that the Labor Party was trying to stop the pay rises for pensioners, is not an indication that the News will play the same filthy role that it played in the 1979 election.

On Monday night the Premier of South Australia delivered his policy speech. I think that before he finished people were questioning some of the figures which he supplied. I refer to an article in yesterday's Australian which made reference to Mr Tonkin's figures for the amount of investment in South Australia. In his televised policy speech on Monday night he stated that the Liberal Government in South Australia was successful in attracting to South Australia 20 per cent of all investment capital in Australia. Now, everything in South Australia is closing down. My friend the honourable member for Hindmarsh supplied figures relating to the companies that are laying off employees everywhere. I do not know where all this extra expenditure about which the Liberals talk is coming from, I will not read the whole article; the figures can be picked out quite clearly. The last paragraph of the article states:
At the end of the period, total new fixed capital expenditure on a national basis was $4,347.6 million while the total for South Australia was $275.1 million, or 6.33 per cent.
That 6.33 per cent is a fair way from the 20 per cent that was cited by the Government. Pernaps we could look at the Liberal's record in some areas. It is a fact that South Australia, which used to be a much larger State population-wise than Western Australia, has been not standing still but has been sliding backwards. It is now expected to be the smallest populated State in the Commonwealth. Information published by the Commonwealth Treasury as part of the 1982 Budget indicates that by the end of 1982 South Australia's total population will be well behind that of Western Australia. It is expected that its population will be exceeded by Western Australia's population by 8,300. The figure given for South Australia is 1,334,700 and the figure for Western Australia is 1,344,500. So we can see that South Australia's population will be down on that of Western Australia. The major factor holding down the population growth of South Australia continues to be the net loss of population to other States. During 1980-81 the largest loss in a financal year was recorded at over 7,000. The number of people who have left South Australia to go to other States since the Tonkin Government has been in office is over 15,600.
We all know that South Australia has the highest level of unemployment of any State on the mainland of Australia. My friend the honourable member for Hindmarsh detailed some figures and gave a clear indication of the situation there. In my electorate quite recently Titan Manufacturing Co. Pty Ltd at Whyalla decided to retrench all its staff. For a long time the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd has been recruiting no staff and has been

2356 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Grievance Debate

reducing its staff by attrition. It announced last week that it would reduce its staff by a further 350. It is cutting out shifts. What were seven-day shifts are now five-day shifts, and BHP piously says: 'We do not have to put anyone off; we hope it can be done by attrition'. The fact is that the same situation applies as applies everywhere else; if employers cannot obtain lower staff levels by attrition, the workers will be given notice.
Tomorrow the Prime Minster (Mr Malcolm Fraser) will visit Whyalla. I contacted his office. The Whyalla combined union council requested an opportunity to meet the Prime Minister and to put a case for the people who will lose their jobs, and the unemployed people around the Whyalla area. Unfortunately the Prime Minister's office informed me that he will not have time; the car will blow into Whyalla and blowout, and the people will not have a opportunity to put their case. I feel this is a disgrace in an area where people are being laid off. The least the Prime Minister could do is spare ten minutes and show a little compassion for the representatives of those people who will be laid off within a few months. As I said, South Australia's unemployment level is the highest of any State on the mainland of Australia and, according to the latest figures, it is now 8.5 per cent.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo) (11.43)-1 wish to raise two matters in the grievance debate. I first deal, as did the honourable member for Grey (Mr Wallis), with the attitude of the media in reporting or misreporting facts. I refer to an article by one Kenneth Davidson of the Age which was printed on 24 June 1982 in which he attacked private schools for being funded by public money. He misquoted the facts to suggest that those schools received some sort of privilege and special treatment as against government schools. This article was replied to in depth in a letter by the Victorian Parents Council, but of course the Age elected not to run it. So I take this opportunity to answer some of the points made by Mr Davidson. Mr Davidson's article began with the usual theme that education has a fundamental role in obtaining top jobs and that top jobs are now becoming scarce in relation to demand. He continued:
It is not surprising in this situation that the more atlluent or more ambitious~or even more caring~parent is going to look for ways to beat the competitive pressure.
The obvious way is to buy a superior~or an apparently superior~education which can be done by increasing education spending for yourself and your group or by squeezing the resources available to other groups.

Thus, the Federal Government now spends more on nongovernment schools, which educate 22 per cent of the school population, than on Government schools which educate the other 78 per cent.
While expenditure per pupil in Government schools is still higher than for Catholic schools and about the same as for other non-government schools, non-government schools are expanding their spending while reducing their fees.
Thus Catholic secondary schools were able to reduce their fees by 10 per cent and the other non-government secondary schools by 14 per cent in real terms between 1974 and 1979.
To argue against that article and put the matter correct, I point out that in any discussion concerning funding from public funds-public funds including Commonwealth funds-the only figures that really matter are those of total government expenditure, State and Commonwealth. Public funds are collected from all citizens and the ownership of any moneys distributed by government resides in the people. Governments are simply the trustees of that money and expected to see to its equitable distribution on behalf of all Australians. Schools in Australia are funded by State and Commonwealth governments. State governments have the primary responsibility for education and spend almost five times as much on schooling as does the Commonwealth through the Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Some of the deficiencies in Mr Davidson's article can be summarised in this way: In total expenditure on schools from public funds of almost $5,000m and in a situation in which State governments have the primary responsibility for education, Mr Davidson commented only on Commonwealth funding, and ignored the fact that State governments spend, as I have already mentioned, five times that amount. There are good reasons why the Commonwealth, in its role of making good the deficiencies of State governments, has increased funding to non-government schools, and an impartial writer would at least have mentioned them. Mr Davidson is wrong in stating that fees in non-government schools were reduced between 1974 and 1979. The Schools Commission has in fact stated that the levels of both fees and other private income have increased in real terms.
In 1979 and 1980 the State governments spent $4,117m on schooling, of which $3,935m-95.6 per cent-was allocated to government schools. That is hardly what one would call a bias towards non-government schools. The allocation to nongovernment schools from the States was $182m out of $4,117m-that is, 4 per cent. The Commonwealth Government, through the Schools Commission, spent $853m. The sum of $492.5m, 57.7 per cent, went to government schools and $360.5m, 42 per cent, went to non-government

Grievance Debate

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2357

schools. Thus, of the total allocation of $4,970m, only $542m, or 10.9 per cent, actually went to the 22 per cent of Australian school children in nongovernment schools. The truth is quite obviously totally opposite to what our friend Mr Davidson elects to say. He referred to tables from the Commonwealth Schools Commission. I have asked the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett)

opposite whether he would allow me to incorporate a table in Hansard. I have mentioned this matter to the Acting Clerk of the House. The table is headed 'Recurrent Expenditure from Public Funds 1974 and 1979'. It clearly sets out the true figures in relation to this matter. I seek leave to incorporate that table.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FROM PUBLIC FUNDS 1974 AND 1979

Per Pupil

% increase

$ increase

1974

1979

over 1974

over 1974

Primary
Government schools Catholic schools-
Commonwealth Grants
State Grants Total Grants
Other non-government-
Commonwealth Grants State Grants
Total Grants Secondary-
Government schools Catholic Schools-
Commonwealth Grants State Grants
Total Grants
Other non-governmentCommonwealth Grants State Grants
Total Grants

$

$

%

$

948

1,351

42.5

403

230

440

91.3

210

145

226

55.9

81

375

666

77.6

291

142

306

115.5

164

131

228

74.0

97

273

534

95.6

261

1,662

2,204

32.6

542

307

628

104.6

321

199

382

92.0

183

506

1,010

99.6

504

224

423

88.8

199

188

393

109.0

205

412

816

95.6

404

Mr BOURCHIER-Finally, only the Commonwealth Government gives assistance for capital works in non-government schools. In 1979-80 total capital expenditure by State and Commonwealth governments was $516m. Nongovernment schools received $37m or 7 per cent of the total. That small amount of $37m came from the Commonwealth Government. I suggest to Mr Davidson that when he elects to write articles-he is supposed to be an expert in economics-he should exercise his mental ability, study the facts and cover the whole school funding system and not be selective in a biased, political manner. Perhaps we can swap the Age in Victoria for the News in South Australia. It would be a good deal as far as the Liberals in Victoria are concerned.
The second matter I wish to bring to the attention of the House is a matter of concern about which I have spoken to a number of my fellow members. It arises out of the decisions of the Repatriation Commission in regard to war veterans who have applied for reassessment of their disabilities. I refer particularly to a person in my electorate who made an application and, even

though his medical history was confirmed as worsening, was told he was not to get any increase and that he could get a job.
I checked on this matter. I thought it was rather startling. We have to keep in mind that this man is 68 years of age. He was a motor mechanic in his working days. I checked with the Commonwealth Employment Service in Bendigo and I found that it did have a telephone call from the Department of Veterans' Affairs. The Department was advised that work opportnities for a 68-year-old mechanic would be virtually non-existent. I do not think it would take much intellingence to work that out, particularly if the person concerned was medically unfit. The Department of Veterans' Affairs officer said that his board interpreted the phrase 'virtually non-existent' to mean that there were some positions available. He also advised that the Department took only disability into account and did not consider age. The Repatriation Commission stated:
The report of an examination by a departmental medical officer who recorded the member's statement that he considers the pain in the low part of his back is worse and he now gets pain when straightening up from a bent position; he gets very irritable, his nerves are not good and is easily upset; he

2358 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Grievance Debate

also has pains in both wrists, elbows and left ankle and both knees ache a bit.

On clinical examination the medical officer found that, in respect of the member's lumbar spine, flexion when standing
was restricted but lateral movements were full; there was no swelling of the knees and movements were full; he had full movements of the elbows with pain at full extension; the right
wrist is thickned with some tenderness and restricted dorsiflexion; no significant changes were noted in the fingers.

The report goes on to state:

In summary the medical officer stated that the member had no apparent trouble dressing or climbing onto the couch but
has some difficulty sitting up from a prone position.

Honourable members should not forget that he is 68 years of age and was injured during the War. The Commission then referred to the case of Bowman v. the Repatriation Commission. The report
states that in broad terms:

. . . in assessing a member's entitlement to pension in

excess of the one hundred per cent

General Rate,

the determining authority is bound in law to take into account

the effect of the member's physical or mental disability on his

capacity to earn remuneration, by employment or otherwise,

in any market reasonably accessible to him. It is necessary, in

this respect, to establish whether, in fact, he is prevented, by

reason of his service-related disabilities, from performing his

normal occupation or some other occupation which, having

regard to his work history . . .

How broad does one have to be in order to try to work out how a 68-year-old man, crippled with
arthritis and suffering from other complaints, can possibly find a job? This is no problem for the
Commission, It has had no trouble at all in assess-
ing that the evidence, from which I have already quoted, shows that such work is accessible to the
member. The Commission's report continues:

The Commission notes factors affecting the member's capacity, namely his age-

At that stage he was 67-

and his rejected disabilities; however, these cannot be taken into account in this assessment.

That means that he is obviously getting better as
he gets older. According to the way in which the
Commission has assessed this man's ability, there is no doubt that he will be able to find a job prob-
ably anywhere at all. The report continues:

Having considered all of the evidence in this case, the Commission accepts departmental medical opinion in relation to the appropriate pension assessment and also the member's ca-
pacity for employment, being satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, that this opinion is fair and proper.

If honourable members were to go to any decent pub on a Saturday afternoon they would find out just what the expression 'fair and proper' means. It cannot be related to the Commission's decision.
An absolutely impossible situation is occurring when we have people who are supposed to know better making an assessment that a person who has a disability caused by the War is actually improving as he is getting older. Those people then

have the gall to state that this person aged 68 has to get work. He has to find a job because their could be a position available even though he has been told that jobs are practically non-existent.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (1\.53)-1 Jom with my colleagues the honourable member for Grey (Mr Wallis) and the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) in referring to the present South Australian Government. That Government was elected in 1979 on its supposed ability as an economic manager. The major argument advanced for its eJection in 1979 was that South Australia was in a decline as a result of the Labor Government's alleged anti-business activities. We have had three years of what is supposedly a pro-business government. What has been the result? In those three years there has been a steady and continuing erosion of South Australia's economic position. The only argument that the Premier can produce now, after three years of this government is that South Australia is going down the gurgler more slowly than the other States. The best argument that the South Australian Government can produce for not producing the economic miracle that it promised to bring to South Australia is that South Australia is going down the plughole more slowly than the other States. Even that argument has no substantial support in the evidence.
Somehow Mr Tonkin is trying to pretend that South Australia is resisting the economic malaise over which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) presides. In fact, Mr Tonkin and the Prime Minister are birds of a feather. In both we have euphoric economic promises at election time and stagnation in the years between. At eJection time we have them both mouthing the same private enterprise litany. They promise miracles of economic achievement and then the following years are years of stagnation. The evidence is now overwhelming that the Prime Minister and Mr Tonkin are false economic prophets.
All honourable members are fully familiar with the 1975 policy promise of the Prime Minister that:
. . . a growth rate of 6-7 per cent is quite feasible . . .
In the seven years of Federal government ever since that promise was made that growth rate has never been approached. Mr Tonkin, in both his 1979 campaign and his present eJection campaign, has also stressed the importance of growth to South Australia. Let us look at growth in terms of

Grievance Debate

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2359

the criteria he set down for the Labor Government in 1979. In 1979, under Labor, South Australia's share of private fixed capital expenditure for manufacturing industry was 7.5 per cent-a disappointing figure. Under this Government, the latest Australian Bureau of Statistics figures puts South Australia's share at 5 per cent of private fixed capital expenditure. Another key indicator of growth used by Mr Tonkin-let us use his own criteria for judging Labor governments to have him judged-is new car registrations. With a 9 per cent share of the national population in 1979, South Australia had 8.2 per cent of new car registrations. This was lower than the population share of registrations and was an indicator used by the Liberal party in its 1979 election campaign to indicate economic stagnation. But under the Liberal Government's three years of management the share of new car registrations slumped to 7 per cent in 1981. This share has now risen marginally to 7.65 per cent. Thus, on Mr Tonkin's criteria, South Australia has now a lower share of these registrations than was the case under the stagnation about which it complained in 1979.
Again, all honourable members in this House would be familiar with the Prime Minister's policy speech promise of 1975:
Only under a Liberal-National Country Party Government will there be jobs for all who want to work.
We are all familiar with that promise which was made seven years ago. The result has been that, under this Prime Minister, we have had higher and more continuous rates of unemployment than under any Prime Minister since the Great Depression. Similarly we have Mr Tonkin in South Australia campaigning on a 'stop the job rot' call in 1979. If unemployment in South Australia is any indicator, jobs have simply rotted away under Mr Tonkin. When Mr Tonkin set out to stop the job rot in 1979 South Australia's level of unemployment was 7.6 per cent. At present 8.5 per cent of its labour force is unemployed. As for Mr Tonkin's argument that South Australia is doing better on the employment front than the rest of the nation, let us take the statistics for the 12 months ended August 1982. South Australia had a 1.3 per cent decline in employment, the second worst decline of any State in Australia. Only Tasmania had a bigger drop in employment in the same 12-month period.
There is a common thread to Liberal Government economic promises. They talk about sound, free enterprise management and they say that that will get the economy going. That is what Mr Tonkin promised in 1979.

Mr Hodges-Nobody believes you.
Dr BLEWETT-Of course nobody believes it. That is what the Prime Minister said in 1975 with the same result. Nothing happened. What is the result of this formula that the Liberal Government advocated in 1975 and 1977, and 1980 at the national level and in 1979 at the South Australian level. The result of those kinds of promises for this country, including South Australia, has been record unemployment and stagnant growth. Having failed there, what do these leaders fall back on? Is it job creation? Not on your life. Is it economic stimulation? No, that is too dangerous. What they produce is the cargo cult mentality that somehow there will be a mineral boom. We had a classic example of that this morning. The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) talked about the marvellous economic boom that will take place in South Australia as a result of the mineral boom. He is the very same man who promised in December I980-just before the Federal .election-that there would be a mineral boom across this nation. That boom evaporated as soon as the election was over. We now have the same cargo cult mentality.
I turn now to the other issue raised by my colleague the honourable member for Grey-the performance of the Adelaide News newspaper. The ability to perpetuate the type of nonsense about which I have been talking-that is, this cargo cult mentality; getting away with these economic promises which have never been methas been dependent very much on an obsequious and uncritical press in Adelaide. As the honourable member for Grey pointed out, in 1979 the Adelaide News sank to a new level in that most of its major news stories ceased to be news stories and it simply became a pamphlet for the Liberal Party. But yesterday a new nadir was reached by this gutter journal of the Murdoch Press. It presented this marvellous headline: 'Threat to Pension Dole Rises-ALP tactics may delay new benefits deal'.
Mr Hodges-That is true.
Dr BLEWETT-That was its headline story.
Mr ShiptOD-Very accurate.
Dr BLEWETT-The two honourable members opposite who, of course, have peddled dishonesty for the past seven years are prepared to say that that story is true. The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) and the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) know that that is a completely unfounded and unsubstantiated story. Twelve hours before the story even appeared in the News the Bill authorising all those payments had passed the Senate. Could I

2360 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Grievance Debate

say that the honourable member for Higgins and Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

the Minister at the table clearly indicate their own Order! Honourable members on my left will re-

dishonesty when they are prepared to interject main silent. The honourable member for

and say that a story like that is true. It is a classic Bonython had the opportunity to address the

example of what one British Conservative Prime House. I call the honourable member for

Minister said was the exercise of power without Wakefield.

responsibility. That is, he said, the prerogative of the harlot down through the ages. They have used
the great power this newspaper has and the
influence of those headlines without any sense of responsibility whatever.

Mr GILES-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I will tell honourable members about the
Adelaide Advertiser and other newspapers. The
House might remember that a week ago I asked a
question on uranium enrichment. I geared that

I am not going to label that collection in North question--

Terrace in the News offices as a collection of harMr Scott-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to raise

lots. That would be an insult to an ancient proa point of order. I draw your attention to the fact

fession. Rather they are simply a gaggle of pimps that the reference was to the Adelaide News.

who prostitute the truth for party purposes. Twelve hours before that News story appeared on
the streets with that headline the Social Security
Legislation Amendment Bill had passed the
Senate authorising the payment of all those benefits, allowances and deductions, and nothing
can prevent them being paid on I November.
That happened 12 hours before that story hit the streets. I believe that a free Press is the requisite of
a free society and that without it we cannot have
the sort of good society we would desire. It is also important for the Press to note that if it is to exer-
cise that freedom it also has to accept the respon-
sibilities that come with it. Unless the rest of the Press is prepared to condemn and discipline gutter
stories of this nature then freedom of the Press in this country is endangered.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr GILES-I would like to get on to the point I am trying to make. I asked a question on uranium enrichment on the first day on which the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) was Acting Prime Minister. The only newspapers in Australia that used it were the eastern States Press, but neither of the Adelaide ones used it. Let us be fair about this. Members of the Opposition are launching an attack on one section of the Adelaide Press. The fact of the matter is that that Press does not report very much from this House, in their parochialism or whatever the reason might be. Nevertheless, to have an attack on the mass media because it suits their purposes is patently absurd and obscene. Honourable

Mr GILES (Wakefield) (12.3)-Last night in members opposite should have a better rational

the Senate we saw an exercise by the Australian view of what is happening across the mass media

Labor Party which was geared completely to the generally. Those newspapers in South Australia

South Australian election campaign. Today in this pedal their own sort of parochialism, as the

House we have seen three Labor speakers playing newspapers do in Tasmania and I believe else-

their own form of gut politics.

where. The National Press in Australia, the Aus-

tralian and its adjunct, the News, get much closer

Mr Wallis-Never mind about that. Why to reporting national matters to this nation than

didn't any of your people put their names down? do a lot of others. It is no use Opposition members

Mr GILES-The honourable member should
wait until his successor is rolled; then he will see where the truth lies. That is very likely to happen
in the electorate of Grey, as he well knows. I repeat that we saw a political exercise last night in the Senate, we have seen a political exercise by
the Labor Party today, and an attack on the Adelaide Advertiser or some other newspaper, I am not quite clear what, which--

screaming rage and thinking they are being victimised. They have not been victimised. Nine times out of 10 it works the other way around.
Let us get back to the South Australian election. When the history of that State is written it is quite clear to me and to any rational person what it will be. Premier Dunstan and the Labor Party did a great deal to help the cultural development of the State, if it was necessary. Apart from Steele Hall building the Festival Hall and not Dunstan,

Dr Blewett-Why don't you listen to what I . which everyone always ignores, in this House and

say?

elsewhere else, the history of South Australia will

unquestionably say that the Dunstan Administra-

Mr GILES-I will tell the honourable tion presided over the economic stagnation of the

member--

State of South Australia. It did nothing to help it

Grievance Debate

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2361

at all, and the Tonkin Government has had to try to resurrect and resuscitate investment and confidence in that State, which has been done to its very great credit. If people are going to come in here and play cheap politics about a State election, at least one person out of eight should be capable and fair enough of putting an opposing point of view. That is the truth.
Opposition members should go and talk to Queensland Treasurers if they do not like the National Party. They should ask what the Queensland Government has got out of royalties from mineral production and findings. They should ask what that has done for Queensland and its development. Are they seriously going to stand up here today and say that South Australia should not be allowed to progress along those lines? This situation and their point of view is arrant nonsense and they know it. The people of South Australia are not as dopey as some members of the Opposition think. They know when a Premier and a State government have tried to bring a State together and develop its pride as a State. All these things the Tonkin Government has done and done very effectively. If anyone wants to offer me six to four against Tonkin, which I gather is the ruling rate in Canberra at present, I for one am standing ready to put some money where my mouth is.
Enough of this damn nonsense of gang warfare by the Labor Party in the Senate and the Labor Party in this House, trying to play cheap politics. Opposition members have the nerve to mention the Press. They should have a look at their own consciences and at what they are trying to do in a national Parliament. It is a disgrace to the Labor Party, in this House and the other place, to be carrying on in this manner. This is a State election. I strongly advise the honourable member for Grey (Mr Wallis) to look to the Federal election to come because that is where there will be a big change in the South Australian field.
Mr Wallis-You were here in 1975. You apparently have a very poor memory.
Mr GILES-I have got quite a good memory.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Wakefield might assist if he addresses the House through the Chair.
Mr GILES-I apologise, Mr Deputy Speaker. My respect for you and the Chair I thought would be unquestioned. I accept your rebuke. We have reached the stage in South Australia where there is huge incipient investment available. I gather that the Premier has made the statement in a moderate and sensible fashion that the investment he has in hand now will produce 30,000 more jobs over a decade. He has not played around cheaply

by saying what could happen during the election campaign or for a three-year period afterwards. He is staking his claim in South Australia very properly to the development of that State. He is welt on track and well on the way to achieving it for the benefit of the people of South Australia..
At this point I will turn off what I regard as a cheap and unfortunate attack by the Opposition on the Government of South Australia. Let us stop and try to be rational and have a look at the national implications of it. The Labor Party today, thanks to my friend Norman Foster, who used to sit in this House as the member for Sturt, is in a cleft stick nationally, not only in South Australia. I am trying now not to be parochial. Every uranium field in this country, under the Labor Party's current policy, will be phased out. Where does that leave South Australia? The Victorian Branch of the Labor Party does not even agree with the phasing out. It wants to say that a Labor Party in government will immediately extinguish and not allow any other field such as Roxby Downs to persist.
Mr Falconer-That is the socialist left influence.
Mr GILES-Yes. In fact, one can argue that the most conservative and unimaginative group in Australian society today is the trade unions. Who is against change under any circumstances? What would have happened to Kelvinator Australia Ltd in South Australia if it had not rationalised its production? It is now a good going concern with its ups and downs according to consumer demand. The Labor Party policy nationally is a tragedy for fields of world scope and world potential such as Roxby Downs. As members of this House would probably perceive if they have got around to looking at it, there is no way that purely uranium can be mined in Roxby Downs. There is no way that copper can be mined purely and simply in Roxby Downs. It is a composite mineral lode. The new component which has come to bear only recently is silver. We have a world class mine of enormous potential to this country based primarily on copper, but also on uranium ore and on gold and some silver. That is the sort of project about which the Labor Party is apt to sit back and say: 'You are selling the farm. You are plundering the mineral resources. You are doing away with scrub, trees, sheep or salt bush'-and I do not know what. Roxby Downs is a world class mine of major consequence.
It is quite true to say that if we adopt a selfish, inward-looking policy in relation to the development of many of these mineral resources then we deserve the sort of future in this country that the

2362 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Grievance Debate

Labor Party would have us have. There is every reason why people's jobs, people's livelihoods, and our capacity to service demand from international markets, should go ahead. This stick in the mud, conservative, stay put, against all change attitude of the Labor Party will, I believe, be its undoing. I am quite certain in my mind that the Tonkin Government will be seen by the people of South Australia to be a good government, one that has worked in the interests of the State, which has some imagination, and which is not cluttered up with the shibboleths of the past, not cluttered up with stupid arrangements against development at all costs. I am most grateful to the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) who allowed me to take his place in this debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (12.12)-1 had intended to speak on another topic but in view of the remarks of the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) I think that some reply must be offered. The situation in South Australia is that that State depends for its livelihood, and has depended for its livelihood, on industrial development. The fact is that secondary industry, manufacturing industry, was the basis of that State's economy. What we have is the run-down in manufacturing industry in that State and no answers whatsoever from the Tonkin Government as to how that will be prevented. We have not heard the Premier, Mr Tonkin, talk about the reduction in tariffs in manufacturing industry or about any plans or programs to advance manufacturing industry in that State. We have not heard any idea whatsoever about the run-down of the motor car industry in that State. All we have heard is this kind of magical idea that somehow one project will save a whole State from ruin.
The fact is that, first of all, this project will take a very long time to develop. What are the unemployed going to be doing in South Australia while they wait for this project to come on line in six or eight years? What are they going to be doing? I will tell the House what they will be doing. They will be leaving South Australia. That is what has happening ever since the Tonkin Government was elected-people have been leaving that State.
Mr PorterRubbish!
Dr THEOPHANOUS-They have so. In many thousands they have been leaving that State because of unemployment. The record of the Tonkin Government is absolutely disgraceful in relation to this area and every other area. Not one imaginative idea about how to create one industry in that State has been put forward. All that we

have heard about is this so-called resources project that will save the whole of a State. What about all the other hundreds of thousands of people in that State who are suffering under that Government and its lack of provision of services to them?
Let me mention one group, namely, the ethnic communities in South Australia. The Dunstan Government was not just responsible for the so called cultural activities, as the honourable member mentioned, it was also one of the most progressive governments in Australia in relation to ethnic affairs. It brought forward programs for the introduction of multi-culturalism in schools, second language teaching, programs to help migrant kids to learn English better and adult education programs. In fact, the Dunstan Government's programs were the precursors of most of the other programs that have been adopted in this area in every other State. Under those circumstances what has the Tonkin Government done? Absolutely nothing. It has reduced those programs. It has come forward with nothing new. In fact, if anything, it has tried to divide the community in South Australia because of its continuing creation of unemployment. It has tried to blame that phenomenon on the migrant community.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It is now 12.15 p.m. In accordance with Standing Order 106, as amended for this session, the debate is interrupted.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Report
Mr FRY (Fraser)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory, I present the Committee's report on retail trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory, together with the transcript of evidence and the minutes of proceedings.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr FRY-by leave-The report I have just tabled deals with the subject of retail trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory. This matter was referred to the Committee for consideration after a proposal to repeal the present trading hours ordinance contained in section 90 of the Commonwealth Functions (Statute Review) Act 1981-otherwise known as the Lynch Committee of Review on Commonwealth Functionswas debated in the Senate. During this debate it was agreed that the Government would not proclaim the relevant section of this Act until the

Committee on Australian Capital Territory

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2363

Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory had considered comprehensively the question of its implementation and the possible effects of deregulation of trading hours. It was further stated in the debate that the Committee should provide every opportunity for all views to be heard.
The Committee was requested to examine the manner in which deregulation of trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory might be implemented having regard to the effect on retailers, employees and consumers. The Committee formally accepted its terms of reference on 10 September 1981 and concluded its deliberations on the inquiry less than 12 months after its referral. The initial response to the inquiry was quite significant. In the four weeks immediately after advertising the terms of reference, about 4,000 pro forma slips from individual shoppers, 200 form letters from small traders, 60 form letters from individuals, 40 letters from small traders, 6 letters from residents as well as 50 major submissions from retailers, trade unions, interested organisations and individuals were received. In order to provide an opportunity for interested parties to present their arguments the Committee held a series of public hearings in Canberra, Sydney and Melbourne. It was decided also in the concluding stages of the inquiry to conduct a series of inspections and informal discussions in the Northern Territory where trading hours, apart from liquor trading, are not subject to regulation. In all, 68 witnesses, representing 38 organisations, and seven persons appearing in a private capacity, gave evidence to the Committee.
As I do not agree with the recommendations of the Committee I do not wish to speak any further about the report. I want to make a few remarks about the dissenting report which I have signed. The normal practice, of course, is for the Government to make a decision following a report but in this case a decision was made by the Lynch Committee. The Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory was then asked to legitimise that decision. I objected strongly to this procedure. By handing this type of reference to the Committee I believe that the Committee's legitimate role has been prostituted to legitimise a hasty and illconceived decision of the Lynch Committee. Many of the decisions of the Lynch Committee in relation to the Australian Capital Teritory can likewise be described. Some of them have been abandoned. I hope the Government will give further consideration to this decision.
As a result of this procedure we found that the Committee was placed in the position of having to make recommendations which in my view and in

the view of my colleagues were in direct conflict with the evidence presented to the Committee. Hence, my colleagues and I really had no option other than to present a dissenting report. I must say that I had some sympathy for the Government member, the chairperson, who was placed in the position of trying to justify government policy in the face of contrary evidence. The Government is obviously bowing to pressure from its big business friends. Even that pressure was not unanimous. I must say that the big business organisations of Myer Canberra, G.J. Coles and Co. Ltd and Woolworths Ltd pressured very heavily for deregulation. But the views of big business organisations were by no means unanimous in that Waltons Bond Limited and David Jones (Aust.) Pty Limited gave contrary evidence and did not press for deregulation at all.
I suggest to the House that the evidence, if looked at impartially and objectively, indicates that there was overwhelming objection to deregulation because 4,000 shoppers, 200 small traders, the Australian Association of Independent Businesses and the Shop Distributive and Allied Employees Association wrote to the Committee and registered their total opposition to deregulation. In contrast with the strong opposition to deregulation there has been virtually no public demand for a change in trading hours in Canberra. In this respect I must say that I have found that people have taken a fairly unselfish attitude in this matter. Some people have said that it would be nice to have longer trading hours but that we must consider the position of the people who work in the industry. Some people have said that it is not fair to ask people to work extra hours and on the weekends because that would deny them the opportunities for recreation and relaxation that we have. An influencing factor in the lack of demand may be that Canberra residents already enjoy the convenience of shopping seven days a week and extended shopping hours at their small neighbourhood shopping centres where most things can be purchased.
We consider that the evidence indicates that the cost of goods to consumers will rise if trading hours are extended. David Jones provided such evidence. It said that Saturday afternoon trading would result in an increase in the price of goods of around 1.5 per cent. Waltons calculated a 13.3 per cent increase in payroll costs associated with Saturday afternoon trading. Such an increase must put pressure on prices. In addition, small traders argued strongly that increased overheads brought about as a result of increased trading hours would inevitably result in higher prices for consumers.

2364 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Committee on Australian Capital Territory

The dissenting report basically supports the major arguments raised by the traders and the Shop Distributive and Allied Employees Association as well as many religious and community groups which appeared before the Committee. They generally stated that deregulation would result in reduced opportunities for full employment, increased prices of goods to the consumer, would seriously disadvantage and threaten the viability of small traders, would cause disruption to the family life of employees and would reduce the opportunities for sporting and religious pastimes at weekends. In addition, I think it should be noted that any change in the shopping hours in the ACT would seriously disadvantage traders in the surrounding areas of New South Wales, particularly in Queanbeyan. I hope the Government takes note of this situation. It would cause a considerable amount of disharmony in the harmony which presently exists between the ACT and Queanbeyan.
The dissenting report appeals to the Government to reconsider the situation and suggests that if the Government looks at the evidence impartially it will reject the proposition for deregulation of trading hours. We suggest that the Ordinance should be amended, if necessary, to remove any anomalies but that for the interests of the people and the shopkeepers-particularly the small business people and the people who work in the industry-deregulation would be a backward step. We suggest that it is in conflict with the evidence and the findings of inquiries into deregulation in many other parts of Australia.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth)-by leave-In conducting this inquiry the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory was aware that its first obligation was to the traders, retail employees and consumers of the Australian Capital Territory. But it was also aware that the inquiry was being watched carefully by those same classes of people in the States. If anything I believe that added to the conscientiousness of the inquiry. It is an area in which there are strong disagreements. In recommending a limited deregulation the Committee believes that it has gone as far as is possible to reach some sort of consensus among the conflicting positions.
The Committee began by examining the anomalies in the actual operation of the Trading Hours Ordinance in the Australian Capital Territory. This Ordinance provides that the sale of goods in shops is prohibited on a Sunday, a gazetted public holiday, a weekday before 6 a.m. and after 6 p.m. other than a late shopping day when trading hours are extended to 9 p.m. and on a Saturday that is not a public holiday before 6 a.m.

and after 12 noon. The Schedule to the Ordinance
specifies goods and classes of goods which are
exempt from the provisions of the Ordinance. The Ordinance has been subjected to a number of pub-
lic inquiries and reviews. The difficulties associated with the enforcement of the Ordinance have been highlighted repeatedly at public inquir-
ies. Due to problems associated with the lack of enforcement of the present legislation the situ-
ation in relation to trading hours in the Australian
Capital Territory is, at present, not satisfactory and some direct action is required to correct the
anomalies in the present system.

In giving evidence to the Committee the De-
partment of the Capital Territory admitted that it
is not at present enforcing the Ordinance and that it has no regular inspection program. It also gave evidence that when action was once taken to en-
force the Ordinance it resulted in strong public reaction and antipathy. I should also mention the
problems associated with the definition of exempt
goods. The Schedule contains some obvious anomalies. An example is mentioned in the re-
port. It is that a light fitting could be considered as an electrical good, non-exempt, or as a good for use in the decoration or repair of domestic prem-
ises, exempt. I think the Committee regards this sort of interference in the market-place as
ridiculous.

In accordance with the terms of reference of

the Committee it has examined 'the manner in

which deregulation of trading hours in the Aus-

tralian Capital Territory

might be

implemented having regard to the effect on re-

tailers, employees and consumers', after having

examined how trading hours operate in other

States and after having taken into account the

special conditions applying in the Australian

Capital Territory. In looking at the effect of

deregulation on retailers it is recognised that cer-

tain constraints apply which make it difficult for

total deregulation to operate. Retailers have

entered the market on the basis that the hours of

trading, as set out in the 1962 Ordinance, will con-

tinue to apply.

Small traders are more vulnerable to sudden
changes in legislation affecting their hours of op-
eration than are larger retailers. Therefore, small traders would be greatly disadvantaged in an environment which changes overnight from one
of regulated trading hours to one of deregulation. The Committee has taken this into account in its recommendations. Another point is that the
nature of leases in large shopping complexes prohibits individual retailers from opening or closing at times which they are free to determine. The
question of whether any increased costs

Committee on Australian Capital Territory

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2365

associated with opening longer hours would be reflected in increased prices to consumers was not
able to be determined by the Committee.
In relation to the effect of deregulation on employees, a lot of controversy has been generated by claims that deregulation will contribute to a futher decline in the number of full time permanent positions in the retail industry. The Committee considers that deregulation would most probably continue, if not accelerate, the trend towards the structural readjustment of employment in the industry away from full time to part time employment. However, the Committee considered that this is an inevitable trend. The Committee was also concerned about the argument that the proposed deregulation would lead to a disruption of family life. This matter certainly concerns me because I have had discussions with members of the Shop Distributive and Allied Employees Association-the SDA-over the years and, indeed, more recently in my electorate in
Sydney as well as, of course, during this inquiry.
Major retailers have stated in evidence that only voluntary staff would be used on weekends and that this would reduce the impact on the family and social life of employees on Saturdays and Sundays. I know that members of the SDA whilst accepting that that statement had been made to the Committee and that it was influencing the Committee, nevertheless expressed scepticism about it. They stated that they are in the service business and are psychologically conditioned to service. They thought that if a retailer really required a certain member of the staff to work on a Saturday afternoon it would be difficult for that member of the staff, psychologically conditioned to service as he or she is, to refuse. They said the effect over a time would be a moving away from the reliance on voluntary staff. We have made this recommendation on the basis that only voluntary staff would be used at weekends, and this is something that we will obviously have to watch the operation of very carefully.
Reference was made during the inquiry to results of surveys to determine public support for or opposition to deregulation or extended hours of trading. The most recent survey results indicate increasing support for an extension of trading hours and the polls on this matter are published in appendix IV to the report. For example, a poll conducted by the Bulletin and published on 29 June 1982 indicated that extended shopping hours had gained favour since the previous poll. It showed that 56 per cent of people aged 14 and over throughout Australia favoured all day Saturday trading while 36 per cent were opposed and II per cent were undecided. In New South

Wales, perhaps the most relevant State, 68 per cent of those polled favoured Saturday afternoon trading and only 20 per cent opposed it. The Committee acknowledges the shortcomings of these polls. A lot depends on the wording of the question. They give conflicting results. Nevertheless statistics are set out at appendix IV to the report on retail trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory.
The Committee, while favouring the general principle of deregulation, considers that the nature of the market place in the Australian Capital Territory, combined with the oversupply of retail space in areas of Canberra and a shortage in others, makes it difficult to recommend the immediate repeal of existing legislative provisions governing trading hours. It is impossible because of the number of variables involved to forecast accurately the effect of deregulation. It is also not possible to draw on the experience of comparable areas in Australia because of the special nature of the market place in the Australian Capital Territory and the fact that there is a general lack of experience of deregulation in other States.
Therefore, in reaching its final conclusions, the Committee wanted to arrive at a formula which would enable a move to greater flexibility in trading hours while not implementing full deregulation. It was considered that too many exclusionary categories of shops or goods would create problems of definition and legal interpretation and that therefore a single provision was preferable to a number of constraints. For this reason it was decided to base the determination on the number of staff employed by anyone retailer which may involve one or more shops in one week.
The Committee supports unlimited trading Monday to Saturday. This means that in addition to the hours presently allowed under the Ordinance all shops should be free to determine their own hours of operation between midnight Sunday and midnight Saturday. On these recommendatons, the major traders will be excluded from opening on Sundays. This will enable small shop owners to be free to trade in an environment not dominated by the major stores. In conclusion, the Committee considers that any future reviews of trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory should be referred to the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra)-by leave-I support the dissenting report of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory on retail trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory. It strongly rejects the findings of the main report.

2366 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Committee on Australian Capital Territory

I reject the majority findings because of the implications of those findings on business and the community in this Territory. The majority report recommends deregulated trading hours all day Saturday. That recommendation will undoubtedly bring in Saturday afternoon trading throughout Canberra. Honourable members may say that that is a matter of choice for the retailers, but I point out that the majority recommendation will do away with the element of choice. Everyone knows that it is the major retailers, those who in the Committee definition employ over 100 people, who are the pacesetters in the industry. If they open, small retailers will be forced into following their example. Added to that is the fact that most of Canberra's shopping is done in shopping complexes which have a major retailer. Do honourable members think for one minute that the Lend Leasers of this world are going to tell the small retailers in these complexes that they will have the freedom to choose whether or not they open on Saturday afternoon? That is clearly not the case, and the Committee has evidence that that would not be the case.
The minority report, however, still allows that flexibility. Our recommendation would ensure that there would be freedom for small traders to open seven days a week but they would not have the pressure of the large retailers forcing them to open on Saturday afternoon. Honourable members will recall that the decision to deregulate the Australian Capital Territory's trading hours was made last year by the Lynch razor gang. It is worth noting that the role of the Review of Commonwealth Functions was supposedly to prune government expenditure. In the light of this it was very difficult to understand the purpose of inflicting a totally deregulated trading environment on Australian Capital Territory business as that would hardly save the Govern-
ment any money.
The reality was that the only reason that decision was brought down by that committee was to use the Australian Capital Territory in an attempt to get a flow-on for deregulation of shopping hours throughout Australia. Members of this Parliament should be aware of the significance of this report. It is not just a report about trading hours in Canberra. What it will end up doing is bringing about a flow-on effect of increasing trading hours throughout Australia. It will begin in New South Wales. It will flow from the Australian Capital Territory borders to Queanbeyan and Yass and then throughout New South Wales. This report is probably the most significant report to be brought down on trading hours in Australia. Honourable members have to understand what

we are debating today and the effects that it will have on people in the retail trade throughout Australia.
The razor gang, or Lynch Committee, in making its deregulation decision, did not consult with local House of Assembly members, local business organisations or Federal representatives as to the likely effect of such a decision on the local economy. The decision was made in the face of strong opposition from many quarters throughout Canberra and was only very reluctantly referred to the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Australian Capital Territory for consideration. At
least three of the 10 members of that Committee represent the Australian Capital Territory and are able to look after the interests of Australian Capital Territory residents, business people and employees. Unfortunately in the final report of the Committee it is apparent that one of these local representatives~the Chairman of the Committee~was able to ignore the fact that 4,334 submissions which were received opposed deregulation while only 36 favoured it. I know that local residents and business people will have noted that with very great disappointment.
It will be recalled that the Australian Capital Territory has no State or local level of government. Its only form of representation in a legislative forum is through its Federal members of parliament~its two House of Representatives members and two senators~and through the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Australian Capital Territory, which unfortunately has become a surrogate administrative and appeals body for local Australian Capital Territory matters. It is not only inappropriate but also undemocratic for a small number of Cabinet Ministers to hand down far reaching decisions such as this one when they do not live in Canberra and are not accountable to the people of the Australian Capital Territory. I know that the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) will support me on this matter as he spoke very strongly in similar terms on Tuesday evening last about the impropriety of outsiders making decisions for his constituents.
It is readily apparent from the number of submissions and the evidence received by the Committee that the overwhelming majority ofretailers and employees are opposed to deregulation of trading hours in Canberra. It is irresponsible of the Committee to ignore the wishes of the people who live in Canberra, those who have to work in the deregulated trading hours environment and the consumers and retailers who would have to pay for the increased costs associated with unregulated shopping hours. It is inevitable that the cost of goods to consumers will rise if trading

Committee on Australian Capital Territory

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2367

hours are deregulated. David Jones provided evidence that Saturday afternoon trading would result in an increase in the price of goods of about 1.5 per cent. Waltons have calculated a 13.3 per cent increase in payroll costs associated with Saturday afternoon trading which would put pressure on prices if it could not be absorbed by the firm. Many small traders argued strongly that increased overheads as a result of increased trading hours would inevitably result in higher prices to consumers. That is just common sense. If a store opens longer the trader will have to pay more.
Appendix III of the report indicates the strength of local feelings on this matter. A total of 4,334 submissions opposed deregulation and only 36 submissions supported it. We are very concerned that the Committee's report has not accepted the evidence provided by local businesses and shoppers and appears to favour the submissions of a very small number of large interstate retail chains-Myer, Woolworths and Coles. These chains appear to have had considerable funds at their disposal to launch major television advertising campaigns in other States as well as in the Australian Capital Territory to get support for their views. It is worth reiterating that after all this effort only 36 submissions out of 4,370 submissions received by the Committee favoured deregulation.
It is readily apparent that the push for deregulated trading hours did not develop locally but rather was a push originating from other States in the hope that extension of trading hours in Canberra would flow through to New South Wales and Victoria. I believe that will be a direct consequence of this report. For example, how can Queanbeyan and other nearby towns not follow Australian Capital Territory traders without disadvantaging the traders in those towns? There is very little doubt that this recommendation must flow on into New South Wales and be incredibly significant there. Local residents have in fact been quite content with existing trading hours. Here in Canberra we already enjoy incredible flexibility in our trading hours. We have the convenience of seven day shopping and extended hours at all small neighbourhood shopping centres. Further, it has been my experience that most visitors and new arrivals to Canberra from other States are pleasantly surprised by the generous and convenient shopping hours that already exist. Many honourable members will be aware of the situation from their own experiences. In areas such as food and groceries, for example, Canberra is well served seven days a week by its unique system of

urban planning with small neighbourhood shopping centres. In the area of department store retailing only one firm, Myer, supports deregulation, while David Jones and Waltons oppose it.
I am very disappointed that the Committee chose to disregard the enormous number of major inquiries that have already been conducted on this subject in the States and even in the Australian Capital Territory. Extensive reviews of trading hours in other States were conducted-in New South Wales and South Australia in 1977, Queensland in 1978 and 1982 and in Victoria in 1978. These all resulted in the recommendation that trading hours not be extended other than to include one week night. Accordingly, we reject the Committee's finding in chapter 5, on page 121 of the report, that 'there is very little factual data to support many of the contentions made'. On the contrary the subject of trading hours has been exhaustively studied in other States. More importantly, the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly Standing Committee on Development conducted a major inquiry in 1979 into trading hours. It recommended that trading hours not be extended because this would seriously disadvantage many of the small traders. I ask honourable members to remember that this is a recommendation of the group elected by the people of Canberra. It recommends that we do not extend trading hours.
However, one of the recommendations of the majority Committee report brought down today is that in future all matters relating to trading hours be referred to a committee of members of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly. In recognition of the importance of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly in matters affecting the Australian Capital Territory it is suggested that any future review of trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory be referred to a committee of members of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly. However, when the House of Assembly Committee brought down a report on trading hours its views were ignored. Basically the views that it expressed were that we should not extend trading hours because the economic climate in Canberra was not appropriate. That was a decision made in 1979. I think all honourable members of the House would agree that the prevailing difficult economic climate in Canberra has not improved since 1979. In fact, if anything, it has got worse. Accordingly, I believe that this is the worst possible time to be considering measures that would cause serious disruption to Canberra's major private sector industry and theaten commercial viability and the competence of investors.

2368 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Committee on Australian Capital Territory

I have grave doubts about the argument that increased sales would result if people had more flexible shopping hours. It must also be questioned whether estimates of savings bear very much relation to the spending power of people when it is remembered that consumers now have to save more to preserve their real assets which are gradually being eroded by inflation. In times of very high interest rates and high housing prices-Canberra is second only to Sydneyconsumers need to save significantly greater amounts to bridge the deposit gap. People simply do not have the cash to spend. All of these factors cast doubt on the notion that there would be more disposable income available for spending if shopping hours were extended. My colleague the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry) has pointed out the adverse effect that deregulation would have on retailers and their employees. The honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) who was speaking to the report also referred to the fact that we were attempting to get a commitment from the traders that they would not force anyone to trade on Saturday afternoon. I have grave doubts as to whether we would be able to enforce that.
However, the area that I am particularly concerned about is in relation to those small family retailers. They are the people who will suffer as a result of this. They are the ones who will not have that element of choice and who will have to open on Saturday afternoon. This decision will place enormous strains on these people and their families. For employees it is likely that this will mean less security of employment and acceleration of the trend to part time employment in this industry. I also reject the Committee's suggestion that the implications of deregulation and more flexible trading hours have not been fully considered by those giving evidence. On the contrary, most small business owners are well aware that it is not commercially feasible to open and shut a business at various times throughout a week in line with the most profitable periods of trade. Most traders are well aware that consumers would not be attracted if opening hours were varied on an individual basis and if there were uncertainty about particular shops being open on particular days of the week or times of the day.
In conclusion I believe that consumers would not be served by such a deregulated shopping environment. I think the minority report that states that small retailers should be able to open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, but that large stores be closed by I p.m. Saturday and until Monday morning is a very good compromise. This recommendation would be easy to implement, cause

little disruption to business and would provide sufficient opportunities for consumers.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-by leave-I publicly thank the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry), the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) and the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) for their remarks. I compliment the Chairman of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory, Senator Reid, and all the members of that Committee for the work they have done, The Committee inquiry that the Deputy Chairman, the honourable member for Fraser, referred to commenced on 2 November last year. It has been a mammoth inquiry involving some 4,000 plus submissions and over 70 witnesses. I will read with great care the Committee's recommendations. I will also read with great care the dissenting reports of the honourable member for Fraser, the honourable member for Canberra and Senator Colston, and the separate dissenting report of Senator Georges. I will advise the Government in due course.
Suspension of Standing Orders
MrSCHOLES (Corio) (12.48)-1 move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the member for Corio moving that the contents of the report of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory on retail trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory be referred to the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly for comment and recommendation.
I believe the matter is one which has an integral involvement with the people of Canberra and I believe they should have a proper consultative process.
Mr Hodgman-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. To assist the honourable member for Corio I state that not only is the motion not opposed but also it is my standard practice to refer formally to the House of Assembly all parliamentary reports. I give the undertaking that that report will be referred to the Committee.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! There is no point of order. Is the motion seconded?
Mr Fry-I second the motion.
Question resolved in the negative.
PECUNIARY INTEREST
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:

Pecuniary Interest

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2369

The Government's failure to provide for public disclosure and accountability in respect of members of parliament, senior public servants, statutory offl'ce-holders and the judiciary, thereby causing a lack of public confidence in the administration of national affairs.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number o/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr LIONEL BOWEN ,(Kingsford-Smith) (12.51)-This is not a new matter for the Parliament. At this stage we will be interrupted by the luncheon adjournment before the debate is finished. This matter is very serious. In recent weeks and months it has become very clear that the people of this nation regard the Parliament as ineffective, unable to cope with the problems of normal administration, and certainly weighed down by allegations of inefficiency, negligence and, indeed, corruption. If it goes on in this fashion we will have no democracy left and certainly no respect for the Parliament. It comes back to what we in this Parliament have been doing for a period of years. As far back as 1974 we suggested that there should be public disclosure of income and assets by parliamentarians, public servants, statutory office-holders, or anybody in any position which could influence a decision the general public might feel was unfair to them or gave an advantage or a benefit to those able to influence that decision. There has been a fair amount of agitation since that time as to what should be done.
Parliaments in other countries-for example, in the United States of America, Canada, the United Kingdom and Sweden-are able to lay down a course of conduct not only for members of parliament but also for people holding public office. In 1974 we set up what was known as the Riordan Committee-the Joint Committee on Pecuniary Interests of Members of Parliament-to report on what should be done. The Riordan Committee said that it felt there should be a code of conduct to remind members that their ethical obligations to the community did not cease merely by declaring their interests. It felt that there should be public disclosure to ensure that there was no misunderstanding about people's obligations when holding public office. That recommendation was agreed to and I will now advert to its principles. We asked when the Committee's proposals were likely to be implemented-bearing in mind there had been a change of government in 1975-and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) declared that at

that stage his Government had not finally determined its attitude to the matter.
This approach continued until the inevitable disaster happened within the Government's ranks in what is known as the Lynch indiscretion, the result being, of course, that the then Treasurer lost his job on the eve of an election and the Prime Minister stated in December 1977 that he wanted a new approach to the matter. Therefore, in 1978 the Bowen Committee of Inquiry Concerning Public duty and Private Interest was established. Because of public opinion of the former Treasurer's indiscretion-there appears to have been a large amount of capital gain which was dissipated amongst members of a family, thereby minimising tax; it was as simple as that-he lost his job and there was introduced a rule of conduct which guaranteed that nobody would minimise tax and that there would be retribution should somebody do so. The Bowen Committee presented a report, which we have debated. The Opposition has said in debates that it is a pretty weak report, which it is. Honourable members cannot deny that. Whilst the Bowen Committee was asked to grapple with the problems, since its report the problems have grown more acute and more difficult for this Parliament to gloss over.
I turn to more recent reports, such as a report on the meat industry by the Kelly Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems. That 'report showed that an industry worth $3,000m was held to ransom by 1,800 inspectors. That report talks about many other matters that were wrong in the meat industry. For example, some evidence in the Landros notes suggests blackmail, inspectors not doing their job, free meat being made available, non-compliance with standards, drunkennessall sorts of allegations. If a Minister has the responsibility for the running of a department, he is obliged to set out a code of conduct for that department. He is obliged to set out in the code of conduct that the department will report to him any matter that comes under its notice. The permanent head of the Department of Primary Industry should have reported to the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) as soon as it was clear that there was mismanagement and difficulty. Something should have been done about a major industry being held to ransom by 1,800 inspectors. Nothing was done until substituted meat appeared in San Diego. If this was a matter of knowledge within the Department and was made public in evidence to an inquiry, why was the Parliament not told?
I come to the Treasurer (Mr Howard). He tabled a report which clearly indicated that in

2370 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Pecuniary Interest

1977 there was concern about tax measures which would mean a substantial loss of revenue, including sales of companies with current profits and sales of dormant companies. As far back as 1978 there was a question of what was to be done about revenue problems. With regard to straw companies, on 24 May 1978 the Commissioner of Taxation~who, I might add, was doing his job-in a report to the Treasurer, stated:
I have previously mentioned the worrying problems of a trend to tax evasion through the stripping of funds from companies so that they are not able to meet their tax liability.
In many cases there is an arrangement for a trustee to be appointed who is made liable to tax but who is a man of straw. Why was the Parliament not told about those problems at the time? Why is there no disclosure of information of that nature? It does not do any damage to the Government. The Government has the information. But it does enormous damage to peblic concern about what is happening to revenue when the public knows that this information was made available to the Government four years ago and nothing was done about it. The evidence discloses that in November 1978 a draft Cabinet submission indicated that there was a very serious fraud on revenue. Why was the Parliament not told about this matter, as an example of what we mean by public disclosure?
I turn to the classic case of the Asia Dairy Industries scandal. An amount of $3m was placed in a bank account in Singapore. The Auditor General stated that Mr Uytengsu confirmed to his officers that he decided to move the funds to Singapore because of somebody's decision and that he entered into arrangements. These funds could properly be said to belong to dairymen in Australia. I add that $3m is not an insignificant amount of money. In the final analysis of the situation the Auditor-General stated that the funds were subsequently removed to a Swiss bank account. My office was informed that the account cannot be located. Nothing will be done about that. I am mindful of the fact that the Auditor General, when writing to an officer of the Prime Minister's Department after the report was tabled, said:
I only want to make this comment: That the tabling of the report has generated a remarkable resurgence of memory on the part of officers of the corporation who, during the audit investigation, found themselves unable to offer more than the barest modicum of information to the audit base.
When we talk about public disclosure we have to talk about codes of conduct that Ministers must lay down for their departments, as well as what we have said in previous debates which, I might add, the Government has tended to ignore. The Bowen Committee made other recommendations.

A study of Hansard clearly indicates that in 1980 the Government had in mind the setting up of an ethics committee~a public integrity commission~which would generally talk about a register of parliamentarians' assets and liabilities. None of that was done.
Sitting suspended from 1 to 2 p.m.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Prior to the luncheon break we were debating the Opposition's proposition that something should be done to give some more prestige to this Parliament in the light of relatively recent events. Reference was made to the Bowen report which recommended that where there can be a conflict between a private interest and a public duty the public of Australia is entitled to know all the facts at all the relevant times. Prior to lunch I was indicating how recent events have downgraded the prestige of this Parliament and have perhaps made it look ineffectual. I referred to all the crime, corruption, negligence and incompetence that is now being revealed in reports that the Parliament eventually had to commission. The public is asking: 'Why did things go so tragically wrong, costing millions or billions of dollars? Why are those who seem to be guilty of crime not being prosecuted?' Generally it appears that this place is just a talking shop and that we are not really implementing anything at all worthwhile.
I wish to advert to the responsibilities of those in public life-not only members of parliament but also public servants, office holders and others. We ought to operate on the basis that office holders are trustees~that applies to all of us~and that we have a duty to account. We also have a duty of care. We have a responsibility for competence and we have a liability for negligence. Failure to perform should mean the sack. Of course, it does in our political terms mean the sack because our constitutents evaluate us and can accept or reject us. Before the luncheon break I enumerated some of the reports that have been made public and the matters that they deal with. There was the meat scandal. A multi-million dollar industry was in jeopardy because of blackmail and all sorts of criminal activity which were known to the Department and allegedly not drawn to the attention of the Minister. What is the solution? Surely it is that a Minister should set down a code of conduct whereby anything that is deemed to be wrong in his Department should be brought to his notice. In relation to Asia Dairy Industries we saw $3m apparently just frittered away, disappearing into Swiss bank accounts. The Auditor-General visited the company and could not find out what had happened to the money. It is certainly related to matters which meant that

Pecuniary Interest

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2371

the dairymen of Australia had some equity in that amount. Surely that matter should have been dealt with on the basis that there should not have been that negligence or incompetence.
We come to tax evasion or avoidance, the straw companies. It has now been disclosed that the extent of tax avoidance and evasion was put on record in front of the Treasurer in 1978. I make the point that surely if a matter relating to tax revenue was on record to the Treasurer it should have been on record to the Parliament. The Government would have at least been prodded into action. Instead, it has lost billions of dollars and has had to wait four years for the report of the Costigan Committee of Inquiry into the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union to indicate clearly where it was wrong. The Bowen report clearly indicated that a number of matters ought to be done. Some of them have been done but the Government has not really grappled with the issues. The Bowen report made a very significant point which I think is worthy of note. It stated:
The impression should be avoided that any person can improperly influence an office holder or unduly enjoy his favour.
An enormous number of people seem to have had the benefit of enjoying the favour of or, apparently, of influencing an office holder. We have to do something about this and it has to be done in the following terms: A Minister, when he is appointed, should set out a code of conduct not only as to his own assets and liabilities-that ought to be a matter of public register, and the Government will not accept that fact; it was the Bowen committee, I think, which said that something should be done along those lines-but also as to minisferial responsibility. There should be a code of conduct for public servants. When matters of criminal activity, incompetence or negligence come to the attention of public servants they should certainly advise the Minister and, if nothing is done promptly, advise the Parliament. The code of conduct for the public servant should include an obligation to bring to the Minister's attention any problems that may arise. This should be done whether or not the Minister asks for the information. There cannot be this plea that we often hear now: 'I didn't know; I wasn't told'. The inevitable plea of the Australian Taxation Office is: 'Under section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, we cannot disclose the information you seek.' Nobody wants to know people's names, but the files show that there is certainly a record of massive tax loss. A similar code of conduct should apply to the judiciary. We cannot have members of the judiciary perhaps interpreting the law under which they themselves

might have some benefit. There has to be a register of their interests. The Costigan report reveals things that we have never been told. Mr Todman, for example, wrote an 18-page report on what he thought was wrong with the Attorney-General's Department. There is plenty wrong with that Department.
In summary, apart from the obligation to comply with the missing matters-that has not been dealt with in the Bowen report-new matters and new material now before us clearly indicate that there has to be a more detailed code of conduct, a more frank public disclosure. Those appointed to public office now have an obligation to disclose their interests and their assets. Otherwise they should not take the job. In other words, the public has to be brought fully into the parliamentary process. I submit my proposition on that basis.
Mr DEPUTY) SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) (2.6)-The honourable member for Kingsford Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) in introducing this matter of public importance today has given the impression that this Government is insensitive to the kinds of propositions that he has advanced. Also, of those who have listened to him and those who will later read his remarks will be under the impression that the Government has not taken any action in this area. The fact of the matter is, of course, that it was this Government that took the initiative of establishing the Bowen Committee of Inquiry into Public Duty and Private Interest. I need to remind the House and particularly the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith that the Government supports the main thrust of the Bowen recommendations and, indeed, has implemented most of those recommendations. This has been made clear on a number of occasions in this House by Ministers of the Government in statements and also in answers to questions that have been asked from time to time. It also needs to be remembered that it has been only in the time of this Government that these procedures have in fact been laid down. Indeed, in all but one area the Government has responded positively to the Bowen recommendations. I shall refer to these later in my remarks. The only recommendations yet to be fully dealt with by the Government are those concerning members of parliament. In my capacity as Minister Assisting the Prime Minister I have recently been giving consideration to this matter. I hope to be in a position to discuss the question, and further details of it, with my colleagues as soon as possible.

2372 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Pecuniary Interest

As I mentioned earlier, the Government has already responded to the recommendations of the Bowen report and, indeed, has put into place a comprehensive system to ensure that the public duty of office holders is not prejudiced by personal interest. In relation to Ministers, I submit that it is a matter of public record and standard procedure that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) regularly seeks declarations from Ministers in respect of their private interests. Indeed, under the guidelines laid down by this Government, Ministers are required to confirm to the Prime Minister that they accept no retainers and derive no income from personal exertion other than that arising from their duties as Ministers of the Crown and as members of parliament. These declarations are provided to the Prime Minister and kept on a confidential basis as was recommended by Bowen. In addition, it is a well established practice that in the course of a Cabinet meeting or a Cabinet commitee meeting or, indeed, discussions, Ministers declare any interest that they may have relating to matters under discussion.
Moreover, procedures relating to gifts and acceptance of sponsored overseas travel by Ministers have been laid down. These are well established principles which have been in operation for some considerable time. As a Cabinet Minister I can assure the House that these procedures are in fact followed to ensure the absolute propriety of Government operations. With respect to senior public servants, and indeed all public servants, this Government has directed the Public Service Board to require all Government employees to comply with the standards laid down by the Government. I remind honourable members that as early as 1979 the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) said this in this House:
The Government has accepted the code of conduct (as proposed by Bowen) in principle as the basis for particular action to be taken in regard to particular categories of office holders. The code is a statement of the broad principles to which effect will be given, in the first place, in relation to Ministers, public servants and other officials. The Government accepts, as the report proposes, that every effort should be made to secure the widest possible familiarity with and observance of the code.
I seek leave to table an official circular from the Public Service Board concerning the implementation of the Bowen Committee report in so far as it affects public servants.
Leave granted.
Mr FIFE-This circular draws attention to the code of conduct proposed by the Bowen Committee. It consists of 10 principles to promote the avoidance of conflicts of interest and to provide a basis for their resolution where necessary. It also requires public servants to disclose any interests

that they may have in order that they should not conflict or appear to conflict withtheir public duty. The circular also outlines rules relating to post-separation employment by public servants. The Government believes strongly that the service it receives from its employees deserves commendation. We in this country are fortunate to have public servants of such high calibre and integrity who have served not only this Government but also previous governments to the best of their abilities.
Let me now turn to the position as it affects statutory office-holders. I remind the House that the Prime Minister regularly writes to Ministers requiring them to ensure that these standards, which I mentioned before, are implemented. For ease of reference I now seek leave to table provisions relevant to statutory office-holders.
Leave granted.
Mr FIFE-These provisions require Ministers to draw to the attention of statutory office-holders the principles I outlined. Insofar as members of the judiciary are concerned, let me remind the House that Bowen regarded the provisions of the Crimes Act as sufficient and did not recommend any further measures. The provisions referred tb provide that any person, being a judge or magistrate, who wilfully and perversely exercises Federal jurisdiction in any matter in which he has a personal interest shall be guilty of an offence. The Opposition has accused the Government of failing to provide an adequate system for public disclosure and accountability. It alleged that this is causing a lack of public confidence in the administration of national affairs.
During the course of my remarks I have outlined the existing measures already implemented by the Government in respect of Ministers, senior public servants and statutory office-holders. This system has been rigorously implemented to ensure that the highest standards of government operation are maintained. It is also pertinent to remind the House at this point that, as indeed Bowen said, there is a need to strike a proper balance between the public accountability of office-holders and their right to privacy in respect of their private interests, including their pecuniary interests. It was for this reason that Bowen recommended against a public register of interest, preferring instead disclosure to the appropriate authorities-the Prime Minister in the case of Ministers, and heads of departments in the case of public servants.
I submit that what is necessary to ensure public confidence is a system such as the Government has implemented, not an unwarranted intrustion

Petitions

21 October 1982 REPR ESENTATIVES 2373

into the private affairs of individuals. The Opposition has been singularly unsuccessful in this House in its use of smear tactics and innuendo to accuse innocent people. It is nothing short of hypocritical that the Opposition should seek to condemn the Government when, by its own actions-by the abuse of parliamentary privilege-it seeks to denigrate the integrity of others and to smear innocent people, people whose innocence has been clearly established. The Opposition's endeavours today, I believe, similarly are an abject failure.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Acting Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Retirement Benefits: Private Enterprise
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth our concern that:
I. The Income Tax Assessment Act (the Act) and its administration is inadequate in providing retirement benefits for employees in private enterprise;
2. The Commissioner of Taxation (Commissioner) denies deductions necessary to index retirement pensions;
3. Deductions for the self-employed and employed are inadequate;
4. The Commissioner has exercised his discretion improperly by negating a choice the Act allows on investment in Government Securities;
5. The Commissioner's constant alterations to guidelines and lack of communication has created great uncertainty.
6. The Commissioner is acting arbitrarily, and without proper notice in restricting trustee's investments with employers;
7. The Commissioner seeks to apply new actuarial guidelines retrospectively to July 1981.
Your Petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, take action to remedy these inadequacies and in particular we pray that action be taken:
(i) To ensure that the Commissioner exercises his discretion only with proper regard to legal principles;
(ii) To ensure that the Commissioner does not delegate to auditors part of his function of administering the Act;
(iii) To enact legislation allowing proper levels of retirement benefits to be provided;
(iv) To ensure that retirement benefits are regulated by a Department with a primarily social welfare function.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hawke, Mr Jarman and Mr Scholes.
Petitions received.

Sinai Peacekeeping Force
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ~f the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
We believe that Australia's participation in the US-- sponsored 'peace-keeping' force is not in the best interests of the Australian people.
We fear that Australia's involvement may draw it into a Vietnam-type conflict.
Further, we cannot see that it will contribute to a solution of the problems of the Middle East region. In particular, we are concerned that the so-called 'Peace-keeping' force is being used as a cover by the US for introducing its rapid deployment force into the region.
We demand the Australian Government reverse its decision to send Australian troops. to the Sinai Desert region.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton, Mr Scott and Mr West.
Petitions received.
Defence Force Pay Rates
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
That in respect of the Defence Force Tribunals reassessment and subsequent downgradings of Operator Specialist Vehicles downgraded from pay level 6 to pay level 4 has had detrimental effects on the morale of our husbands and severely disadvantaged them, since the Governments' implementation of the Tribunals findings for the following reasons:
I. Primarily, a number of the operators gave up the promotional standing to do the complicated course, of which no consideration was given in the findings of the tribunals' report, and no element of compensation was ever suggested.
2. The added strain and responsibilities incorporated by being an O.S. V. also has not been considered.
3. The scammel and trailer are in the order of some 12 years old and require extra-ordinary dedication in operational maintenance to keep them on the road.
4. The fact that the O.S.V. must have the knowledge of special routes, road and bridge classifications and knowing the axle loadings to both the prime mover and trailer.
5. The servicing alone is a long, complicated process far more involved than that of the smaller vehicle ego the 109 truck, for which the O.S.V. is now being paid at the same rate.
The ramifications of the re-assessments and subsequent downgradings are:
I. The members cannot be expected to maintain the faith, trust and loyalty they had experienced prior' to the downgrading.
2. As the Government can re-assess a member at will they feel the 'security' which once promoted the service is now non-existent for them.
3. Again, due to the re-assessment members are given no inspiration to succeed in terms of qualifications.
4. Some members, believing a substantial pay increase had been granted have financially committed themselves to the increase they did not get.
5. The career minded soldier that has been downgraded no longer feels the desire to fulfill his ambition of completing a 20 year term.

2374 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Petitions

6. Without adequate pay incentive there will be insufficient volunteers to undertake the additional training required to become an O.S.V.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the re-assessment of the Operator Specialist Vehicles will be aborted and dated retrospectively.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Slaughter of Seal Pups
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The petition of citizens and residents of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That they are disgusted at the reported mass slaughter of seals with the approval of the Canadian Government.
2. That they are horrified at the cruel methods used to kill the seals causing suffering to both the pups and their mothers.
Your petition therefore prays that your honourable House:
I. Express Australia's disapproval in the strongest possible terms to the Canadian Government calling for an immediate halt to the killings.
2. Place an immediate embargo on all goods imported or expected to be imported to this country from Canada.
3. Place an immediate embargo on all goods of Canadian origin imported or expected to be imported from any other country.
4. Raise this matter in the world forum of the United Nations with a view to obtaining like action from other countries of the world.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Slaughter of Marine Mammals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that:
I. Since the Australian Whale Protection Act 1980 provides for the banning of importation into Australia of all whale by-products, and
2. the Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the international banning of whaling,
3. then consistent with (I) and (2), this Government should immediately legislate to ban the importation of all marine mammal by-products, including the harp seal of Canada, and
4. through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly, the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an international ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that consistent with legislation on whaling, this Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products and support an international ban on slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sand mining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored public enquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That Moreton Island has been listed on the Register of the National Estate because of its exceptional scientific, ecological, heritage and recreational values; and
(2) That any sand mining of Moreton Island will result in the destruction of the exceptional scientific, ecological, heritage and recreational values of the island; and
(3) That Moreton Island has been the subject of detailed investigation resulting in the adoption of a management plan by the Brisbane City Council the main aims of which are to conserve in its natural state the quality of its scenery and natural environment and to enhance public enjoyment of it for recreation purposes; and
(4) That Moreton Island represents the last significant area of wilderness close to Brisbane; and
(5) That there is an acute deficiency of national parks within a 150 kilometre radius of Brisbane; and
(6) That Moreton Island contains Aboriginal relics of immense scientific and cultural importance; and
(7) That the island represents a major potential tourist resource specifically because of its unspoiled natural scenic attractions; and
(8) That public opinion actively demonstrated over a number of years clearly indicates that most citizens of Brisbane are strongly opposed to any sand mining on the island, and desires that the whole of Moreton Island with the exception only of existing townships, tourist resort, airstrips and lighthouse reserve should be declared a national park.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Parliament of Australia will:
(a) accept the wishes of the petitioners and the citizens of Brisbane generally and take whatever action is necessary and available to it to prevent sand mining of any description taking place on Moreton Island; and
(b) request the Government of the State of Queensland to take immediate action to declare the whole of Moreton Island to be a national park with the exception

Petitions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2375

only of existing townships, tourist resort, airstrips and lighthouse reserve.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Labelling ofCosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That (a) the export of live animals for slaughter overseas and
(b) the shipment of live horses to Japan sentences such animals to cruel'and inhumane treatment in the export process and at the hands of foreign importers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ban the export of live animals for food and allow only carcas trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhuman use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(I) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose; and
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Proposed Student Loans Scheme
To the Honourable the'Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the introduction of a comprehensive student loan scheme will:
I. Restrict Access to Education
People from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from studying by the prospect of incurring large debts. These people, if they enrol, will be forced to amass loan debts. Richer students do not face this handicap.
2. Undermine the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme
TEAS should cover the basic living costs of students. Currently the scheme only assists 38% of full-time students and the maximum level of TEAS is a mere $49.67. Government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced.
3. Disadvantage Women
Women students would be disadvantaged by a loans scheme as they have a lesser ability to repay loan debts, because on average women earn less and have a higher unemployment rate.
4. Disadvantage Mature-Age Students
Usually mature age students forego income to study and already have large financial commitments. They could not return to study if it meant incurring substantial debts.
5. Distort Educational Choices
Mounting loan debts would force students into studying shorter courses or not continuing with post-graduate study.
6. Result in Massive Attrition Rates
Students will attempt to undertake extensive part-time work or overload courses to minimise their loans. Increased failure rates will result forcing students to "drop-out" rather than continuing study and increase their debts.
7. Cause Administrative & Financial Difficulties
Overseas experience shows high default rates will occur on student loans. Government money will be channelled away afrom TEAS to paying off banks. The government will also bear the administrative burden of pursuing defaulters.
Therefore, the proposed student loans scheme will have disastrous effects on tertiary education, which we believe benefits the whole community, not just the individual student.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The House of Representatives will reject the introduction of a student loans scheme
And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever humbly pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.

2376 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Petitions

Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders are angry. The Queensland Government plans to abolish reserves and give 50 year leases of land to the Aboriginal Communities inste, d. The Communities do not want this to happen. They want proper ownership of the land so that it cannot be taken away. This means freehold title.
With regard to the Aborigines Act. Even with the Act abolished, the people still want special legislation to allow community councils, elected by the people, to be in control of the management of communities. This can be done without any complications, and at no disadvantage to any Queenslanders.
Your Petitions therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government use their constitutional power to ensure that Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders are given freehold title to the reserves on which they live, and that they pass special legislation to give self-management to the people.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of certain citizens undersigned respectfully showeth:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian postal service truly meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any proposal that Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward be diminished will destroy the concept of the national postal service.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Brisbane respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,

(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Brisbane respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hayden.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Bennelong respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,

Petitions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2377

(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of McMillan respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Barker respectfully showeth:
That the plan by. the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:

(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Porter.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of N.S.W. respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles Jones.
Petition received.

2378 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Conciliaation and Arbitration Bill

DEFENCE FORCE PAY RATES
Motion (by Mr Cross)-by leave--agreed to:
That the petition relating to the decision of the Defence Force Tribunal to re-assess and downgrade the classification of 'Operator Specialist Vehicles' which was lodged by me today be referred to the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence.
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION (COMPLEMENTARY INDUSTRIAL
RELATIONS SYSTEM) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Macphee, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations) (2.20)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The amendments to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act proposed by the Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill seek to address aspects of one of the fundamental structural problems of the Australian industrial relations system, namely, the multiplicity of industrial jurisdictions. The broad purpose of the Bill is to foster greater co-ordination in the work of Federal and State industrial tribunals. This is a significant goal, but it is one which of course cannot be accomplished by means of Commonwealth legislation alone. The wider significance of the legislation is to be found in the agreement of the Commonwealth and the States to enact complementary legislation on the matter. The measures proposed by this Bill provide the response to the implementation of that agreement which is required of the Commonwealth.
The concepts which underlie the provision made in this Bill emanate from consultative arrangements entered into by the Commonwealth and the States with a view to finding means whereby a more complementary system of industrial relations might be brought about. Honourable members may know something of these arrangements and the background to the legislation. The Premiers Conference in June 1979 agreed that Commonwealth and State Ministers for Labour should conduct a review on the question of fundamental changes to the Australian industrial relations system, and the Commonwealth State Review of Industrial Relations Systems was established.
The working party set up to carry out this review put forward a wide range of proposals for consideration by Ministers during 1979-81. These proposals were considered by the National Labour Consultative Council. While consider-

ation was being given by the Commonwealth and the States to a proposed national inquiry into wage determination and industrial relations, the review established by the Premiers was suspended. The Premiers Conference in February 1982 decided, however, not to proceed with the proposed inquiry, but agreed that a working party of Commonwealth and State officials be established with the following terms of reference:
To examine and report on steps which could be taken to achieve:
(i) a complementary industrial relations system within Australia;
(ii) more effective liaison between State and Commonwealth industrial jurisdictions.
The Premiers Conference requested that the report of the working party be presented to the June Premiers Conference. The working party reported to the Conference of Labour Ministers in May 1982 and the report was unanimously adopted by the Ministers, who agreed upon its submission to the Premiers. The June 1982 Premiers Conference agreed to implementation of the recommendations contained in the report. I should say that the spirit of co-operation which was evident at all stages of the development of the proposals now reflected in the Bill, and at the June 1982 Premiers Conference, gives promise of further co-operative proposals to bring about a more effective industrial relations system for Australia. The officers working party is continuing to meet and I am confident that further proposals of significance will emerge.
I might now turn to consider briefly the character of the industrial problems with which this Bill is concerned. While well recognised in the industrial relations community, they are not generally clearly perceived by the community at large. The power of the Commonwealth to legislate with respect to industrial relations matters is limited to the enactment of laws for the prevention and settlement of interstate industrial disputes by conciliation and arbitration. Disputes which are wholly within a single State cannot be dealt with by the Federal Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and not all matters which may be in dispute between employers and employees are 'industrial' within the meaning of the Constitution. Outside the permissible scope of Commonwealth law the State legislatures have wide powers. All States have established tribunals to deal with industrial disputes and in each State there are organisations-which mayor may not be registered-of employers and employees operating wholly within the State.
Particular consequences of these arrangements are, first, that no one tribunal, Commonwealth or State, may have jurisdiction to deal with what is in

Conciliaation and Arbitration Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2379

effect, but may not be in law, a single dispute or with closely related disputes, and secondly, that it is difficult to co-ordinate the decision-making activities of the tribunals and to bring about uniformity in the principles and policies applied. Some efforts have been made in recent years to ameliorate the problems arising from the divided industrial jurisdictions and to bring about a measure of co-ordination in the work of industrial tribunals. The President of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, Sir John Moore, has since 1976 convened meetings of the heads of Commonwealth and State industrial tribunals. Initially held annually, the meetings are now convened each six months and have been widely supported as effective in promoting cooperation and co-ordination between tribunals. Furthermore, to meet particular industrial situations, such as where part of an industry is covered by a Stat'! and part by a Federal award, or where one of two unions competing for work is covered by State and not Federal registration, the Australian Commission has conducted joint conferences and joint hearings on an informal basis with an industrial tribunal in a State. It is desirable that such a practice be put on a statutory footing.
For the benefit of honourable members, I will prodeed now to outline the particular provisions made by this Bill. In short, the Bill provides for joint sittings of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and a State Tribunal; expansion of the powers of local industrial boards-when constituted by a State Industrial Authority-to permit them to exercise Federal jurisdiction; and the exercise, by agreement, of State jurisdiction by the Australian Commission.
Joint Proceedings of Commonwealth and State Tribunals
The provisions made by the Bill are intended to provide a proper statutory footing for the conduct of a joint sitting of a State tribunal and the Commonwealth Commission. In terms of the proposal developed by the working party, it is envisaged that each tribunal, whilst it would sit with the other and hear the matter simultaneously, would exercise only the powers conferred by its own constitutive legislation and would make a separate decision-though ideally in identical terms-in its own jurisdiction. The appeal, reference and review provisions applicable by reasons of the constitutive legislation of each tribunal would apply to a decision made in the jurisdiction.
The provision made in the Bill, while guarnteeing the validity of the joint sitting arrangement, does not fetter the discretion of the President of

the Commission in deciding to initiate a joint sitting or to respond to a request from a State tribunal for such a sitting. Similarly, the President is not limited in his capacity to determine the timing of a joint sitting, such as whether the sitting is to be held at the conciliation or arbitration stage of proceedings, or as to termination of the sitting.
The Government considers that such a provision will be of considerable utility in the circumstances referred to above, such as where State and Federal unions are involved in a demarcation dispute, or where neither the Federal nor the State jurisdiction has complete coverage of an industry. In the latter case, a joint sitting could be convened in such circumstances as where a Federally registered union makes an application to the Commission for variation of an award and proceedings have commenced in a State industrial jurisdiction in respect of a State award or determination dealing with employees in occupations the same or similar to those in which members of the Federal union are engaged, or where a log of claims is served by a Federally registered union, a dispute is notified in the Federal Commission and proceedings have commenced in a State tribunal in respect of an award or determination dealing with employees in categories of work the same as or similar to those covered in the Federal log.
Powers of Local Industrial Boards
Under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act as it stands a member of the Commission may refer a matter to a local industrial board for investigation and report. A local industrial board may be constituted by representatives of employers and employees with a chairman, or by a State industrial authority. New arrangements proposed by the Bill will permit the President of the Commission to refer a matter to a local industrial board constituted by a State industrial authority and that authority will be empowered to settle the dispute by conciliation or arbitration or both as appropriate. In performing these functions the local industrial board will be exercising Federal jurisdiction and will be able to exercise powers under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act.
The principal benefits of such an arrangement are twofold. First, circumstances may arise in which a member of the Australian Commission is not immediately available to deal with a dispute but a member of the State industrial authority is able to proceed to deal with the matter at short notice. Disputes occurring in remote locations are particularly amenable to such proceedings. Second, situations arise in which a dispute at a local level may affect both State and Federal jurisdictions-such as where employees in a single

2380 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Royal Commission into Meat Industry

enterprise are covered by both State and Federal awards-and it is appropriate for a member of a State tribunal to proceed to settle the matter in both jurisdications.
Empowering of Federal Commission to Deal with Disputes in a State Jurisdication
As part of the agreement reached by the Commonwealth and the States it is envisaged that, in appropriate circumstances, the President of a State industrial authority would be able to request the President of the Commission to exercise the jurisdiction of the State tribunal. In such circumstances the powers of the member of the Commission exercising the State jurisdiction would be given by the legislation of the State concerned. Mr Deputy Speaker, it is intended that the powers of the Australian Commission in relation to the joint proceedings and local industrial board provision made by this Bill will be exercised only in relation to such State industrial authorities as are prescribed. As State parliaments enact legislation to give effect to the agreement as to complementary industrial relations systems, the Commonwealth will, for its part, make regulations to give force to the amendments proposed by this Bill in respect of particular State industrial tribunals. As I suggested at the outset, Mr Deputy Speaker, the significance of the Bill lies perhaps as much in the fact that it is a manifestation of a co-operative approach by the Commonwealth and the States to the resolution of industrial relations problems as in the specific provision made. The Government is optimistic that this process will continue and bear further fruit. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
REPORT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE AUSTRALIAN MEAT INDUSTRY
Ministerial Statement
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-by leave-The Government has now had the opportunity to make a preliminary study of the recommendations of the Royal Commission into the Australian Meat Industry. In view of the significance of this report to our export meat trade, I believe it is important that I detail an initial response to those recommendations without delay. I propose to discuss the recommendations in the report under three broad categories. Firstly, those recommendations on which action has already been taken, secondly, those which are readily acceptable, and thirdly, those which require further detailed consideration. Many of the measures recommended by the

Commissioner have already been implemented. In particular, the report endorsed the basic reorganisation in March this year of meat inspection within my Department and the further modifications proposed by my Department in its final submission to the Commission. This endorsement is set out in paragraph 9.1 of the report. It states:
'The Department of Primary Industry should proceed to reorganise the Commonwealth meat inspection service along the lines indicated in its final submission to the Commission. In particular, the removal of the Service from the Bureau of Animal Health and placing of it in a newly formed export inspection service is commended. Unless otherwise stated, the Department's proposals for its new inspection system-so far as they fall within the Commission's terms of reference-are endorsed. This applies to both legislative changes and administrative arrangements.'
The Commissioner also recommended that an investigations unit and compliance and evaluation unit be established within the Department as a matter of some urgency. Public Service Board approval for the establishment of these units was obtained in early September this year. They are being set up in the new investigations branch of the export inspection service and staff are currently being recruited for recently approved positions. The report concluded that the relationship between the branch and the Australian Federal Police will require close attention and recommended that some former police officers be employed. The Government agrees with this and a formal memorandum of understanding is now being finalised with the Australian Federal Police. Moreover, a former commissioner of the ACT Police, Mr Roy Wilson, has been appointed to head the investigations unit within the Department. A separate filing system for incidents of possible malpractices has also been instituted as recommended in the report. The Royal Commissioner's recommendations on an improved documentation system are to be considered by an independent computer consultant soon to be engaged for the export inspection service.
One of the malpractices which the Commissioner found to be widely prevalent in the industry was the provision of free meat or other ]Jenefits to inspectors. As a result of evidence placed before the Royal Commission, I took vigorous legislative action earlier this year, through the Export Control Act, to stamp out such practices. Section 24( 1) of the Act specifically prohibits owners of registered establishments supplying free meat to Commonwealth meat inspectors. Circulars and standing instructions were also issued, in May this year, to all staff and to all registered export establishments, stressing the new law and the already existing provisions governing the

Royal Commission into Meat Industry

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2381

acceptance of gratuities. This action was recognised in paragraph 7.127 of the Commission's report. It stated:
However, the Department has now acted resolutely by applying a blanket ban on the receipt of benefits, and requiring written approval for any exceptions. This is clearly the proper course.
Excessive and fictitious overtime, also disclosed before the Commission, has been countered by the tightening up of attendance recording and the introduction of unannounced checks on overtime performance. A complete review of overtime arrangements is underway which will see more significant management control by the export inspection service over the extent and nature of overtime worked by inspection staff. This raises the question of action which has been taken against those departmental officers implicated in malpractices by the Commission's evidence. Where criminal matters have been involved, the Australian Federal Police are conducting investigations. At the request of the Police, my Department has not taken action which the Police believe might prejudice the successful conclusion of their investigations into criminal charges. Nevertheless, three officers have already been dealt with under the disciplinary provisions of the Public Service Act. In addition, Police charges have been laid in the past two weeks against 22 officers, in relation to alleged bribery at Tennant Creek in the Northern Territory. As a result, immediate action was taken to suspend those officers without pay.
The Commissioner made several recommendations regarding the registration of meat premises. The Export Control Act 1982 contains new provisions to regulate the registration of establishments. These provisions will be put into effect as soon as possible. The Commissioner endorsed the requirement that applicants be 'fit and proper persons' and that this should apply to both managers and owners. However, he recommended that the power to refuse registration be used sparingly with appropriate appeal provisions. He also considered that the Minister for Primary Industry should be able to suspend registration where there is cogent evidence of serious malpractice. These points will be taken into account when introducing the new provisions. Moreover, on the matter of registrations, on 27 August I announced new requirements for the list of plants certified to prepare meat for entry into the United States of America. The new criteria included factors such as the possible lack of integrity and general reputation of the establishment and/or its operators and whether criminal charges had been laid against people directly involved in the operation

of an establishment. The new listing requirements came into effect on I October 1982, and as a result a small number of establishments have lost the right 'to process meat for the United States market. The Royal Commissioner found that the most serious malpractice in the industry, the one which prompted the establishment of the Royal Commission, was meat substitution. I introduced strict countermeasures immediately the substitution was discovered. The Commissioner has fully endorsed those actions. They include sampling and species testing and checks on refrigerated containers. Penalties for substitution and related offences have been drastically increased, to a maximum $100,000 fine or five years imprisonment or both. Other measures involve greater security arrangements for carton, load and premises sealing; the segregation of export meat in cold stores; and the development of a new 'Australia approved' stamp, with stricter controls over its production and distribution.
I will also take into account recommendations on the measures made by the Commissioner. The Commissioner considers that these measures should be kept under review and relaxed as soon as appropriate. In particular, he considers that random testing be concentrated in areas of greatest risk, that premises sealing be relaxed at an early stage and that discretion be used in the application of the new penalties. These recommendations will be taken into account. I should add also that a computerised system of product flow monitoring is currently under examination. The Commissioner recommended that all pet meat for export be dyed with brilliant blue and come under the control of the export inspection service. All pet meat for export is now under the control of the service. Furthermore, I agreed in July this year, prior to the Commission report, to the staining of export pet meat, and introduction of this measure is underway. It is therefore clear that the actions already taken at my direction have coincided to a very substantial degree with the recommendations of the Royal Commission report. Indeed, in paragraph 1.22 Mr Justice Woodward commented:
I believe that, in consequence of the strong reaction of the Minister and the Department, and the establishment of this Royal Commission, the current level of malpractice in the meat industry is lower than it has ever been.
I now turn to those recommendations which are readily acceptable. These proposals have been largely developed as a result of evidence placed before the Commission. I am sure that their implementation will represent additional genuine reforms, and thereby further significantly enhance the integrity of the industry. However, I must

2382 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Royal Commission into Meat Industry

stress that their full implementation will require the agreement of unions, State governments and the meat industry. I therefore take this opportunity to appeal to all those parties to regard the Commissioner's endorsement of the proposals as a persuasive argument for full co-operation with the Commonwealth Government.
The report recommended that managements be encouraged to take over responsibility for certain work performed by meat inspectors and that greater emphasis should be placed on management accepting responsibility for the operation of their plants. My Department has proposed, as a key feature of the inspection reorganisation, the progressive transfer to companies of a proportion of responsibility for hygiene, quality control and product description. The aim is to provide services to each establishment on a fee-for-service basis. This will ensure that the services conform more closely with the actual needs of industry. It will also make industry more conscious of the costs of providing these services.
Improvements in the recruitment and training of inspectors were recommended also by the Commissioner. Proposals to accomplish this have already been put forward by the Department. A consultant is currently being engaged to investigate this aspect of the new service. Furthermore, a staff integrity program along United States lines, which has been proposed also, will be the subject of detailed discussions this month with a visiting United States expert. The export inspection service is being developed with a strong decentralised management system, which conforms with the recommendations of the Commissioner. Already, a revised organisation in each State has been approved, including the upgrading of a senior position. A corporate planning consultant is being engaged to develop a detailed plan to ensure that these and other management aspects of the new scheme are successfully implemented.
The report stresses the role of the unions-the Meat Inspectors Association and the Professional Officers Association-in successfully reforming the industry. It recommends that the Department consult closely with them before committing itself to proposals which could affect their industrial interests. This approach is in fact being adopted by the Department in the development of changes aimed at better aligning the demands of the job to industry requirements.
A very significant recommendation of the Commissioner was for common standards of construction, hygiene and meat inspection for all Australian meat works. He considered that, once developed, a common domestic standard should

then be applied to foreign markets which are prepared to accept it. Special standards would apply only to works which export to countries insisting on those standards. This is a major aim of the export inspection service. However, considerable consultation and development will be necessary before the ideal can become a reality. The Department will also maintain a close liaison with the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation on its licensing and inspection functions, as recommended by the Commissioner. The Department's plan to use automatic data processing to develop a system of product flow monitoring and for documentation has been endorsed by the Commissioner. The Department will certainly take into account his comments on the necessity for broad consultation on the proposal.
On the issue of halal slaughter the Commissioner recommended that there be a single system of certification in Australia under the direct and continuous supervision of the export inspection service. This proposal has a great deal of merit. However, there are many interests which need to be consulted and satisfied before it can be implemented, and I will be pursuing the recommendations with my colleagues, the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) and the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) as a matter of urgency. The inspection service will give also the fullest possible coverage to the game meat industry, as the report recommends.
I now turn to a recommedation on which further detailed consideration and consultation with the States is required. This recommendation is in paragraph 9.2 of the report. It states:
So far as Victoria is concerned, it is recommended that a joint authority be established along the lines already negotiated and reported to the Australian Agricultural Council.
As honourable members know, the Commonwealth has been striving for a long time to find a solution to the problem of dual meat inspection services. The matter has been discussed time and time again at meetings of the Australian Agricultural Council from August 1980 onwards, and some progress has been made. The proposal to examine the feasibility of a joint authority with Victoria was put by me to the August 1981 meeting of Council. My view was that if such an authority could be introduced successfully in one State it could serve as an impetus and as a model for other States. Subsequently a form of joint authority was drawn up in outline by officials of my Department and the Victorian Department of Agriculture. This form was then reported back to the Council.
In the meantime, however, there have been significant changes with regard to meat inspection.

Royal Commission into Meat Industry

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2383

The two most important developments have been the creation of the export inspection service-a completely new approach to export inspectionand the offer of the New South Wales Government to hand over its inspection services to the Commonwealth. In addition to these, we now have this Royal Commission report, and clearly the States will have views on the findings and recommendations. Whilst Mr Justice Woodward has recommended that the establishment of a joint Victorian-Commonwealth service be pursued, he has also indicated his belief that a single inspection service under single control should be the ultimate aim. As he says in paragraph 5.74:
I believe the best that can be presently achieved is a commitment by the States to the need for a single service and the establishment of interim arrangements which represent a move towards, and which leaves the way open for, a single service under single control.
The Government believes it is essential that the Commonwealth control the inspection of all export products. Our overseas customers demand this, and it is therefore essential for the protection of our export markets. I believe the new Commonwealth arrangements, particularly the creation of the export inspection service, provide a strong basis for a national Commonwealth service. I believe also that the New South Wales offer will go a long way towards creating a climate for a change in the traditional attitude the States have adopted on what they regard as their sovereign responsibilities. As a first step, discussions will be initiated with Victoria and the other States to discuss the views and recommendations of the Royal Commission with regard to meat inspection. Once these have progressed at official level the matter will be discussed at the Australian Agricultural Council.
That covers those recommendations which relate to the Commonwealth's responsibility. I believe it has been clearly demonstrated that the Royal Commission's recommendations either have been, or are being, implemented by the Government. We will, of course be giving further consideration to those aspects requiring consultation with industry and State governments. I remain determined to ensure that Australia's reputation as a reliable and reputable world meat supplier is maintained and enhanced. The recommendations of this report will be of considerable benefit in meeting that end.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta)-by leave-Let me state at the outset that the Opposition is not satisfied with the Government's response to the Royal Commission into the Australian Meat Industry. We have been a fair while waiting for the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr

Nixon) to respond. About one and a half hours ago the report of the Royal Commission was put into my hands. In the absence of my colleague the shadow Minister for Primary Industry, the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), I am responding on his behalf.
I think it is fair that we trace the steps that led to this report. The meat substitution scandal, of course, broke in August 1981 with the discovery of horse meat in a shipment of Australian boneless beef to the United States of America. Those of us who have an interest in these things or those of us who have an interest in Australia's reputation can remember with some embarrassment the ridicule which Australia suffered as a trading nation in the US, with all sorts of jokes being made about the meat from Australia in hamburgers in America. People made all sorts of odd jokes and Johnny Carson ridiculed Australia's reputation on his major television program. We all suffered some embarrassment-not just those concerned with the meat industry. The Minister's response after some days was to deregister some suspected boning rooms and to promise a tightening up of the meat inspection system and some new fines and penalties. That was in August 1981.
The Kelly Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems-Mr Bert Kelly, a former Liberal Minister in this establishment, having been commissioned to investigate the dual inspection service in Australia-reported in January 1980. In August 1981 the Minister was starting to do something about the dual inspection service. I remind the House that my colleague in another place, Senator Primmer in the late 1970s had also brought to light some evidence he had. It was some evidence he was quite prepared to document-he, in fact, did in the Senate-of malpractice in the export meat industry in Victoria. I remind the Minister that after I had been in this House a very short time in 1978 I also made a very pointed plea in this House for the Minister to do something about bringing our meat inspection service into line, not just because of the inefficiency that was wrought in that industry because of a duplication of an inspection service but simply because of the opportunities it opened for maladministration and corrupt practice.
But, of course, all that was ignored. We saw what that led to-the meat scandal. Two months after the original horse meat discovery the Minister announced that there would be a royal commission. That was a decent about face because just two days prior to that announcement the Minister-I hope he remembers this-stated that there was really no need for a royal commission.

2384 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Royal ComlJ1ission into Meat Industry

However, wiser counsel prevailed and we got a royal commission. The Royal Commission into the Australian Meat Industry under Mr Justice Woodward promptly reported in September 1982. The response to that report was fairly predictable. The Minister's response was to place himself in the hands of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). Could there be a more sinister fate than placing oneself in the Prime Minister's hands? Still, he did have the protection of being a member of the National Party, which gives him a slight exemption when it comes to the Prime Minister apologising for the inefficiency, maladministration or alleged corruption of the people in the National Party. If he had been a Liberal Minister of course he would not have dared to place himself in the Prime Minister's hands. I am sure the honourable member for Warringah (Mr MacKellar) and the honourable member for Ryan (Mr Moore) would back that up.
However, we saw this fairly theatrical performance on television of the Minister beating his breast and giving us a plaintive cry about how he was going to deliver his fate into the Prime Minister's hands-God help him. However, the Prime Minister's response to this was also fairly predictable because all he did was to call into question the findings of the Royal Commission and also the claims by Mr Kelly that he had told the Minister of allegations of malpractice. In fact, the Prime Minister declared that the Minister for Primary Industry had no case to answer. The ramifications of that run fairly deeply. I do not think anybody in this House, no matter what side of this table they sit upon, would regard in any way other than in the highest exalted standing, the reputation of Mr Justice Woodward. But the Prime Minister sought to denigrate this man and the findings that he had so studiously discovered in his Royal Commission by claiming that he had made mistakes.
Mr ScottHe made smears.
Mr JOHN BROWN-He smeared: That is the word. That is probably the best word to describe the Prime Minister's reaction to Mr Justice Woodward. The result of that is that this Government will have difficulty in future in persuading people of Mr Justice Woodward's great reputation a~ a man of the law to sit upon royal commissions that this Government wants to introduce because, if they do not produce findings the Government wants, they are also likely to be smeared. I see that the Law Society of New South Wales has suggested to Queen's Counsels, barristers and judges that they should be very wary about taking a position as head of any royal commission this Government wants to introduce. Of course, the slurs that were then placed upon Mr

Kelly caused him to respond in like fashion. Perhaps I will refer to that a little later.
In the furore over that Royal Commission's findings the big effort of the Government was to protect the Minister and not to take note of what that Royal Commission had said. It wanted to protect the Minister. The meat industry was forgotten. One of Australia's major industries, an industry which provided employment for many thousands of people, which has enormous ramifications for our economy, both internal and external, and which has added greatly to Australia's reputation as a trading nation-a reputation that had been brought into question by what has happened in the meat scandal-was forgotten in an attempt to save the Minister's face and hide.
Four major issues are in need of urgent resolution. The first is the establishment of a single meat inspection system. The Minister had promised that action on this issue would be taken by August 1981. Secondly, there needs to be the introduction of a single inspection standard covering both domestic and export meat. Thirdly, we need the development of an objective and reliable system for guaranteeing that Islamic requirements for halal slaughter have been complied with. Fourthly, there should be the use of a distinctive dye to distinguish pet meat from meat for human consumption. In the 14-page statement the Minister has now tabled, only one of these four major outstanding issues has been resolved-the minor one, the dyeing of pet meat. The other three issues remain unresolved. The industry believes that the dual meat inspection service was largely responsible for the meat substitution scandal and the Opposition supports that view. That is why for five years we have been suggesting to this Minister and his predecessor that there is an urgent need for reform of the whole system of meat inspection within Australia. I suggest to the House that the measures announced by the Minister do not really guarantee the future of the meat industry.
I think it is fair to come back to the Kelly report. The Kelly report on meat inspection appeared in January 1980, a long time before August 1981 when horse meat was first discovered in hambuger meat in the United States. That report called for a single meat inspection service in Australia-that was in January 1980. That single meat inspection service is still not operative. If that is not a measure of maladminstration or lack of efficiency in the Department administered by this Minister, I do not know what else is. At the time of the Kelly report it was revealed that Mr Landos, a senior officer of the Department of Primary Industry, had documented 409 pages of

Royal Commission into Meat Industry

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2385

examples of malpractice in the,meat industry during the Kelly inquiry. All this was available 2t years ago, yet this hapless Minister in this House just one month ago told us that although 409 pages from Mr Landos's report were available within that Department, no departmental officer had seen fit to refer them to the Minister. Perhaps they thought the Minister was too damn stupid to know what to do with them, if they had told him, anyhow. Honourable members can make their choice: It was one or the other. All that information was available 2t years ago and nothing has happened.
The Minister's lack of concern and responsibility for the meat industry became clear in September this year when he addressed the annual conference of the Cattlemen's Union of Australia in Mackay. The poor Minister became a little agitated when the cattlemen reacted and heckled him. I can quote what he told them. He said:
You can have the beef industry, I don't want it.
He said that the producers were welcome to take the industry out of the Government's hands. Is that a responsible action for a Minister charged with the administration of one of Australia's major industries? I would suggest that it is not. Mr Justice Woodward in his report said quite clearly that the Minister for Primary Industry did not deal with allegations about malpractice in the meat industry adequately and effectively. Mr Justice Woodward said that after acknowledging a number of things the Minister did do, and we will freely acknowledge them. He still says that the Minister did not deal with the allegations as a Minister should have. As we know, as most of Australia knows, as the meat industry certainly knows, the Minister should have resigned, but he did not resign. Instead he sought the support of the Prime Minister to smear not only Mr Justice Woodward but also Mr Bert Kelly and to twist Bert Kelly's evidence to the Royal Commission into something quite different from what he had said.
Rumours of scandals and malpractices have been circulating for years around this Minister and his predecessor, and not only in the meat industry. The series of scandals in the dairy industry should be enough to make any Minister think twice as to his competence as a Minister. Let me list a few of the scandals. We have had the Murray Goulburn Co-op Co. Ltd event; Reserve Bank of Australia loans were not properly accounted for; there were strange meanderings of $3m of Asia Dairy Industry (Hong Kong) Ltd funds in and out of Singapore, in and out of banks and in and out of who knows whose pocket; and now a

probable loss of $19m from the Minister's interference in the sale of PT Indomilk. We have had a meat substitution scandal that shook this nation. It could have been avoided if the Minister had acted promptly on Bert Kelly's advice to him in February 1980. The Department of Primary Industry records-those that are left after quite a number mysteriously disappearedshow that Landos and Kelly told the Minister of:
. . . the sordid nature of the meat industry and meat inspection. Particular reference was made to graft and misuse of inspector power.
The Minister has the hide to deny knowing enough about this industry to take any action. I think that the words 'the Minister's knowledge of the industry is very limited' are very significant. I say that as someone who has practised in the industry for 25 years.
Mr Nixon-Malpractised.
Mr JOHN BROWN-No, not malpractice. My reputation is unsullied in the meat industry. It is very different from the Minister's reputation. This morning in the House the Minister had the hide to tell us that the Minister for Agriculture in New South Wales should go. If anybody can state any reason why Jack Hallam's record of competence should be called into question in comparison with that of the Minister at the table I will be very surprised.
The simple fact is that our export meat industry has been destroyed. An industry worth $1,200m annually to Australia is now in tatters simply because the Department that administers it is incompetent. The Minister at its head and his predecessor are likewise. The Minister has alienated graziers. I note that only two members of the Country Party are in the House-I am sorry, I mean the National Party; it has changed its name. They dare not let farmers know that they are representing them because of the way that they maladminister anything that they have and that they rely on. Those members would not want to have 'country' included in the party name.
Mr Hunt-Five.
Mr JOHN BROWN-Two more National Party members are here but there are still very few of them. If one added their corporate intelligence together one would not have much. The Minister has alienated the graziers, the great supporters of the National Party. Their industry has collapsed. No export markets are left and primary producers are taking a lot less for their cattle than they should. Yesterday we had the spectacle of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation giving a free barbeque on the lawn to encourage

2386 REPRESENTATIVES 2I October 1982

Royal Commission into Meat Industry

people to eat meat again. This happens quite regularly. It is a cyclical turn of events. Every so often we have to try to get people to eat meat again. Every time that the export business builds up, the local market becomes expensive and people stop eating meat. Then the export market collapses because the Minister does not know how to regulate it. He ought to be ashamed of himself for having to try to increase the consumption of red meat in Australia. It should be a natural thing that Australians eat beef. The meat industry, in which I have been a practitioner for many years, is appalled at the bungling and maladministration that has gone on in the Department of Primary Industry.
It is high time that the Parliament realised that the National Party should not have the comfortable sinecure of having control of the Department of Primary Industry. We have a country in which less than 6 per cent of our population exists in primary industry, exists in non-urban areas. Yet we have a government with 125 members in two Houses, 42 of whom give their occupation as primary producers. That represents 30 per cent. We have a Cabinet which consists of a group of agrarian Bolsheviks who prop up an inefficient agricultural industry, call despair down on the manufacturing industry in this country and are generally over represented. It is high time that control of the meat industry-it is not a primary industry; it is a secondary industry--':was taken away from this Department and this bumbling, hapless and inept Minister. He has destroyed one of Australia's most attractive, economically sound and profitable industries by his maladministration. We call upon the Minister to resign. We do not accept his response to the Royal Commission. We think that the response we have had from the Minister today is totally inadequate and we call upon him to resign in order that some efficiency may be restored to the Department and the Australian meat industry can have a chance to get back on its feet.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek your indulgence to present a report.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-The Chair accedes to your request.
Mr NEWMAN-For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the Industries Assistance Commission on harvesting and processing of fish, crustacea and molluscsinterim assistance for south eastern trawl fishery.

AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (3.6)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide the Australian Shipping Commission with more autonomy in its day-to-day control over the operations of the Australian National Line. The opportunity is also being taken to make a number of minor amendments which are of a machinery nature and to repeal some sections which are redundant. Honourable members will be aware that it is the Government's intention that the Australian National Line should be operated on a commercial basis in competition with other shipowners and transport operators. Accordingly, the Government has taken a number of decisions with the objective of making the Line more responsive on a day-to-day basis in the commercial world, without in any way reducing the Commission's accountability to the Parliament for its stewardship of the Australian National Line.
The significant provisions of the Bill which give effect to these decisions relate to purchasing limits, directions to the Commission and subsequent reimbursement, charges for services, corporate planning, terms and conditions of employment for all Australian National Line staff, and its financial policy and borrowing powers. Section 16 of the principal Act is to be amended to permit the Commission to enter into contracts for the acquisition or disposal of any property, right or privilege up to the value of $2m without ministerial approval. The previous limit was $500,000. While the Commission will require ministerial approval to enter into financial lease arrangements, provision is made for the Minister to approve a specified class of these contracts or arrangements.
In the past, the Commission has been required to comply with certain government policies and practices which have not applied to its competitors. In some cases the Commission has been placed at a commercial disadvantage and has incurred additional costs. It is proposed therefore that unless specifically directed by the Minister, the Commission shall not have to comply with such policies and practices. Such directions will have to be tabled in the Parliament and the Commission will be entitled to reimbursement of the costs it incurs from its compliance. One of the

Australian Shipping Commission Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2387

major amendments proposed is to allow the Commission freedom to set its rates of charges for the services it provides. The Commission will be required to submit the basis on which it will establish its charges to the Minister, who will have the power to amend that basis; but once that basis is fixed, the Commission can set its charges in accordance with normal commercial practices and against the background of the financial targets established each year. This should allow the line to compete more effectively with other transport operators.
Honourable members will also note that the Commission will be obliged to undertake corporate planning. It is intended that, very broadly, the plan should outline the Commission's objectives and how it proposes to achieve them. The Commission will be required to keep the Minister informed of the plan. The terms and conditions of employment for all staff of ANL other than the General Manager's salary are to be determined by the Commission. This is appropriate for a commercially oriented authority. The General Manager's salary and allowances will continue to be set by the Remuneration Tribunal. As honourable members will be aware, it is essential for a commercially conducted organisation to have the flexibility and responsibility for its financial affairs. With the introduction of the new section 29, the Commission will determine a financial target for each year's operations. However, should it be considered necessary to do so the Minister may vary the target. In addition, the Bill makes provision for a review of the financial results of the Commission during the year and it is expected that, like any commercial organisation, the Commision will respond positively if it appears the profit targets are not going to be achieved. The Commission shall also propose to the Minister the dividend payment which would be appropriate in view of commercial factors including the level of profits and strategies for future development. Moreover, the Commission will be given power to determine the disposition of profits after payment of any divideod to the Commonwealth.
New borrowing provisions are included in the Bill. These are updated provisions to overcome problems previously encountered with trade credit borrowing. The machinery amendments to the Australian Shipping Commission Act, which I mentioned earlier, relate to the appointment of commissiOflers, their remuneration and allowances, the disclosure of interests, meetings of the Commission and the ability of the Commission to delegate its powers and a classification of the Commission's functions and by-laws and regulations. By and large, the redrafting in these areas

bring this Act into line with similar Acts. However, there are two items in particular which I should mention. Firstly, the Act will now allow the appointment of a part time Chairman, thus giving the Government an option should it wish to exercise it at some time in the future. Secondly; an acting commissioner can now be appointed in the event of a commissioner not being available at any time. Presently, an acting commissioner can be appointed only for the unexpired term of a retired commissioner. This has caused some problems for the Commission.
Sub-sections 12 (2) and (3) of the Act, which prevented anyone but a British subject from being appointed as an officer of the Commission; section 47, which permitted the purchase and sale of vessels by the Commonwealth to allow the payment of shipbuilding subsidy; and section 48, which ensured the adequacy of tonnage on the coast by requiring ministerial approval to transfer or mortgage vessels off-shore have been repealed. It is not appropriate that the last two sections mentioned should be continued under the Commission's Act. Repeal of the two sub-sections on employment restrictions will allow the Commission to employ suitably qualified non-British subjects. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS COMMISSION BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (3.15)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill and the accompanying Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill is to repeal the Australian National Railways Act 1917 and replace it with legislation more appropriate to the Commission's role as a commercial statutory authority operating in an intensely competitive market-place. This is the first full scale revision of this legislation since the establishment of the Commonwealth Railways in 1917. Successive amendments, including the 1975 amendment which established the Australian National Railways Commission, have changed various elements of the original legislation to deal with changing circumstances. Much of the legislation has remained unchanged and is now totally inappropriate to a modern government business undertaking.

2388 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

National Railways Commission Bill

The Government's policy regarding ANRC is that the Commission operate as far as possible in a commercial manner. To achieve this it is necessary that the Commission be in a position to respond quickly and positively to the demands of the market-place. Honourable members will recall that in the light of our policy the Review of Commonwealth Functions committee recommended that ANRC be deregulated. This legislation will give effect to the deregulatory measures approved by the Government and will considerably enhance the Commission's ability to operate effectively in what is a very competitive market. This legislation, as it must, provides for ministerial control in certain specific areas and by way of reserve powers so as to ensure that the Commission remains properly responsible and accountable for its actions. The new legislation therefore sets out to define precisely the Commission's powers and responsibilities by giving it a clear and distinct charter; remove many archaic constraints on the Commission's ability to operate in a commercial manner; and allow the Commission freedom to react flexibly to the demands of the market-place while retaining the control necessary to ensure proper responsibility and accountability.
The changes proposed are in accordance with the Government's policy that transport business undertakings should essentially operate in a commercial manner. If the Government requires the Commission to act not in a commercial manner then such requirements should be by way of an explicit direction and any costs incurred should be fully reimbursed. The legislation is consistent with the recommendations of the House of Representatives Expenditure Committee report on the Australian National Railways Commission. The Committee's theme was:
AN(RC)'s commercial judgment must predominate and therefore the scale and range of operations of AN (RC) should be determined by customer preferences for its services subject only to explicit Government directives . . .
I have circulated explanatory memoranda to assist honourable members in their consideration of both Bills. Let me now speak briefly and in general terms on the main provisions of the new legislation. Firstly, the Commission, as currently established under the Australian National Railways Act 1917, will continue. A significant feature of the new Australian National Railways Commission Bill is that, for the first time, the functions and powers of the Commission have been set out in a comprehensive statement. It was very difficult to ascertain what the functions and responsibilities of the Commission really were under the previous legislation. A significant change from

existing arrangements in this area relates to the Commission's powers to provide 'consultancy services'. Previously the Commission was restricted to providing services out of its surplus resources for, or on behalf of, the Commonwealth. This power has been widened to allow the Commission to provide consultancy services to the Commonwealth and its authorities, to other persons within Australia from surplus resources which it may have available from time to time, and to overseas clients with the approval of the Minister or at the request of the Commonwealth.
While the Bill removes a number of inappropriate constraints, Ministerial control in certain important areas will remain. Specific matters where Ministerial approval will be required are, firstly, entering into contracts valued at over $2m-the present limit is $500,000; secondly, entering into lease financing arrangements; and thirdly, participating in the formation of companies et cetera. The Commission will also have power to construct small extensions to its existing railway network when it decides these are commercially viable. An Act of Parliament which was previously necessary for all railway construction will now only be required when railways over 25 kilometres long are constructed. The Commission's powers relating to the construction, maintenance and operation of railways, including its powers to enter and occupy land, have been brought up to date to ensure that the Commission has the power necessary to perform its functions, and that it does so openly and responsibly.
The general duties of the Commission have been clarified to highlight its commercial role. The Commission will be required to operate its services safely and efficiently, in a manner that accords with proper commercial practice and attempt to achieve its financial target, subject to any directions by the Minister. A broad direction power is provided in this legislation. In order to ensure that this power is not used to constrain the Commission unduly in the proper exercise of its powers, directions will be tabled and noted in the Commission's annual report. Furthermore, if a direction results in financial disadvantage to the Commission, the Commission will be reimbursed. The direction power is an essential element of the measures which ensure proper responsibility and accountability of the Commission.
The Bill provides new arrangements for the determination of fares and freight rates charged by the Commission. The Commission will be required to prepare and submit to the Minister a statement setting out the basis under which it sets its fares and freight rates-essentially its pricing policy. The Minister may within 60 days either

National Railways Commission Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2389

approve this basis or substitute an alternative, giving reasons for any change. The Commission may then charge in accordance with the approved basis without further reference to the Minister. Should the Commission wish to alter the basis, the Commission is required to notify the Minister of the proposed variation to the basis. If the Minister considers a change to the basis to be unacceptable and not 'in the public interest' he may within 60 days direct the Commission either not to implement the change or to substitute an alternative. Such a direction will be made under the 'general direction' power-that is, it will be tabled in Parliament and noted in the Commission's annual report. This new arrangement will allow the Commission to respond positively to changes in the marketplace.
The Government is concerned to see that its trading authorities should take a long term view. The Commission has been undertaking corporate planning since 1978. Corporate planning has proved of great assistance in welding the three disparate rail systems which previously existed into a single entity and enabled the Commission to determine and address its long term goals. The new legislation will specifically require such planning. There are a number of changes to the Commission itself. The most significant are: To provide an option for appointing future Chairmen on either a full time or part time basis; to enable a deputy Chairman to be appointed; and to remove the statutory retiring age of 65 for part time Commissioners.
The Bill continues in existence the railway service which existed under the previous Act. I assure honourable members that the rights of the employees of the Commission, including those persons transferred from the former South Australian and Tasmanian systems, have not been altered in any way. There have nonetheless been some changes in the area of personnel practices. The power of the Public Service Board to approve the terms and conditions of employment of the Commission's staff and to represent the Commission at arbitration proceedings has been removed. The requirement for ministerial approval of salaries of senior positions has been removed. Such matters are properly for the judgment of the Commission. In addition, the ability of the Commission to offer alternative superannuation schemes, subject to the concurrence of the Minister for Finance under the terms of the Commonwealth Superannuation Act, has been clarified in the new legislation.
The provisions relating to the Commission's financial affairs have been amended to give the Commission greater responsibility in determining

its financial policy. The Bill provides for the Commission to advise the Minister prior to the beginning of a financial year of its financial target for that year. The Minister may vary this target but this action and the reasons for the change must be reported in the Commission's annual report. The Commission is required to plan its operations so as to achieve the target so determined and continually review progress in achieving the target. The Commission will be required to report regularly to the Minister on its progress. The dividend provision has been altered to reflect this greater responsibility. The Commission will, subject to ministerial intervention if this is considered necessary, be able to determine the. level of the dividend it proposes to pay to the Commonwealth.
Some alterations have been made to the Commission's borrowing powers to clarify its power to undertake trade credit borrowings and similar transactions. While consideration was given to removing the Commission's tax free status, it was decided that this should not be done at this time in the light of its present financial position and the comparable position of railways operated by the States. This matter will be kept under review as the Commission moves towards profitable operations.
The Part of the Bill dealing with miscellaneous matters contains several provisions which deserve mention. The first of these relates to accident reporting and investigation. The present accident reporting provisions have been clarified to ensure proper oversight in this important area. The power of the Minister to order independent investigations of accidents has also been strengthened. The approval of the Minister rather than the Governor-General will be required before the Commission can close railways. As in all such matters, the provisions of this Bill will, as with the previous Act, be subject to any overriding requirements of the transfer agreements. This is specified in clause 74 of the Bill. The Commission is also no longer to be a common carrier and this is specifically stated in the Bill. This change, which is in line with moves recently taken both overseas and in Victoria and Western Australia, will allow the Commission greater freedom, which has been available to its competitors, to provide those services which it is best suited to provide.
The numerous offences provisions which existed in the previous Act have not been repeated in the new legislation. They will be replaced with a single serious offence of endangering the safety of the railways with a substantial penalty. This offence is modelled on provisions of the Crimes (Aircraft) Act. Other offences will be handled through the Commission's power to

2390 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Protection of the Sea Bill

make by-laws to protect railway property and railway users and to prescribe offences including penalties up to $500. These by-laws, which are a normal requirement for operating authorities will, of course, be subject to the same sort of parliamentary scrutiny as regulations. I believe the new legislation will be a significant step in giving the Australian National Railways Commission the powers and responsibilities to achieve its corporate goal of profitability. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS COMMISSION (TRANSITIONAL
PROVISIONS AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (3.27) - I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is complementary to the Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Its purpose is threefold. It repeals the Australian National Railways Act 1917 with effect from the date of proclamation of the new ANRC Act. It makes necessary. savings to ensure continuity in the Commission's operations. In particular, it continues the appointment and terms and conditions of service of the Chairman, Commissioners, General Manager and officers and employees of the Commission as if the Act had not been repealed. Lastly, it changes references in other legislation where this is necessary. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
PROTECTION OF THE SEA (PREVENTION OF POLLUTION FROM
SHIPS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (3.31 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Pollution of the marine environment has been a matter of concern to the Commonwealth Government for many years. During this period, legislation has been introduced from time to time to take advantage of increasingly effective international treaties. In 1981 the Parliament passed the protection of the sea legislation package. The

1981 package included measures designed to provide improved protection to the marine and coastal environments, to provide powers of intervention in cases of actual or threatened marine pollution incidents and to provide a regime which will ensure that considerable compensation will be available to pay to combat and clean-up tanker-sourced oil pollution. All of those measures had their origins in treaties made by the International Maritime Organisation.
The two Bills in the 1982 protection of the sea legislation package will take the Government's fight against marine pollution a significant step further. The Bills will, together, give effect to the Commonwealth's obligations under the 1973 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships as amended by the 1978 Protocol to the Convention. These two instruments are widely referred to as MARPOL 1973-78. MARPOL 1973-78 is a complex and wide-ranging antipollution convention. It was designed to provide all nations implementing its provisions with uniform controls over marine pollution caused by oil, noxious liquid substances carried in bulk, harmful substances carried in packaged form, sewage and garbage.
This Convention was developed to take advantage of technological advances that have occurred since the original oil pollution convention was made, namely, the 1954 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil1954 OILPOL-. Australia is a party to the 1954 Convention. MARPOL 1973-78, however, is such an advanced convention that it has taken nearly ten years for the operational requirements of the Convention to be translated into forms suitable to maratime nations. It is only now that the Convention is nearing the membership required to bring it into force internationally. MARPOL 1973-78 includes two mandatory annexes dealing with prevention of pollution by oil and noxious liquid substances carried in bulk form. The provisions of the compulsory annexes will come into force, in the case of oil, on the day that the Convention comes into force internationally, and three years following that day for noxious liquid substances carried in bulk.
The Marine and Ports Council of Australia recommended to the Commonwealth, State and Northern Territory governments in 1981 that Australia should, by complementary legislation, give effect to the compulsory provisions of MARPOL 1973-78. Consultation with the States and Northern Territory is taking place via the Marine and Ports Council to facilitate the development of

Protection o/the Sea Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2391

model complementary legislation for early introduction into State and Northern Territory parliaments. Australia will not be able to ratify MARPOL 1973-78 until all necessary Commonwealth, State and Northern Territory legislation is in place. It was decided by the Marine and Ports Council that while Australia is in a position to ratify the compulsory provisions of MARPOL 1973-78, a further study concerning the noncompulsory provisions needs to be undertaken in order to determine whether there is a need for a~gmentation of port reception facilities. As I mentioned earlier, MARPOL 1973-78 is not yet in force internationally. The passage of this legislation and that of the States and Northern Territory will place Australia in the position of being among the early participants in this very much improved means of controlling marine pollution.
The Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982 will repeal and replace the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981, which applies the provisions of the 1954 OILPOL Convention to which I referred earlier. This Bill introduces new and improved pollution control provisions for oil pollution, including special arrangements for protection of the Great Barrier Reef. This particular matter was the subject of legislation in 1981 which provided Australia with the enabling legislation to implement provisions of the 1954 OILPOL Convention, which are not yet in force internationally. It is now anticipated that the MARPOL 1973-78 Great Barrier Reef protection measures will enter into force earlier than will the OILPOL provisions.
The new Bill introduces new controls on the operation of ships carrying noxious liquid substances in bulk. Specifically, provision is made concerning prohibition of discharges of noxious liquid substances into the sea, cargo record book requirements and cleaning of cargo tanks following discharge of cargoes. The protection of the Great Barrier Reef has been continued in relation to noxious liquid substances by imposing outright prohibition or special discharge rules when ships are within 50 miles of the outer edge of the reef. Differing rules are applied depending on the categorisation of the substance and its strength in the mixture being discharged. In many cases discharge into the sea is prohibited entirely. This Bill extends the effective control of ships from the pollution point of view into an entirely new area, and the Government believes that these new controls will, with the co-operation of the States and the

Northern Territory, further assist in the preservation of the beauty and uniqueness of the Australian marine and coastal environment. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr JohnBrown) adjourned.
NAVIGATION (PROTECTION OF THE SEA) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (3.38)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is the second of two important steps in applying the provisions of the MARPOL 1973-78 Convention. In this Bill, Division 12, inserted by the Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 is repealed. The existing Division 12 has not yet come into force because it was inserted in the legislation to enable Australia to implement the 1971 ship construction provisions of the 1954 International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships and those provisions have not yet attracted sufficient signatures for them to have come into force internationally.
The MARPOL 1973-78 Convention supercedes the 1954 Convention and therefore new requirements will be inserted in the Navigation Act 1912. This Bill inserts a new Division 12, relating to ships carrying or using oil, and a new Division 12A, making provision concerning ships carrying noxious liquid substances in bulk. As all matters relating to construction, safety and survey of ships are incorporated in the Navigation Act, MARPOL Convention requirements have also been included in that Act for simplicity of administration and understanding by the industry. I commend this Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES (NATIONAL STANDARDS) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Thomson, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (3.40)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to update the nomenclature of reference standards of physical quantities and to clarify the functions and powers

2392 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Weights and Measures Amendment Bill

of the National Standards Commission. The establishment and use of a common and uniform system of weights and measures has a long history which may be traced back in written records to the earliest civilisations. Today's high technology society requires a far more complex and extensive system and cannot be satisfied by standards for the measurement of length and weight only. A uniformly applied system of measurement is as essential to modern society as a common language or monetary system.
Under section 51 (xv) of the Constitution, the Commonwealth has power to make laws for the good government of Australia in respect of weights and measures and as a result it established the National Standards Commission. In practice, and by mutual agreement, the Commonwealth has limited the application of its power to legislation covering uniform measurement standards, while the States and Territories have legislated to regulate weighing and measuring practices in the market-place. The activities are complementary and combine to give Australia a uniform measuring system applied honestly and consistently everywhere. In general, the principles expressed in the Bill have been discussed with those Ministers of the States and Territories who are responsible for weights and measures and have their support.
The National Standards Commission was originally established in 1948 and presently operates under the Weights and Measures (National Standards) Act, which was extensively revised in 1960 and has been subject only to minor administrative amendments since then. It is responsible for establishing and maintaining legal units and standards of measurements for uniform application throughout Australia, and for approving the pattern of measuring instruments for use in trade to ensure accuracy and reliability in service.
In this era of rapid technological change, the States have looked to the Commission to play an increasing role in matters such as the promotion of uniform principles in State legislation relating to trade measurements and packaged goods and giving effect to internationally agreed principles of legal metrology. Furthermore, the range of responsibilities of the Commission in regard to trade instruments has increased markedly due to the technical complexity of the measuring devices submitted and the integration of measuring equipment with other devices. The Bill proposes to give legal effect to the increasingly important role undertaken by the Commission in legal metrology in the new technological age.
In summary the Bill provides for:

(a) an updating of the hierarchy of standards of physical measurement in accordance with modern practice;
(b) use of other than Australian legal units in certain circumstances;
(c) a clearer definition of the functions and powers of the Commission to reflect present procedures;
(d) clarification of the Commission's powers and responsibilities in respect of approval of patterns of complex measuring instruments in use for trade including component parts of such instruments and complex measuring systems incorporating measuring instruments;
(e) updating the requirements concerning conduct of the Commission; and
(f) an increase in membership of the Commission from a Chairman and four members to a Chairman and six members.
This last provision will allow two members to be appointed representing industry and commerce. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
NATIONAL CRIMES COMMISSION BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr N. A. Brown, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications and Acting Attorney-General) (3.44)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
A succession of reports from royal commissions and other inquiries on criminal activities in Australia convinced the Government that a fresh look must be had at existing arrangements and institutions for the investigation and prosecution of criminal offences of a serious kind, particularly offences in the nature of organised crime.
In the course of this fresh look, a close examination was made of existing arrangements, consultations were entered into with the States and discussions had by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) in the United States and the United Kingdom in July of this year with law enforcement authorities in those countries. As a result, the Government has concluded that existing Australian law enforcement efforts need to be supplemented by the establishment of a new standing body with the necessary expertise and powers to make an effective attack on organised

National Crimes Commission Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2393

crime. The purpose of this Bill is therefore to establish such a body, to be called the National Crimes Commission, which will be given the functions and powers necessary to deal with forms of crime with which existing law enforcement bodies now have difficulty in coping. However, it must be emphasised that the Commission is intended to supplement the efforts of regular law enforcement bodies, not supplant them. It will be directed indeed by the Bill to work in cooperation with these bodies.
Several recent royal commissions have demonstrated that they are able to uncover and bring to public notice instances of wrong-doing not detected by ordinary law enforcement agencies. These include the Costigan Royal Commission into the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, which attributes its success in this regard to first, its power as a royal commission to require by subpoena the production of documents and the attendance of persons for examination-this power is not of course possessed by the police; secondly, its access to equipment and expertise to enable sophisticated intelligence gathering and analysis; and, thirdly, the use of personnel with high intellectual capacity and special training.
From the Government's general experience and the information obtained by the Attorney General during his overseas consultations, the Government came to the view that the solution to the need to improve law enforcement does not lie merely in the use of royal commissions in their traditional form. The function of a royal commission is essentially to inquire into and report on the matter referred to it. It may recommend the institution of prosecutions; however, most Australian governments, Commonwealth and State, have had the experience of a royal commission recommending the prosecution of named persons but it being subsequently found that it is not possible to bring the prosecutions because of lack of evidence.
A further consideration in relation to royal commissions is that it usually takes a royal commission quite some time to establish itself and develop expertise in its particular task. That expertise and its trained staff are dispersed when the commission's task is finished. Having regard to these considerations, the Government concluded that, while the new form of commission should have certain points of similarity with a royal commission, for example, the subpoena powers of such a body and the power to examine witnesses, it should differ from that body in several significant respects.

Perhaps the most important difference will be that the primary function of the Commission will not be to make reports to government but rather to inquire into areas of criminal activity with a view to prosecution action, if appropriate. It will be enabled to pass information, as obtained, to the regular police forces but, in serious or more complex cases, it is intended that it will seek the appointment of a special counsel who, if pros-
ecutions eventuate, would be the ultimate prosecutor. This is seen by the Government as the means by which the Commission will be enabled to make the most effective imput into the prosecution process. A Special Prosecutor appointed under the recently enacted Special Prosecutors Act could, in appropriate cases, handle prosecutions resulting from the Commission's operations.
Other important differences between the Crimes Commission and the traditional form of royal commission are as follows: Firstly, it will be a standing body able to accumulate experience and expertise. Within its wide statutory area of inquiry it will not require a reference from government but it can be given a particular reference by government. Secondly, the Crimes Commission will be given a wide discretion to conduct its hearings in private. This will be appropriate if there is possibility of prejudice to the ultimate fair trial of a person. Thirdly, self-incrimination will be expressly made a lawful excuse for failure to answer questions put by the Commission. The Commission can seek immunity for a witness in an appropriate case as to use of his evidence against him in subsequent proceedings; but, except where such immunity was granted, the answers given by a witness would not be made by the statute inadmissible in other proceedings. This is contrary to the rule applying in relation to royal commissions. Fourthly, the Commission will not be permitted to name persons in public reports as suspected of committing criminal offences. Finally, the Commission will not be expected to examine under subpoena the principal target of the investigation unless this person wished to give evidence.
The Commission will be empowered in its annual reports to draw attention to patterns or trends and the nature and scope of any criminal activity coming to its attention. It will also be empowered to recommend, on the basis of its investigatory experience, changes in the law or administrative action-for example, that the attention of the police should be directed to particular areas. In addition, the Commission can be empowered by a reference from the Government to conduct a general inquiry, which could include public hearings, into a particular area of concern

2394 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

National Crimes Commission Bill

with a view to making recommendations to government. In exercising this function, the Commission would be prohibited from naming individuals as suspected of committing criminal offences.
Protection of Individual Rights
The Commonwealth Government recognises the need to ensure that proposed changes in law enforcement procedures and institutions do not prejudice individual rights. Therefore: Firstly, self-incrimination will be provided as a lawful excuse to answering questions by the Commission. Secondly, when the Commission is investigating suspected criminal activities, it will be given appropriate discretion to ensure that a hearing will not be in public if the ultimate trial of a person would thereby be prejudiced. Thirdly, a witness will be entitled to be represented by counsel if he so wishes. Fourthly, the Commission will not be empowered to name persons in a report as suspected of committing criminal offences or as recommended for prosecution. Fifthly, the Commission will not be expected in ordinary circumstances to examine under subpoena the principal target of an investigation. Sixthly, the legislation will expire after five years unless extended by parliament after review of the Commission's activities.
By clause 7 the Commission will be given a wide authority to investigate on its own initiative or at the request of the Attorney-General a wide range of matters within the Commonwealth's constitutional jurisdiction. While the Attorney-General will be able to issue directions or guidelines of a general nature, he will not be able to issue a direction or guideline as to the conduct of a particular investigation. The community thus has the assurance that the Commission will be able to discharge the functions entrusted to it by parliament free from any extraneous direction as to particular matters.
I now deal with the very important question of participation in this national effort by the States and the Northern Territory. From the outset the Commonwealth Government has emphasised the great desirability of the States and the Northern Territory participating in this matter. A series of meetings have been had with State Ministers and the Government is hopeful that the States will recognise the desirability, and indeed the essentiality, of involvement in this national effort.
To allow for State participation, the Bill as introduced provides for involvement of the States and the Northern Territory in either of two ways. Firstly, provision is made in the Bill to permit a State or the Northern Territory to vest functions

in the Commission by, or under, a State or Territory law. Secondly, the legislation will permit members of the Commission, with the consent of the Attorney-General, to accept functions or powers from a State or the Northern Territoryfor example a commission under State legislation providing for establishment of royal commissions-and to perform those functions and exercise those powers in conjunction with the performance or exercise by the Commission of its functions or powers under the Bill. In this connection, the Commission members would be able to use the resources and facilities of the Commission. Thus, under these provisions, it will be open to a State or the Territory to authorise the Commission either on a standing basis in relation to a general area or on an ad hoc basis in relation to a specific matter to carry out investigations drawing on State or Territory powers.
The Government sees the first alternative as the preferable and more effective one but the second course, if preferred by a particular State, is workable provided the relevant State legislation is in a form compatible with the Bill. The Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence is seen by the Government as an important adjunct to the Crimes Commission and the Government is prepared to support a review of the resources available to the Bureau with a view to the upgrading of its performance.
Another important feature of the Government's legislative plan of action in relation to the criminal law is the Criminal Investigation Bill. This Bill, which was introduced in the Senate in November last year, has attracted considerable comment including comments from police forces. The Attorney-General, (Senator Durack), shortly before his illness, considered these comments in detail and approved a number of proposed amendments to the Bill to take into account the public response. Unfortunately, before it was possible for the Bill to be brought on for debate, Senator Durack's illness intervened, preventing the matter from being brought to finality.
All too clearly in recent months we have seen evidence of the dangers presented to the Australian community by organised crime and crimes involving sophisticated techniques and methods. While in no way belittling the efforts of the ordinary law enforcement agencies of Australia, it is clear that the problems presented by these new developments require new solutions. The Government is confident that the Crimes Commission to be established by this Bill with the new functions and powers given by the legislation and the expertise that it can be expected to develop will be a

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2395

very significant supplement to the efforts of law enforcement agencies. Together with those agencies it will provide an effective answer to the problems presented by these new developments in the field of crime. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN BICENTENNIAL ROAD DEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND BILL
1982
Second Reading Debate resumed from 20 October, on motion by MrHunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
upon which Mr Morris had moved by way of amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House-
(I) recognises the special roads needs of various regions of Australia and deplores the failure of the Government to make provision in the Bill for an equitable allocation of national roads funds between the States and the Northern Territory, and
(2) condemns the Government for its discriminatory decision to allocate an inadequate level of funds to local government bodies for local roads'.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (3.59)-The Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Bill is a very important Bill involving the collection of an extremely large amount of revenue from Australian motorists. Australian motorists have long been among the most exploited of all the identifiable groups in Australia. Now they are to be subjected to an additional $2.5 billion surcharge on petrol and diesel fuel to finance what has been described as this new public relations gimmick of the Government-The Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program.
This measure can be regarded as a death-bed repentance by a government which has been guilty of flagrant neglect of Australia's road needs. For years motorists have been bled dry by petrol taxes, crude oil levies and sales taxes in connection with motor vehicles. I intend to provide some statistical substantiation of the contentions that I am making. Now we are to have a new tax on motorists which will have enormous inflationary consequences, particlarly for country people, who are also hit by changes to the Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy Scheme. All road taxes on vehciles have an inflationary effect since they are involved with the transportation of goods and primary materials right through to the finished product stage.

I know that statistics are hard to assimilate but I want to put some figures in the record. Substantial revenue is gained under two major headingsthat is, the crude oil levy and excise on petroleum products. For 1980-81 the amount collected from those two levies was $3,944m and the amount allocated to the States for roads was $606.9m. For 1981-82 the amount collected from those two areas was $4,074m and the grants to the States for roads amounted to $662m. In the current year, 1982-83, the estimate is that $4,568m will be collected and the grants to the States for roads will amount to $709.3m. The total amount derived in those three years from the crude oil levy and the excise on petroleum products was $12,586m and the amount spent on roads was only $1,978m. If those collections had been delivered to the road construction program, the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program and tax imposition would not be needed at all.
Last night the honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean) said that if the members of the Opposition want more money spent on roads they have to nominate the area of expenditure that they want curtailed. He said: 'Do you want less money spent on education, health and social security? You would have to reduce expenditure in those areas'. The Opposition is saying that that enormous amount of $12,586m collected from the motorist in three years should have been directed to roads, instead of the miserable $1,978.2m which in fact went in that direction. For the sake of the record, as at 30 August 1982 the Commonwealth was extracting excise of 6.15c per litre on petrol and 6.l5c per litre on diesel fuel. There is some Federal-State complicity in the whole deal. For example, the New South Wales Government is collecting 3.02c on super petrol, 2.95c on standard and 5c on diesel fuel.
The Roads Grants Act 1980 covers a five-year period. Expenditure for the current financial year, 1982-83, under this Act is $734m. That represents part of the undertaking to provide a total of $3,650m for roads over the five years to 1984-85. The Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program will expire in 1988. An amount of lc per litre has been imposed, increasing to 2c per litre on 1 July 1983. This will go right through to 31 December 1988 to raise over that six-year period $2.5 billion. What will all this cost? The Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) has acknowledged that at a 2c per litre level an average motorist travelling 15,000 kilometres per year-which seems to me a fairly reasonable rate to attribute to an ordinary motorist-will pay something like 67c per week. The driver of a 38-tonne truck travelling Sydney-Melbourne on a

2396 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

round trip will spend an extra $18 in fuel as a result of this imposition. As we all know, that also will get passed on in retail prices and have an inflationary effect.
Remember the estimate that I gave for 1982-83. The revenue from the crude oil levy will be $3,237m and the excise from petrol will be $1,331 m, making a total revenue in that financial year of $4,568m, but road grants to the States will be limited to $709m. If the Government started to give the motorist back a substantial proportion of what it is taking from him it would have no problems in respect of the development of Australian roads.
Roads have been neglected for many years. Government expenditure has never kept pace with the great need that is apparent. In 1979-80 road construction costs rose by 15.9 per cent and Federal road funds rose by only 7.5 per cent. In 1980-81 the costs of road maintenance and construction rose by 15.3 per cent, but funds increased by only II per cent.
Mr ScottIt has gone backwards.
Mr LES JOHNSON-It has gone backwards. The Minister acknowledged that in his second reading speech. He said:
The Commonwealth acknowledges that the level of funding of roads in recent years has not kept pace with increases in road construction costs.
That is quoted from page 2086 of Hansard of 14 October. So road users are the victims of neglect. They have been hit with rising fuel taxes for years and many other taxes as well. As the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) said the other day, every petrol pump is now a tax collector and there is a 100 per cent tax imposition on fuel. The fact of the matter is that Federal revenue from fuel related taxes has more than quadrupled since 1975-76; that is to say, they have increased since the Labor Government went out of office by 400 per cent. Despite this massive increase in revenue, Federal road expenditure has been cut by $51 7m in real terms when 1975-76 is compared with 1980-81. That is the situation in the general sense.
We have heard some parochialism espoused in respect of these matters. I want to mention the situation in my State of New South Wales, which has suffered a cut in Federal road grants of $92m in real terms since 1975-76. I note that for Victoria the allocation has been slashed in real terms by $112m over the same period. Last financial year I understand the Commonwealth collected in New South Wales alone $1,300m from motorists. Only 16 per cent of that was returned to the States for road construction. In fact, New South Wales receives only about 16c for every dollar paid out

in fuel taxes. The honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall), a former State Premier of South Australia, complained during the course of this debate about the raw deal that has been meted out to his State in respect of this new Bicentennial Road Development Program. Of course, it is true that some allocations have been made in a total sense for urban, arterial, rural and local road programs. But there is still a prerogative left to the National Party Minister to shuffle the figures at will. Local governments can have allocations shifted from them and put on to pork barrelling rural programs or some other programs at the whim of a National Party Minister or his cronies.
Mr Morris-National Country Party.
Mr LES JOHNSON-I think they now call it the National Party. The honourable member for Shortland coined a phrase which relates particularly to national roads. It is the national roads area where the Federal Minister has an unfettered and exclusive prerogative to determine where the money is to be spent. The honourable member for Shortland said that this is a case of putting Dracula in charge of the blood bank. National roads do not have to be just those roads that cover the perimeter of Australia; they can also be those roads which deviously wend their way through the electorates of the National Country Party or National Party-whatever it is called at the present time. These are matters which give rise to very justifiable concern.
I noticed that the other day the New South Wales Minister for Transport, Mr Cox, said that Federal fuel taxes returned to New South Wales dropped by over 50 per cent in six years. He said that whilst $1 billion was collected in New South Wales, only $214m or 21c a litre was returned to the State for roads. He went on to say that in every respect New South Wales has been getting a raw deal in respect of the Commonwealth's decisions on tax reimbursements which in themselves cost that State Government $400m. So the New South Wales Government certainly does not want to be robbed on the roads front. New South Wales received the smallest reimbursement of any State-that is, $420 a head-under that reimbursement formula whereas Tasmania, for example, received $839 a head. I emphasise that we do not want any skullduggery in respect of the allocation of funds under this Bicentennial Road Development Program. Nevertheless, it is time we found more money for roads. As I have indicated, I would prefer to find that money from the road taxes that have been imposed over the years rather than introduce this new road tax. The cost of having bad roads is one that Australia can no longer afford. I notice that Mr Ken Dobinson, an

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2397

engineer from the New South Wales Department of Main Roads, in a recent seminar said that in the I970s, 36,000 people were killed, nearly one million people were injured and that the cost of road accidents was $1 ,800m a year or $260 a vehicle. They are astronomical figures. Some people contend that the overall social and economic costs and other expenses associated with road crashes are currently running at the rate of $4 billion per annum. Whether those figures are accurate is very hard to know. But we all know that they reach an astronomical level and something has to be done about the position. In that respect, some very interesting points are being made. Mr Dobinson, in the same seminar, is reported as saying:
. . . we must grapple with the basic problem-the inadequacy of the Australian road network. A comparison of the accident rates in any other countries shows that those with the lower fatality rates all have well developed road systems. The fatality rate in the USA. which is 60 per cent of that in Australia could be regarded as a target to be achieved.
I think that puts the situation in very stark form. In quoting from that contribution to the seminar which was called The Community Benefits of Roads' and which was held in the Camberwell Civic Centre in March this year, I make reference also to another interesting speech that was delivered by Mr E. Drinkwater of the Royal Automobile Club of Victoria Ltd. The summary of the seminar states:
Mr Drinkwater maintained that motoring taxes are being used by the Government for increasing revenue. Road users, through the operation of their vehicles contribute nearly 10 per cent of total Commonwealth revenue but less than 2 per cent is returned in the form of road grants, and this situation exists because there are 'no votes in roads'.
This is the interesting point that he made:
Australia now has over 7 million registered vehicles or one vehicle f9r every two persons, and there are only three countries in the world with a higher vehicle ownership (USA., Canada and New Zealand). Over the last decade there has been a phenomenal growth in motor vehicle ownership and usage, and also high increases in road construction and maintenance costs (currently 16 per cent p.a. in Victoria).
This situation has not been recognized by the Commonwealth Govenrment's road grants which, over the last 10 years, have increased by only 188 per cent, equivalent to an annual increase of less than 7 per cent. By comparison other Commonwealth expenditure over the same period has increased as follows:
Education 862 per cent, Social Security and Welfare 617 per cent, Health 552 per cent, and Defence 225 per cent.
These are very high figures indeed when compared with the increase in road expenditure of only 188 per cent over that lO-year period. Although, as I said, we are glad to acknowledge that more money will be spent on roads, we do not altogether approve of the way that the funds are being raised. I notice one feature of this Bill which does not enthuse me. It is the fact that in regard to

the national roads program and I think also in respect of the other programs-the local and urban road programs-it becomes a requirement for the State main roads departments to subject themselves to a tendering process in competition with private enterprise. There is a very adverse reaction to this from the States and certainly from their employees.
It is very likely that what we will see happen is that overseas construction companies will start tendering for our national roads program. They will destabilise the day labour system and the main roads departments in the States. After they have virtually put these out of business, these overseas construction companies will follow the pattern in this country that they have demonstrated in other parts of the world. Having taken a dominant role over the Australian road construction market they will just be able to do precisely what they like. The sky will be the limit so far as the tendering prices are concerned. I warn this Minister and this Government about that. It is very bad to destabilise the main roads departments. It will result in retrenchments in country towns that cannot afford it. I ask the Minister to have another look at this matter. I simply say in conclusion that when a Labor Government takes office we will be using the funds that are derived from motorists for the purpose of road construction.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr COWAN (Lyne) (4.l9)-For many years now the Australian people have been looking for a fund that is identified directly with road construction and road maintenance work in Australia. I believe that the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Fund Bill which is before us today is an important step that councils, the States, the NRMA, the Australian Automobile Association and many other people have been looking for. I believe that research will show that up until 1959 the petrol tax fund was identified directly for use on the roads. After that it became a part of Consolidated Revenue generally.
One should take into consideration that we in Australia have a very great need for communication and that we have a very high standard of living generally. Most families possess a motor vehicle and some possess two. We use the roads a lot more now for both private transport and passenger services than we ever used them before, as the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) pointed out in his second reading speech.

2398 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

Whether we like it or not, we have a great responsibility to upgrade the roads in Australia. We have three categories of roads~national highways, arterial roads and local roads~and I believe the legislation before the Parliament today is a step forward in the improvement of roads.
What impresses me is the fact that the Minister has identified this fund as being a trust fund under which the money has to be expended upon the roads in Australia. I commend the Minister for that. I am sure it will be a relief and a comfort to the States and certainly to local government throughout Australia because they know that the fund will be identified with them. The increase this year on every litre of fuel and the 2c increase to come into effect from the end of June 1983 will certainly bring forth a fund that must, over the years to come, playa very great part in building up roads. As has been said in the House, over a six-year period a fund amounting to $2.5 billion will be directly available for that purpose.
Three Commonwealth funds are available for roads~the petrol tax fund, the personal taxation
fund, and the fund that is being provided for in the legislation we are considering today. The petrol tax fund and the bicentenary road fund are two funds that will be used directly for road building in Australia. This year $914m will be available for direct spending on the roads and, in 1983-84, $1,208m will be made available, or an increase of 33 per cent over last year. Today we heard Opposition speakers say that New South Wales is being deprived of its share of these funds. We know that New South Wales contributes a lot of money to the petrol tax fund.
Certainly, if one has a national outlook and is taking a seat in the national Parliament, one has to look at the whole of Australia. I, as a taxpayer and a petrol buyer in New South Wales, will be quite happy' to see that in this nation an equitable amount of funding goes to roads throughout Australia, and I will say something more about national highways later. It is important from our defence point of view and from the point of view of the needs of industry, particularly the natural resources industries in the north of Australia, that we develop our roads. This year New South Wales will receive an extra 34 per cent in funding for roads under the legislation that has been introduced today by the Government. A comparison of 1983-84 funds with those for 1981-82 shows that New South Wales will receive an extra 78 per cent in road funds. I do not think members of the Australian public mind paying an identified 1c per litre if they know that it will go into a trust fund and that it will be spent on the construction of maintenance of our roads.

If we think about it, this Government has done a considerable amount in making extra funding available for roads. Funds in the personal taxation pool went up by 21 per cent this year. Admittedly that increase will not all go to roads, but a fair percentage will go to the shires throughout the States for their roads. The funds are available for local government to spend, no matter whether they are offset against an increase in rates or for whatever purpose they are used. The money will go into the coffers of the councils in Australia. The amount available is $350m this year, and I do not believe that anybody will be able to criticise the Commonwealth for the contribution it is making
to roads.
I commend the Minister for Transport and Construction, who is at the table today. He has talked to councils, to the associations representing motorists thoughout Australia, and to his back bench, and he has gone to Cabinet with a proposal for a bicentenary fund, which is most appropriate. In what better way can we celebrate 200 years in Australia than by building up the important communications which are so necessary today? Australia is a young country with a great land area. The honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) only last night made what I thought was a rather sensible contribution to the debate when he pointed out that when improvements are made to our national highways and arterial roads, Australia will be a smaller country so far as communication is concerned. I commend the honourable member for that and I commend the Minister
for introducing this Bill.
I was speaking on the telephone only a short while ago to the Honourable J. W. Kennedy, M.L.C., who has just retired from the position of Chairman of the New South Wales Local Government Association. That Association has just had a meeting in Goulburn. He told me that the whole of the conference was most gratified to know that the Federal Government had taken the step it had towards providing finance for roads.
He said: 'The Minister is to be commended', and I
convey that to the Minister. The President of the Shires Association of New South Wales, Councillor Irwin, told the conference that the New South Wales Government is to be condemned for the action it has taken in withdrawing funds for local government roads. Councillor Irwin appreciates the legislation before the House today. He has made his position quite clear.
The States have certain responsibilities, I believe, for road construction and maintenance. The Commonwealth does not have the total responsibility. I am a man who believes in the rights of the States, and the States have their responsibilities.

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2399

Can anybody in this chamber point out to me what funds the New South Wales Government collects from motorists which go directly to roads? If there are any such funds I would like to know. Years ago the Liberal-National Party established the local government assistance fund.
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. If I may answer the honourable member's question, all State charges go towards roads.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! There is no point of order. The honourable member for Shortland will resume his seat.
Mr Morris-The honourable member is a former Minister and he ought to know, as a Minister of that Government.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Shortland will be more prompt in responding to the requirements of the Chair in future. I call the honourable member for Hughes on a point of order.
Mr Les Johnson-I raise a point of order. Is it in order for the honourable member to ask other honourable members to respond to questions, giving the impression that if they comply with the Standing Orders and do not respond they do not know the answers? Is this a confidence trick? I ask you, Mr Deputy Speaker, to require the honourable member not to invite other honourable members to reply to questions if they cannot, in fact, reply.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order. The honourable member for Lyne is posing questions in a rhetorical sense, as the honourable member for Hughes well knows.
Mr COWAN-Fancy the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) talking about a tax on fuel, as he did a while ago. He should look at the fuel tax Mr Wran has imposed on New South Wales motorists in his Budget. Let me get back to what I was saying. Under the New South Wales local government assistance fund, $9.5m a year was going from the State Government to local government. That money has been withdrawn. The Premier, to use his own words, said that he can withdraw the funds now because the Commonwealth is making a fair contribution to roads. That is what the Premier said, and the New South Wales Government withdrew the funds. I would not have believed that we would see a situation in this country in which a government would alienate itself from its responsibilities to allow a rebate on the rates paid by pensioners. Yet the New South Wales Government will now raise 50 per cent of that amount from the ratepayers of that

State. They now have to pay a contribution for the pensioner rebate that was previously carried by the State. It is costing ratepayers of New South Wales an extra $31m today to make up for what money the Wran Government has alienated. It is in the State Budget that it cost the ratepayers of New South Wales $40m. I do not know how the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) or any other Opposition member can come into this chamber and criticise the Commonwealth when their kith and kin in the State House have committed that suicidal event in New South Wales. The New South Wales Government is to be condemned for ever for doing that. It has downgraded local government in New South Wales and local government there does not deserve that. My friend the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe) has served on councils for over 30 years. I have also served on them and we know how important it is that councils receive the co-operation of the State Government as well as the Commonwealth Government in road funding.
Roads are reproductive; this is something that we have to appreciate. The other day in this chamber I criticised the Budget to some degree. I said that I believe it is necessary that more of the wealth and the tax of this country should go into reproductive works in Australia-water resources, roads and other projects that would help to build Australia. Such works are reproductive because they create roads and communications that are so important so far as the transit of our goods and our people around Australia are concerned. They create work. As the Minister has said, over 8,000 jobs will be created almost immediately. When money from the trust fund starts to flow over 20,000 jobs will be created throughout the period. I was pleased to hear yesterday an honourable member stating that years ago America applied a 3c per litre tax levy on fuel to build over 40,000 kilometres of road throughout the United States of America. We are now catching up and this is a scheme that we are trying to implement. The days of gloom are gone. What we see today in our media, what we see emanating from the Parliament-particularly from the Opposition-is a world of gloom so far as Australia is concerned. Let us get behind this scheme. The Minister has brought in a scheme that will start Australia moving-something that we need very badly. It will create confidence for our people. It is up to this Government to give the lead and the confidence.
As I said earlier there are three categories of roads in Australia-national, arterial and local. they are very important categories. I do not want to deprive the national highways of Australia,

2400 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

whether they be in Queensland, Western Australia or elsewhere, of their share of road funding. We have a great responsibility to put into No. I condition the national highways of Australia. I believe that the Bruce Highway, the highways in Western Australia or elsewhere in Australia must be constructed properly and maintained. The roads in Victoria, New South Wales and other closely settled States of Australia need upgrading and improving immensely. This legislation provides the opportunity for that to be done. I agree that there is a very great need, particularly in New South Wales and, I assume, in the rest of the States, for our arterial roads to be built up.
Mr Ian Robinson-The Pacific Highway.
Mr COWAN-The honourable member for Cowper mentions the Pacific Highway. That is a road that is not part of a national highway but, with the tourist industry and the influx of people into the Cowper electorate and my electorate of Lyne, it is the sort of road that must receive greater attention, and will under the formula which is set out for the distribution of funds under this legislation. These major roads are the arteries that serve the valleys. Bridges and roads need to be improved to bring produce to farms, and to bring produce from the farms to the towns and on to the markets. Local roads are the responsibility of councils. Councils have a great responsibilitythe same as our States do-of ensuring that their money is spent wisely and efficiently on roads. The local road system generally throughout Australia needs improving a lot. This legislation will inject funds into the local road system and there will be an identification on the roads that the funding has been supplied by the Commonwealth.
I am concerned, in particular, about the formula for the allocation of funds in New South Wales. I have shires within my electorate that feel they are being deprived of funds because of the formula that has been adopted by the States Grants Commission. I understand that the formula for the distribution of funds is now the subject of negotiation between the Commonwealth, the States and councils. At present State representatives are talking to the local government associations concerned to try to work out a more equitable way to distribute the funds. I believe that many shires everywhere have been deprived of their share because of the formula which has been used. Representing a country electorate I am very keen to see that a proper formula is available for the distribution of funds.

I was pleased to hear the Minister announce in the Bill that there will be funds for developmental roads which must be applied for by the councils, to the States and then to the Commonwealth for approval. There are areas of the States where, because of population and the amount of produce transported from farms, new roads should be developed. I see a benefit in that regard.
Mr Fisher-Bridge work is also very important.
Mr COWAN-As pointed out by the honourable member for Mallee bridge work is very important. I think that in all of our electorates the bridges certainly do need upgrading. I, unlike some members of the Opposition, praise the Government for the attitude it has adopted in calling tenders for work on roads. This is already proving beneficial irrespective of what the honourable member for Hughes has said. I know that councils have their regular work force. However, this funding will result in greater efficiency for the taxpayer's dollar, and that is what we are concerned about. We are concerned about getting better roads, better maintenance of roads and better bridging, and I believe that we will receive them because we are injecting some competition into the system. There might have been criticism from councils in earlier days when the Minister brought in the legislation, but the point now is that councils and people are accepting the need for competition. Today Australia is looking for more competition in every field of enterprise. Nobody can deny this. Governments always possess a certain amount of bureaucracy in the three tiers and that is why we want competition. I do not care if an overseas contractor comes to Australia. If he can build a better road for half the money we ought to welcome him. This means that in the long term much more work will be done.
The Minister has emphasised the fact that arterial roads will be designed to give maximum safety. The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety chaired by the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) has been looking at road safety throughout Australia. It has recommended that certain things be done. The Minister has taken these recommendations into account. I believe that all Australians want to see safer roads. With over 3,000 people killed and 9,000 maimed throughout the year in Australia there is a need for safer roads. I commend the Minister; I commend the legislation. I believe that it will do a great amount for improving roads throughout Australia in the years to come.

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2401

Mr WALLIS (Grey) (4.39)-Although the Opposition has moved an amendment to the motion for the second reading of the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Bill it does not oppose the Bill. It has moved the amendment in order to try to improve the Bill somewhat. I am sure that the people of Australia would agree that better roads are something that everybody wants and looks forward to. I suppose that in a sense people may not mind paying an extra Ic a litre if they are going to get them. I just wonder why, when motorists are paying $3,200m in fuel excise, they are being asked to pay more. As I said the other night, it is like being asked to pay for one's own birthday present. I know it often happens to parents when their kids buy them a nice birthday present. Kids come back and
say: 'Dad, will you buy this?' It looks as though a similar situation is going to happen here; we will have to pay for the roads ourselves.
It would not be so bad either if people were not paying such ridiculously-high prices for fuel. I do not know what it is like in the other States but in South Australia the variation in fuel prices is too silly to be believed. I will give some examples of prices around the electorate of Grey. These are all areas within 120 miles to 140 miles of Port Augusta where I live. The petrol that is distributed in that area is offioaded from tankers at Port Pirie. From Port Pirie the fuel is taken 50 miles to Port Augusta. There is a difference of about 2c or 3c a litre within that 50 miles. The fuel is taken another 50 miles down to Whyalla, on the western side of the Gulf, and the price drops about 4c a litre. In Whyalla you can get fuel for about 39c-plus a litre but in Port Augusta you pay 44c a litre.
North-west at Woomera, the Defence support centre, it is possible to get fuel for about 40c a litre. Five miles away at a place called Pimba fuel is about 46c or 47c a litre. I recently travelled up the Stuart Highway to a place being constructed to service people travelling through. What did I see on the pumps there? Petrol was more than 48c a litre. We can see the variation in those prices. At Coober Pedy, which is 395 miles by road from Port Augusta, petrol is sold at 42c a litre. It can be seen from various distances and directions I have mentioned and the various prices motorists are asked to pay for petrol just how stupid the whole thing is.
The Federal Government introduced legislation into this Parliament to set up the freight equalisation scheme which was supposed to ensure that people in the more remote areas would not have to pay more than 0.44c a litre more for their petrol. When we take into account

the figures that I have just given, showing that it is possible to get fuel for 39c a litre in one area and ISO miles away you have to pay 48c a litre, I ask: Where does the freight subsidy come in? It is about time that something was done about this. As I said, people probably would not mind paying an additional cent a litre if the price was about the same all over the place. In regard to what has been said up to date in the debate on this Bill, I agree with what the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) said last night. I thought he put the case quite well and showed the raw deal that South Australia has had on the matter of roads. I quoted even the South Australian Premier the other night and I will quote him again. A couple of weeks ago the Premier was reported as having said:
The Premier, Mr Tonkin, criticised the Federal Government's allocation of road grants yesterday saying it had been called "Canherra's policy of highway robbery."
The Premier's main complaint is the same as what everybody has been saying for years-that South Australia has not been getting its share of the cake. The article continued:
From 1972-73 to 1980-81 the number of motor vehicles in South Australia had risen by almost 40 per cent, but Commonwealth funding to South Australia had been cut by 40.2 per cent.
I think the Premier is continuing the argument of Mr Virgo, the former Minister of Transport in the South Australian Dunstan and Corcoran governments. The Premier was also reported as having said this:
. . . our share should be 9.4 per cent, in terms of State area 15.5 per cent, length of road 12.2 per cent, population 9 per cent, vehicle kilometres of travel 9.21 per cent, fuel consumption 9.25 per cent and yet we have to settle for 8.22 per cent . . .
I think it can be seen that people on both sides of the political fence in South Australia are not too happy with the financial allocation to South Australia for roads. I will quote now from the second reading speech of the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt). He said:
On a State by State basis, indicative figures suggest that, taking into account both the ABRD Program and the ongoing Roads Grants Program, the following increases in Commonwealth funding will be provided:
New South Wales, a 34 per cent increase this financial year and a 78 per cent increase in 1983-84 compared with the 1981-82 figure
Victoria, increases of 34 per cent and 77 per cent respectively
Queensland, 35 per cent and 81 per cent
Queensland has not done too badly. The Minister continued:
Western Australia, 34 per cent and 77 per cent

2402 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

However, the allocation for South Australia was 30 per cent and 68 per cent. So of all the mainland States, South Australia gets the raw deal. I indicated to the Minister that I wished to speak for only six or seven minutes but I want to make a few more points before I conclude. I am sure that the Minister may feel that the additional money handed out to the States will placate some of them but in view of what has been said regarding South Australia's allocation it thinks it should be given more consideration. I hope that will take place the next time such legislation comes up for discussion. Earlier I referred to what was said last night by the honourable member for Boothby. I know that a lot of the points he raised were put quite strongly by Mr Virgo in the various approaches he made to the Government. The honourable member mentioned that South Australia had spent $27m on national roads from its own finances and that the Commonwealth should have paid for that. I can remember going on deputations with Mr Virgo to the previous Minister for Transport, Mr Nixon, and hearing him push this point most strongly.
There is one other point that should be taken into account when comparing the allocation of finance for roadworks. A point that backs up the argument that South Australia has not had a fair go in the past is the fact that Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory, towards the late I960s and early 1970s, had the benefit of a beef roads program. From memory I think the grant was $65m over three years. If related to today's values that would be around $300m. That money went to those three States and was spent on roads classed as beef roads. Normally the States would have had to provide that money from their own resources. Of course, that is one of the reasons why Western Australia was able to seal the Eyre Highway to the border before South Australia could seal its section of the road to the border. I hope those matters are taken into account. I conclude by saying that we are not opposing the legislation and we welcome the program to upgrade the roads but I suggest we support the amendment.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (4.48)-Several matters have arisen in the course of the debate on the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Bill on which I wish to reply. Firstly, I reject the scurrilous reference by the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) to my declaration of portions of the east-west road between Bourke and Narrabri as a development road and for falsely implying that this road serves my brother's property. The east-west road neither

goes through, past or near my brother's property. I want that placed on the record again. I deplore the way in which the Australian Labor Party has attempted to vilify the approval of an agreed proposal from the former New South Wales Minister for Roads, the honourable Harry Jensen-
Mr Morris-That's untrue. That's a lie. You know that is a lie. That's a lie.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! I ask the Minister to resume his seat. The honourable member for Shortland will withdraw.
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw. It was a falsehood.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Shortland will withdraw without qualification.
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw without qualification.
Mr HUNT-On 4 September 1981 Mr Harry Jensen acknowledged that it was my intention to declare as a national development road sections of the road between Bourke and Narrabri. In his three-page letter Mr Jensen stated:
Your early approval to these proposals would be appreciated in order that the pre-construction activities can be put in hand for the works proposed on the Bourke to Merah North road.
I would like to incorporate that letter in its entirety in Hansard so that nobody shall accuse me of quoting it out of context.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-1 refer the Minister to the statement made by Mr Speaker this morning regarding incorporation of documents.
Mr Morris-It was already tabled three months ago.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister is seeking incorporation of the material, I understand.
Mr HUNT-I will table it again. It is there for anybody who wishes to see it. During the Castlereagh by-election Mr Jensen expressed the view that it was necessary to have a special category of road to recognise the development needs of remote areas. Mr Jensen raised the issue with me and the Roads Grants Act was subsequently amended to give special consideration to development needs in remote areas. Mr Jensen sought additional funds for such purposes and the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program provides that additional source of funding under this legislation.

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2403

I make no apology whatsoever for giving such an important status to the east-west road in north-western New South Wales. It is a very important road link between far western New South Wales and the northern part of the State. Bourke has no direct transport link with northern New South Wales other than the unsurfaced and, in places, black soil road between Bourke and Narrabri. It is a road that is essential to the maintenance of power lines by the Namoi Valley County Council, which serves the western part of New South Wales. It is essential for the movement of agricultural and pastoral produce from western New South Wales to the seaboard. I add that there has been tremendous development in irrigation in the area. It is probably one of the most highly productive agricultural areas in Australia.
The fact that the road happens to be in the electorate of Gwydir should not be a reason why the importance of this road should be ignored. To apply that idiotic approach to development projects in the Gwydir electorate would be to deny public expenditure in an area occupying one-third of New South Wales. In no way should the area be discriminated against by such a stupid approach by the honourable member for Shortland. In any event, the road has a very strong State-wide support. The New South Wales Shires Association strongly supports it. A letter which I received on 8 January 1982, signed by Mr N. T. G. Miles, the Secretary of the Association, reads:
Recently, I reported your press release of I October 1981 dealing with the funding of the Bourke-Narrabri road to members of this Executive.
Members were very pleased indeed to receive this information, and resolved to congratulate the Government on making this important decision. Construction of the road will bring benefits not only to the residents of the Shires involved, but also to the whole population of New South Wales through the increased access to markets and safer travel1ing conditions.
The Association looks forward to hearing of further developmental roads declared, in line with Government policy.
So it had the support of all the councils concerned along the road. It also had the support of the Orana Tourist Association which covers well in excess of one-third of New South Wales. This puts into perspective the importance of this road. The road forms part of the National Association of Australian State Road Authorities inter-regional road system which was developed in 1960. The system was investigated in 1972-74 by a Commonwealth-State highway study team comprising Commonwealth and State officers during the time when the Honourable Charles Jones, the honourable member for Newcastle, was Minister for Transport.
Mrs Kelly-A good Minister, too.

Mr HUNT-He was a very good Minister. The team found that the Bourke to Walgett section warranted sealing to 6.2-metre pavement width during the period 1974 to 1979. I table that report because it also puts into perspective the importance of this road. In answer to the allegations by honourable member for Shortland about the disproportionate amount of funds being allocated to this important road in inland New South Wales out of the Commonwealth road development allocations to the State, I remind him that $43m has been allocated to development roads in New South Wales since 1974. The majority of this funding was spent on the Botany Bay foreshores and coal roads in .the Wollongong district. Nobody would object to that. It is true that $1.5m was appropriated to the east-west road in the last financial year, which amount represented about 3.5 per cent of the total expenditure for this purpose since the inception of this category. Honourable gentlemen may be interested to know that only $14,000 was spent on the east-west road in 1981-82. There will therefore be a much higher allocation spent on the east-west road in this financial year. Indeed, the Minister for Roads in New South Wales, the Honourable Paul Whelan, has recommended quite a substantial sum to be spent on the east-west road in the current year. I am currently giving consideration to his recommendations. Indeed, I will be meeting with him in the very near future to discuss the roads program in regard to both national highways and the arterial roads area for the next five to six years.
The honourable member for Shortland has moved an amendment to the motion for the second reading of the Bill. The Government rejects the amendment. The first section of the amendment deplores the Government's failure to make provision in the Bill for an equitable allocation of national roads funds between the States and the Northern Territory. The very reason that the Bill provides flexibility in the allocation of national roads funding is to meet the requirements of the differing lengths of roads that exist in the various States and the Northern Territory. It is not possible to distribute the actual funds for national roads on a pro rata basis between the States and the Northern Territory and at the same time meet our national objectives of having the national highway system completed by the bicentennial year. Some States necessarily have longer lengths of roads to be sealed and also made flood free than do others. The Commonwealth's major priority in the national roads area is to bring the declared national highway system in all States and the Northern Territory to a dust free and virtually

2404 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

flood free system by 1988. Therefore, no State will be advantaged at the expense of another in the standard to which its share of the national highway system will be upgraded.
The honourable member for ShortIand condemned the Government also for discrimination in respect of local government. The Government recognises the importance of the local roads system to the movement of traffic, goods and passengers generally throughout the nation. We paid particular attention to ensure that local government would not be disadvantaged in the allocation of funds from this trust fund. In 1982-83 the estimated total allocation for local roads under the program is estimated to amount to $200m-an increase of about 24 per cent or $39m over the 1981-82 level. That substantial increase will more than offset the additional excise charges on local authorities, which are unlikely to exceed about $lOm in 1982-83. Benefits to local government will be even more marked in 1983-84 because it will receive $73m more, or a 46 per cent higher increase, than what was available in 1981-82. So allocations are also well ahead of recent trends in construction costs and will provide a real boost to local government authorities.
The honourable member for Shortland put forward the proposition that funds made available for national roads under the program would fall far short of the amount required to achieve the program's objectives, particularly in New South Wales. He must be basing his figuring on a standard that is far in excess of anything that is being considered at present. I do not know how he arrived at his figures or whether he underestimated the amount of funds to go to the national highways area. For instance, there will be a 73 per cent increase in the construction effort for national highways. The exaggerated cost estimates that he has used are based on a blind adherence to standards developed some 10 years ago, we think, and on traffic levels which are not likely to occur until well into the next century. It has been decided that the standards should be applied with the flexibility best suited to meet the foreseeable traffic need and local conditions. The figures that are used by my officers in the presentationthey are not my figures; they are figures that are worked out by experts in the Department after consultation with State officers-are the figures that appear in the documents that have been circulated. They are not rubbery.
Mrs Kelly-Ha! hal
Mr HUNT-He said they were rubbery.
Mr Morris-They are shonky.

Mr HUNT-They are not shonky and they are not rubbery.
Mr Morris-Here is the official telex from the Department of Main Roads-not your shonky figures.
Mr HUNT-They are not the figures that the Department has given us. The figures that we have used have arisen as a result of the Commonwealth-State officials' negotiations. The figures that I used in the documents that have been circulated are coming out on course with all of the States that have come in with applications and with indicative programs for the next six years. The early indications from the preliminary discussions on the programs suggest that the estimates are realistic; so the Government's expected achievements under the program are in fact quite reasonable. First of all, the Bicentennial Road Development Program is a road construction program rather than a road safety program. Nevertheless, as the honourable gentleman would understand, we wrote into the purposes of the legislation a provision to ensure that the objectives would give emphasis to the enhancement of safety on Australian roads. We will be asking the States to take into account as an integral part of the design of the proposed bicentennial road projects a number of principles which are aimed at enhancing road safety.
I wish to respond to a point made by the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) and the honourable member for Grey (Mr Wallis) in respect of the allocation of funds to South Australia. South Australia's 8.5 per cent share of the total road funding provided to the States, excluding the Northern Territory, under the ongoing roads grants program has remained constant since 1977-78. This allocation is in line with South Australia's share of roads needs that were assessed at the time of the former Bureau of Roads. I know that the honourable member for Boothby has not accepted those recommendations at all, but the approach of the Bureau of Roads involved the assessment of the total levels of economically warranted roads expenditure for given periods in each State. The assessments took account of a wide range of economic and social factors, including projected usage of roads, estimated reductions in vehicle operating costs, accidents and travel time, saving, construction, land acquisition costs and the different capacity of State and local governments to finance roads programs in each State. But it must be recognised that while recent studies have shown that there are deficiencies in the total national highway system in all States and the Northern Territory, particularly in the national roads area, the backlog is

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2405

not evenly distributed. This is resulting in some skewing in the way in which the funds will be applied to national roads.
The honourable member for Boothby used a particular figure last night. He said that the amount of fuel that was consumed represented, I think, about 9.3 per cent of the total. On the basis of the latest data contained in the 1981 edition of the Australian Institute of Petroleum publication Oil and Australia, the South Australian marketing area consumed 7.9 per cent of Australia's main petroleum products. Under this program the South Australian share will be 7.2 per cent. If those figures are right there is not a great disparity between what the consumption of fuel will be and the allocation to South Australia. But for the information of honourable gentlemen I have met with the South Australian Minister for Transport in relation to this matter. We have agreed to an indicative program for South Australia which will undoubtedly revolutionise the roads program in South Australia over the next five to six years. The Stuart Highway, for instance, will be completed by 1986 as a result of the Bicentennial Road Development Program, which is giving a tremendous boost-
Mr Cohen-Before the Minister sits down, I remind him that he has not answered my question. How does he define tourist roads?
Mr HUNT-The honourable member for Robertson made a very valuable contribution to this debate in respect of tourism and tourist allocations. He sought information on how the Commonwealth will consider a road to be of national tourist importance. Before considering a road for declaration' as a developmental road because of its importance to national tourism, the Government takes into account the views of the various State and Commonwealth tourist bodies, including State tourist commissions and the Commonwealth Department of Industry and Commerce. It then looks to the State government to put forward a proposal for declaration. The Commonwealth thus gives every consideration to declaring proposed roads as being worthy of receiving such support. I know that there are some very important tourist requirements in the area represented by the honourable member for Robertson. If it has not already been done, I suggest that some action be taken to ensure that consideration is given to projects in that area for the life of this program by both the tourist commissions in the States and the Department of Industry and Commerce in Canberra.
Amendment negatived.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Motion (by Mr Hunt) proposed:
That the Bill be now read a third time.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (5.8)-One question needs to be resolved in relation to the matter before the House. Which State Ministers of Transport and which State Premiers agreed to the imposition of the tax that is being legislated for in the Australian Bicentennial Road Trust Fund Bill? I shall quote from the Hansard of the Parliament of South Australia. I do not have the date but I can ascertain it. The Minister of Transport, the Hon. M. M. Wilson, was asked:
Is it a fact that the Minister of Transport, at a recent meeting of the Australian Transport Advisory Council, agreed with the proposal of the Federal Minister---
That is, the Minister who is at the table at the moment-
to impose a further increase in petrol tax with a levy of 2 cents per litre?
I will quote just the relevant part of the answer. It states:
The answer to the honourable member's question is 'No', I did not agree to it and neither did the Premier nor I at the Premiers Conference.
That question needs to be resolved because claims have been made that would lead one to draw the conclusion that the Minister of Transport in South Australia was lying and the Premier of South Australia had lied. Similarly, the Minister of Transport in Victoria has made the point that at the same Premiers Conference and at the same Australian Transport Advisory Council meetings neither he nor the Premier of South Australia agreed. Again, that matter needs to be resolved because the conclusion could be drawn that the Minister of Transport in Victoria is lying. Either way, a State Minister for Transport in a, Labor government and a State Minister for Transport in a Liberal government both stated unequivocall) that they did not agree to the imposition of this $2.5 billion tax on roads.
It is a fact that certain areas of Australia are badly deprived because of the failure of conservative governments, over the 30 years they have been in office since World War II, to provide an adequate and effective roads system. That is particularly the case in respect of north Queensland and the Bruce Highway, which has been looked at

2406 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

many times by conservative transport Ministers but the matter has not gone far beyond that. The works that have been carried out on the Bruce Highway, in the north-west of Australia, on the Hume HighVlay, on the highway between Sydney and Newcastle, and on the Eyre Highway, the highway across the Nullarbor, are all works that were initiated by the Whitlam Labor Government of 1972-75.
The other question that needs to be resolved so that there is clarity in this very important issue is this: What works can be carried out with the proceeds of this new $2.5 billion tax? To put the record straight, I should like to quote a telex letter of yesterday's date which I received from the Minister for Roads in New South Wales. He referred to the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program and said that the works which the program will achieve are long overdue. We have belated acceptance and recognition of that fact by this Government. The tax being imposed is offensive and would have been unnecessary had this Government and its predecessors carried out their responsibilities to ensure that tax thieves and rogues did not prosper. Mr Whelan had this to say:
The estimated cost of the works which Mr Hunt indicated he expected to have completed by 1988 is $1 ,725 million. The funds which are estimated to be available for construction under the Roads Grants Acts and the ABRD programme total $660 million, so there is an estimated shortfall of $1 ,065 million.
He went on to say:
. . . the Minister's Press release is couched in such terms that interpretation allows some scope for compromise. Advice available to date is that the funds proposed for national highways under the ABRD programme are indicative only and could be the subject of variation later. In addition, the funds which will be available under the Roads Grants Acts are only known up to 1984-85.
It is apparent that if the announced programme is to be achieved there must be a very large increase in funds for national highways construction in New South Wales.
Yours sincerely, (PAUL WHELAN) Minister for Consumer Affairs and Minister for Roads.
That is a fact that cannot be disputed. I will not take the time of the House to read the actual definitions. However, I have before me the factual specifications for each of the items that this Minister, and this shonky Government, on these shonky figures, claim will be completed by 1988. These figures are the actual estimates. They are not based on some figure dreamt up by the bureaucracy of the National Party for electioneering purposes. The figures are calculated on the specifications put forward by the Government for the projects listed by the Minister which he claims

will be completed by 1988, and have been calculated by the Department of Main Roads in New South Wales which, after all, is the expert body in road construction in New South Wales. All information on road construction costs comes from the Department of Main Roads as the Department responsible for the construction of national highways, main roads and arterial roads. It has the information and the expertise. I think the public of Australia and members of this chamber would be well advised to place greater reliance upon the figures I have presented than upon the assertion which cannot be documented or substantiated by the Minister. This Minister is a member of a Government which has now admitted that its Budget is shonky and that the estimates cannot be relied upon. I make it quite clear-
Mr Hunt-Nonsense!
Mr MORRIS-Is the Minister saying that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is a liar when he says that that is nonsense? The Treasurer has admitted that the figures are shonky. The point I am making is that this information is supplied by the Minister responsible for the constructing authority in New South Wales. It shows that there is a shortfall of $1 ,065m in the money to be provided to New South Wales if the programs which this Minister claims will be achieved by 1988 are to be constructed. We can deduct from that shortfall additional moneys that may be provided under the Roads Grants Act after 1985. From that amount we have to deduct road maintenance costs, allocations for national developmental roads, and increases in road construction costs between now and 1988, because the figures I have quoted are calculated on the basis of 1982-83 prices.
If the Minister really intends that the works that have been listed in the handouts are to be completed by 1988 then the shortfall has to be overcome. If by some incredible, unfortunate mischance the Government remains on that side of the House, it is the clear intention that the levy being imposed in this Bill is to be increased substantially. It will be doubled between this year and next year, and it is quite on the cards-there is little doubt about it, judging by the way in which the Minister is trying to defend his indefensible figures-that the Government proposes, if it is returned to office to double further the levy being imposed on motorists by this program.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (5.17)-in reply-I do not want to delay the House. Obviously the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) was trying to make some political capital out of a telex which he has.

A.C. T. Tax Legislation

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2407

Mrs Kelly-Anyone would think we were politicians.
Mr HUNT-I suppose we could say that, but there are politicians and politicians; let us face it. I think the honourable member for Shortland must be basing his estimate of costs on what are called the ultimate standards that were drawn up some 10 years ago, which do not take into account the more flexible standards that this Government has taken into account to meet foreseeable road traffic needs. I do not know the standards upon which the honourable gentleman has based his figuring, but the figures we have used in our estimates are based upon extensive discussions that have taken place between Commonwealth and State roads Ministers. I will be meeting with the New South Wales Minister in the very near future and we will have discussions about how he arrived at his figures, if he did arrive at them, because they are entirely different from the figures we have produced as a result of discussions with New South Wales representatives.
Furthermore, if honourable members look at the estimated return that will come, for instance in 1983-84, from national road allocations they will see that from the Roads Grants Act New South Wales will get $117.64m and from the Bicentennial Road Development Program it will get $65.9m, or a total of $183.54m. Without any increase over the period between now and 1988 it will get a total of $i,101.24m. I am absolutely positive that we will see the upgrading of the Hume Highway between Sydney and Melbourne by 1988, as I have indicated already, and I am certain that we will see a freeway between Newcastle and Sydney.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a third time
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY TAX (VEHICLE REGISTRATION) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill, the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Bill 1982, the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Bill 1982, the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Bill 1982 and the

Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Bill 1982 as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these five measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (5.21)--Whilst the Opposition will not oppose the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Bill 1982 and associated Bills, which are largely administrative improvements on measures introduced last year, we nevertheless are concerned about the way in which the Government makes decisions affecting Canberra. Most of the measures are belated attempts to redress anomalies which resulted in considerable inconvenience and extra expenses for local business people. Unfortunately this inadequate method of developing Australian Capital Territory legislation appears to have become the norm for this Government. This 'shutting the door after the horse has bolted' approach has resulted in extra cost and administrative arrangements to many businesses. Coming on top of all the other antiCanberra decisions of this Government, this approach to Australian Capital Territory legislation merely adds to the uncertainty and disillusionment already existing in the private sector here.
It is obvious that in Canberra the private and public sectors are interdependent and that government decisions have an immediate impact on Canberra businesses which in some cases have been catastrophic. For example, in the past year Canberra's air fares have been raised dramatically-almost 60 per cent on the most travelled Canberra-Sydney leg. The result has inevitably been a massive slump in passenger numbers and a corresponding slump for local businesses and the tourist industry.
A few weeks ago at his retirement dinner, the local Trans Australia Airlines Manager, Mr Dick Thompson, commented on the effect of these massive fare increases. He said:
Thirty-six years is a long time to put into something only to see it being torn apart by circumstances outside one's control . . .
He blamed the fare increases and the 25 per cent drop in passenger traffic for the reduced flight frequencies. He pointed out that:
No other routes in the country suffered anything like that-even the Tasmanian routes-and they get a government subsidy. Nobody did anything for Canberra.
He added:

2408 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

A.C. T. Tax Legis/ation

All of this has been extremely frustrating despite the understanding I have experienced in the community, so I have decided to retire three years earlier than I originally intended.
That is just one area~the transport area. If we look at the housing and construction industry, the economic downturn in Canberra is all too evident. Building approvals are down, the Government housing program has only just been restarted after a long period of inactivity, and major capital works projects were cancelled by the razor gang last year. Even the new Parliament House project was threatened, and apparently was saved only by the vigorous efforts of local organisations in lobbying the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser).
To illustrate the effect of the Government's stop-go decisions on local business confidence, one only has to look at the message of the outgoing President of the Master Builders Association, Mr F. J. Marr. He said:
My presidency came at a very difficult time for our industry. We have seen, in those two years, the level of building activity fall further, movement of people from the Territory and a steady decline in the confidence of those remaining in the future of the city.
The MBA fought, and I believe successfully, to convince the Government that many of its Canberra policies were wrong.
Two bright lights in the darkness during my time as President were the start of work on the Defence Force Academy and the new Parliament House project.
Both projects will help Canberra's economy enormously in the years to come.
I heartily endorse that view. He continued:
However as is pointed out elsewhere in this report, those benefits won't be fully realised unless the Government has a commitment to the broad economic and social well-being of its own Territory, Canberra.
On a basic level the Government must begin spending on head works such as sewerage and storm water networks, and land servicing now that the pool of serviced land is slowly runningout.
This lack of Government commitment to the ongoing as well as the future development of Canberra is having a detrimental effect on business confidence and investment throughout the Territory.
Another of the razor gang decisions which has caused great concern is the decision to hand land development over to the private sector. There have been no developments on this decision. The current situation is that we are running out of land in the Australian Capital Territory. No decision has been taken by the Government, first, to determine how land is to be handed over to the private sector~if it is still to be~and, secondly, what is to happen in the interim. No money was provided in this Budget or indeed in the previous

Budget, for the servicing of land. We find ourselves in a situation where it is most likely that serviced land will run out in the Australian Capital Territory by the end of this year. This is just typical of the problems we have in Canberra because the Government is not thinking in advance of its commitment to this Territory.
The Canberra Association for Regional Development has worked hard to bring the problems to the attention of the Government. It has achieved some success in getting some business incentives introduced in the recent Budget. In its submission to the Prime Minister, CARD drew attention to the negative multiplier effect of adverse government decisions on the Canberra economy. CARD states the situation clearly:
In recent years there have been successive government decisions with adverse effects on the total economy of the Australian Capital Territory, which had been geared specifically to very large public works expenditure and the servicing of a public sector 'company town'.
There was, for example, the impact of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, followed by recent Budget restraints which, unlike other parts of Australia, reached down to Statelocal government expenditure as well as national projects.
With a few exceptions it so happened that the major projects deferred indefinitely and those put aside for later consideration were located in Canberra.
In the event there was no transfer of any matching resources to stimulate the private sector in Canberra, to offset (at least in part) the loss of job opportunities and work force due to the withdrawal of public expenditure. The effects of such decisions in the Australian Capital Territory are reflected in building industry investment statistics, (an acceptable indicator of business cycle ups and downs).
Of course there are graphs which dramatically illustrate the decline in the Canberra economy as a result of the short-sighted, ad hoc decisions made by this Government with no thought for their implication for business confidence. CARD lists these effects and states:
Some consequences of the abrupt changes in funding for the Australian Capital Territory are:
(a) A movement of unemployed from the Australian Capital Territory, thus 'exporting unemployment',
(b) An excess of 'outward' over 'inward' migration of members of the workforce and popUlation generally,
(c) An outflow of private investment funds and a reduction of an inflow from other centres,
(d) A definite trend towards stagnation and possibly a downturn of population levels, unless a recovery can be stimulated,
(e) A projected fall in the creation of employment opportunities in both the public and private sectors and predictions of future unemployment as school leavers are due to enter the workforce.
(f) A reduction in the ratio of the private sector in the workforce to 35% and possibly 30%.
(g) A reduction in the private sector mix in the ACT economy.

A.C. T. Tax Legislation

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2409

That statement was made by an independent body in the business community of the Australian Capital Territory. The Government has consistently talked about how, if there are cutbacks in the public sector, the private sector has to take up the slack. But it is obvious from this report that that is not happening. There must be a mixture of the public sector and the private sector. But the Government must take the leadership and present a long term plan to indicate where Canberra is going. After seven years of this Government we have had no long term commitment. We continue to run the Australian Capital Territory with a whole series of ad hoc policies. Instead, the Government should be looking after the interests of Canberra people and taking positive and constructive steps to restore the local economy, not just for today but for the next five or 10 years. That is what we are asking for-an end to ad hockery and the beginning of a long term commitment and plan for the future of this Territory.
Mr FRY (Fraser) (5.30)-1 want briefly to endorse the support of the Opposition for these Bills. They are not terribly important in themselves, but they do represent some concessions to business people, very small concessions indeed, in an environment which has been quite disastrous, as a result of government policies, for small business generally. Nevertheless we welcome them, such as they are. This debate gives us the opportunity to expand on the problems that government policy has created for small business. This has been outlined by my colleague the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) in some detail.
I want to comment on a couple of particular aspects of these Bills, particularly in regard to the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Bill. I was interested in this Bill because I have made representations to the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) calling on him to bring the registration tax in the Australian Capital Territory into line with the exemptions in New South Wales. It is interesting to note that all these initiatives arise from the Government's desire to fall into line with the progressive policies of the Labor Government of New South Wales. It is also noticeable that nobody in the Government has any interest at all in the Australian Capital Territory. No one on the Government's side has come into the House to speak to these Bills and the Minister is not present to hear our comments. This is a fair indication of the lack of interest and the anti-Australian Capital Territory or the anti-Canberra commitment of the members of the Government.
I am pleased that the Minister has agreed to bring these exemptions relating to the transfer of

registrations into line with New South Wales. Unfortunately the reality of the situation is that if people such as pensioners and other beneficiaries inherit a car as a result of a death in their family many of them will have to sell it because they just cannot afford the registration and third party charges that apply in the Australian Capital Territory. Of course, many of them cannot now afford the cost of petrol to run a car. They would not be able to take the advantage of somebody giving them a car.
It may be of interest to the House to compare the cost of registering a vehicle in the Australian Capital Territory. as against other parts of Australia. It may be a surprise to many honourable members to know that the Australian Capital Territory has the highest cost to register and insure a vehicle in the whole of Australia. It is particularly interesting to note that the cost in Canberra of registering and insuring-that is third party insurance-a Holden Kingswood is no less than $257. When we look at the other States we find that in Hobart, of all places, the cost is $143. That is almost half the cost in the Australian Capital Territory. This is mainly due to the cost of third party insurance, not the cost of registration.
It is interesting that the Minister who is responsible for the Australian Capital Territory has done nothing to introduce no claim or no fault third party insurance into the Australian Capital Territory although it has been very successful in his own State. Although there has been a recommendation from the local assembly that it should be introduced in the Australian Capital Territory the Minister has done nothing about it. This demonstrates again that he is more interested in his home base than he is in Canberra. Registration and insurance costs $257 in Canberra as against $143 in Hobart. Sydney is also quite high. with a cost of $242. The costs in Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth are much lower than in the Australian Capital Territory. Even Darwin has lower charges than the Australian Capital Territory. So we are way out in front in terms of the cost of registering and insuring a vehicle in the Australian Capital Territory and this is particularly hard on peopJe'on low incomes.
In regard to the payroll tax Bill. the increase in the exemption level brings the Australian Capital Territory up to the level applying in New South Wales. This is a welcome assistance to small business. It must be acknowledged that in some cases the level has been brought up to $120,000 per annum as the floor at which payroll tax begins to apply. Sometimes this acts as a disincentive to employ people. Employers want to keep under the floor so as not to attract any payroll tax at all.

2410 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

A.C. T. Tax Legislation

Nevertheless it is some consolation to small business people who fall into that category. As my colleague the honourable member for Canberra has said, small business in Canberra has had a very rough time indeed under this Government. Most of the decisions of the razor gang have been quite disastrous to the people of Canberra. I have some sympathy with the Minister for the Australian Capital Territory for being landed with those decisions. In some cases the Government has had second thoughts on those decisions, such as the closing down of the vehicle inspection stations and the sale of the retail fruit and vegetable markets. I only wish he would have second thoughts about the sale of the Belconnen Mall. Its sale is opposed by an overwhelming majority of people in Canberra. I believe this would ultimately be very detrimental to small traders operating in that area.
Today we received a report recommending deregulation of shopping hours in the Australian Capital Territory. Again this was completely in the face of an overwhelming bulk of evidence. A very large majority of people in the Australian Capital Territory, such as shopkeepers, workers and the public generally, is opposed to deregulation, yet the Government virtually pressured the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory into bringing in a report which supported a decision which it had already made. Here again I hope the Minister will have second thoughts on the matter and try to take into account the real feelings of the people in the Australian Capital Territory. He should not just impose these conditions on the Australian Capital Territory as a result of some doctrinaire approach or doctrinaire application of the Government's broad philosophy.
Whilst small business has been made to sufer and has been given no assistance at all from the Government, we find that the Government has continued to give money in a very wasteful and irresponsible way to the Canberra Development Board which has a budget of $337,500 this year. This is the third year of its operation. It has now spent over $Im and has produced absolutely nothing. It cannot claim full benefit for one job in Canberra. I think it is an irresponsible decision of the Minister to continue funding the Canberra Development Board. I think that money would have been much better spent if given to the Canberra and Regional Development Authority or to the Canberra Tourist Authority which could have spent that money in promoting tourism, opening tourist offices in other cities and bringing some business to Canberra which would have been of

some definite benefit to small business here. Instead of that the Canberra Development Board has been running all over the world trying to sell ideas or propositions to people to come to Canberra. It has been a total failure. At one stage it claimed there were 130 proposals by industries interested in the Australian Capital Territory region. Later it said there were 30 significant proposals.
We have had a lot of airy fairy talk about Natsemi, Advanced Systems Pty Ltd, casinos, convention centres and Tivoli Gardens. None of them have come to anything. They are pie in the sky. The Minister should take a good look at this matter and stop wasting the public's money in propping up an organisation like the Canberra Development Board which has failed miserably. While the Canberra Development Board has been spending all this money trying to attract companies to Canberra, companies have been moving out of Canberra. Many building companies have had to move out and go to other centres. An electronics company called Electronics Research Australia Pty Ltd moved from Canberra to Queensland in the middle of last year because of lack of support. While this is going on the Board has been wasting money in a wild goose chase, running around the world trying to bring people here.
In conclusion, I think it is worth reminding the House that all these Bills refer to matters of the sort which normally would be dealt with by State governments. I understand that these Bills were not even referred to the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly before being introduced here. These are local concerns and should be considered entirely by local people. They should not be the subject of debate in this House. The Government should fulfill its obligations and give some form of self-government to the people of Canberra.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Newman) read a third time.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY TAX (INSURANCE BUSINESS) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Hodgman:

A.C. T. Tax Legis/ation

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2411

That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Newman) read a third time.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY STAMP DUTY AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Newman) read a third time.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY TAXATION (ADMINISTRATION) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
. Bill (on motion by Mr Newman) read a third time.
PAY-ROLL TAX (TERRITORIES) ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Newman) read a third time.

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
In Committee Consideration resumed from 19 October.
Schedule 2.
The CHAIRMAN-Before proceeding with the business I would like to say to the Committee that some confusion clearly exists among honourable members as to the method of allocating the call, particularly in respect of the Minister in charge of the Bill assuming his right to rise and respond to questions or detail arising in debate. Page 449 of the House of Representatives Practice states:
A Minister in charge of business in a committee of the whole may rise to speak as frequently as necessary and may speak without limitation of time and without closing the debate. He usually receives priority of all other Members whenever he wishes to speak. This enables the Minister to explain or comment on details of the legislation as they arise from time to time in the debate.
This provision is designed to add to the value of Committee deliberations, not to detract. The call therefore will, under ordinary circumstances, alternate side to side, ignoring the Minister's participation. The Chair will oblige the Minister to be as concise as possible in his interventions to guard against erosion of opportunity for members to speak within the time allocated for the debate, such allocation not being within the province of the Chair. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition has sought the indulgence of the Chair.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)--I thank you, Mr Chairman, for telling me and my colleagues who are the Deputy Chairmen in advance that you intended to rule this way. I think this will create difficulties which the Opposition cannot be expected to tolerate for this very elementary reason: There is the management of Government Business to be considered. In that context the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) always consults with me as Manager of Opposition Business as to what time will be available so that elected members of this Parliament can at least make submissions to a Minister. The time constraints are very severe indeed. In fact, the Opposition very seldom would want to agree with them and, in fact, is obliged to agree with them at times just to guarantee that the Government has some progress in its business.
I am very mindful of the fact that the Leader of the House is anxious to co-operate. But an extraordinary situation can develop. We are not dealing with a normal Bill when we are dealing with the Appropriation Bill. Mr Chairman, if you look at the Standing Orders you will note that in the process of debate on a Bill in Committee naturally one Minister can rise from time to time, as you

2412 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

say, and you would give him the call under the terms of this interpretation. I do not suppose that there would be much objection to that. But when we deal with the Estimates in Committee there is not just one Minister; there are a number of Ministers. In other words, there is an exceptional set of circumstances which, in my submssion, is not covered by the existing Standing Orders. I base my submission on this point: If time is rationed-it sometimes is by agreement, in which case Opposition speakers get the bulk of it-and if Ministers then get the call whenever they want it Opposition speakers will be denied their time to speak. There will be an extensive erosion of time for the Opposition.
The Leader of the House thought this arrangement could work. I do not think it can. That is not being disrespectful to the Leader. The question and answer session in the Estima~es debate which the Minister thought possible will now be impossible, Mr Chairman, under the ruling you have given. A debate on a section of the Estimates limited to 60 minutes would permit only three Opposition members to speak. Mr Chairman, you can see that if the Ministers take some 10 or 15 minutes to answer questions, as they might be expected to, at least two speakers would be denied the chance to speak.
In a spirit of co-operation I foreshadow-I understand that it is inappropriate to move any motion now-a motion that we immediately refer this matter to the Standing Orders Committee so that appropriate Standing Orders may be submitted to the chamber to guarantee the intelligent discussion of Estimates. Certainly the rationing of time should be agreed on if possible. But any time that Ministers want should be additional to the time agreed to. When a Minister exercises the right to answer a question the Chair should grant the next call on an alternate basis to the Opposition.
Mr Chairman, I think what I have suggested is a little different from what you have interpreted as being the situation now. I accept that what you say may well be the situation applying to consideration of a normal Bill. But an Estimates debate does not lend itself to normal procedure. Any number of Ministers and a large number of honourable members may want to participate. There is usually an agreement in advance about time. Such agreement does not come within the Standing Orders. The opportunity for members to speak within the agreed time will be eroded if Ministers feel that they have to intervene, thus making it a question and answer debate. I think this would militate against Opposition members

getting what we would regard as a fair share of time.
Without delaying the chamber any further I say that I appreciate what you have said Mr Chairman. However, the Opposition cannot accept it because we feel that it would lead to an erosion of our time. I think I have made our point very clear. My colleagues who are Deputy Chairmen have already agreed with what you have said, Mr Chairman. However, they have a slightly different interpretation with which I agree. They believe that if a Minister speaks the next call ought to go to the Opposition. We do not always intend to be in Opposition. But we want the call to be given on an alternate basis.
I say to the Leader of the House that it would appear that there is a strong urging from both sides of the chamber that in future we consider having the question and answer aspect of an Estimates debate in Committee covered under sessional orders rather than Standing Orders. We could then have the normal method of Estimates discussion and if Ministers wished to participate it would be understood that the next call would go to the Opposition. Perhaps we need a sessional order to deal with this. I foreshadow that we will move a motion to ask the Standing Orders Committee to deal with this matter on that basis.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House)-With the indulgence of the Chair, I acknowledge the complete reasonableness of the approach of my friend, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen). I acknowledge the validity of the case he has made. Over a long period I have seen the simple fact that at the Committee stage, be it the Committee stage of a Bill simpliciter or the Committee stage of an Appropriation Bill, some Ministers are more taciturn than others. Honourable members can put whatever interpretation they like on that. But if a Minister, robust in mind and spirit, has a determination to show those qualities by speaking to his estimates, that Minister can exclude private members from speaking on the estimates. I have too much respect for the role of the private member to do that and I am concerned about the diminution of the rights of the private member. If perchance a Minister is intent on speaking a great deal to his estimates, clearly he will prevent private members from offering their views.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition has suggested that this matter be referred to the Standing Orders Committee and he has foreshadowed that that move will be made. I agree with that move completely. I assure him of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2413

the Government's support. I suppose it is rather strange that after some 82 years of parliamentary experience this gap has never been attended to. I do not share my friend's assessment-this is the only murmur of disagreement between us-that it is not possible to introduce a question and answer format into the Committee stage. That may be another aspect of the issue which could be examined by the Standing Orders Committee. In summary, I say that I am grateful to the honourable gentleman for having brought the matter to the attention of the Committee. I assure him that we will attend to it with all possible dispatch.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley)-Mr Chairman, with your indulgence also I just make the point that I, of course, gave a ruling on this matter the other evening. With full deference and respect to you, I say that you have brought down a decision which I know was brought down with the most genuine intentions. As was mentioned by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) this matter has been talked out very fully indeed, I can assure you, Mr Chairman, by both the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and the three Deputy Chairmen of committees from the Opposition. We are unanimous in our viewpoint. That viewpoint was outlined by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition a few minutes ago. I do not intend to go further into that detail and to be repetitive. I want to make just one or two points.
Estimates committees are different from the Committee of the Whole which deals with the consideration of an ordinary Bill. The events that take place are different and I think the idea would be of very great merit. In private discussions with you, Mr Chairman, and Deputy Chairmen from both sides, we all agreed that there will be Estimates committee meetings long after any of us are in this place. This Parliament will be going for a long time. I think it is very important that we establish the relevant Standing Orders quite clearly. At this point of time there are no Standing Orders for Estimates committees. There is no written word or publication for Estimates committees. The ruling I gave last night was made purely on past practice. That ruling is in the memory of people and it is not writ. I think it is very important that what is writ be undertaken.
As was mentioned by the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen), Ministers-this could apply to honourable members from both sides of the chamber-can be a litle garrulous sometimes. This has occurred in the past. It may occur in future. It could bring many problems if this ruling obtains exactly as it is. I wanted to make those

points. It is an issue on which there is some confusion. I think it will be very greatly to the benefit of this Parliament if these matters are fully clarified. The words should be put into the Standing Orders as writ for the future handling of what are not called Estimates committes but Committees of the Whole for the consideration of Appropriation Bills.
Department of Administrative Services
Proposed expenditure, $500,701,000.
Mr UREN (Reid) (5.55)-1 want to concentrate my remarks on the property section of the Department of Administrative Services. I believe that if the Government uses this Department and particularly the property section of it intelligently it could have an enormous influence over the development of our major cities. The sad thing about the matter is that there has been too much ad hockery in the past. Very little of the planning process has been involved in making decisions about where Commonwealth public servants are located. More often than not, top public servants have an enormous influence over where they would like to see their departments or authorities located. They have had enormous influence on Ministers and Governments in the past.
During the years from 1972 to 1975, under the Australian Labor Party Government, we tried to alter that situation. We looked at the situation and in fact, carried out a study in Melbourne in co-operation with the Victorian Government. We found that there were 18,000 too many Commonwealth public servants in the central business district of Melbourne. I refer not only to public servants but also to employees of statutory authorities. To name just a few, I refer to people who work at Trans Australia Airlines, Telecom Australia, Australia Post, the Australian Wool Corporation and the Commonwealth Bank. All these are statutory authorities and, in fact, can come under our direction if we want to use our powers in a more intelligent and efficient way. The Labor Party, at its recent federal conference, set out an urban improvement plan. In fact, we set down certain principles which we thought should be developed for metropolises as a whole. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the Labor Party's policy, as set out in the recent federal conference.
The CHAIRMAN. I refer the honourable member to the statement made by the Speaker this morning regarding the incorporation of material in Hansard. I am quite sure that the document would not meet the requirements as specified by the Speaker.

2414 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

;lppropriation Bill (No.1)

Mr UREN-Unfortunately I did not have time to debate the matter with Mr Speaker at that time. This Parliament has been deprived of speaking time. This miserable, conservative Government, which mismanages this country and which has the power of numbers, allows us to sit very rarely in this Parliament. In fact, the Government wants the Parliament to rise as soon as possible. We have very little opportunity to debate in this House. All I wanted to do was to incorporate a few brief notes. If I have to read them, that will limit my time. In fact, the document contains only a few remarks.
The CHAIRMAN. The honourable gentleman must be relevant to the question before the Committee. He has made his point.
Mr UREN-I am being relevant all right. I am dealing with what our policy states. A Labor government will:
Co-ordinate property investment and development programs by both the Australian Government and its instrumentalities and by foreign companies and insurance companies in order to ensure a balanced pattern of urban development.
The sad thing is that most of the development has been occurring in the central business district. When we were in government we carried out a joint planning program with the Victorian government of the day. It was found, as I have said, that there were 18,000 too many Commonwealth public servants in the central business district of Melbourne. It was thought that we could develop submetropolitan centres at places such as Sunshine, Broadmeadows, Epping, Watsonia and Dandenong.
In the future we would certainly discuss that matter again with the Victorian Government, as we would with the New South Wales Government. Previously the McMahon Government wanted to build a Commonwealth centre which would have housed 15,000 Commonwealth public servants in Woolloomooloo Basin. We decided not to proceed with that program. We decided that the first stage would be developed at Parramatta. The reason we proposed that is that we believe there are so many people living in the far western suburbs of Sydney who are forced to travel into the central business district that that is stupid planning. It is very foolish planning. Therefore, I suggest that it would be better to situate these new sub-metropolitan centres in the places I have suggested.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr UREN-Before the suspension of the sitting for dinner I was discussing the location by the Commonwealth of its public servants and the

influence that had on the development of a city. I tried to incorporate in Hansard part of the Labor Party's policy on this matter, but even though it was only a small portion of the policy I was refused leave because of this outlandish and stupid decision that has been made. I believe that the Parliament would be better served if I could incorporate it. However, I will read paragraph II of the Labor Party's urban improvement policy, which states:
Encourage state governments to focus urban development away from the central business districts of large cities to select sub-metropolitan locations on the public transport system in order to improve the equity of access to emloyment, social and cultural opportunities, to achieve an efficient spread of the transport load over the system and to stop wasteful expenditure on inner city freeways and inner city car parks.
Frankly, that should be done more. As I said earlier, it concerns me that the people who control the ad hockery of the Commonwealth Public Service locate public servants where it suits them and not in the interests of the development of a metropolis. In cities such as Sydney we should not be building in the central business district. As I explained earlier, in 1971 the McMahon Government wanted to build a building in the Woolloomooloo Basin to accommodate 15,000 Commonwealth public servants. We stopped that. We said that the Government should develop the first stage at Parramatta, where something like 5,000 employees would be located, and then at places such as Campbelltown and Penrith so that job opportunities would be created on the fringes of the capital city. A similar situation could occur in Melbourne. After discussion with the Hamer Government, we wanted to locate Commonwealth public servants and develop submetropolitan centres at areas such as Epping, Watsonia, Dandenong, Sunshine and Broadmeadows. I still feel that that is a rational thing to do.
Unfortunately, no work has been carried out by this Government to try to develop the metropolis in the way that we sought. For instance, the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman), who is at the table, has been to Parramatta. He has put up a smokescreen by indicating his intentions to develop a centre at Parramatta, but we know that that is a lot of rubbish. The free market forces that control this Government have allowed the rental market to flourish and vacant office blocks in the central business districts of our capital cities have been taken up by the Minister's Department. I will cite figures on the cost of rental accommodation for public servants. In 1975-76 such accommodation cost $44,191,000; in 1981-82 it cost $96,576,000, or an increase of 119 per cent on the 1975 figure. If one looks at it in

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2415

real terms, it is an increase of 10 per cent. It is true that inflation over that period has increased the cost of rental accommodation, but there has been a real increase.
The Government should at least be encouraging a private sector building program. It could encourage private builders to build and lease back the accommodation, with an option for the lessee to buy in the long term. If we did that-the Minister is nodding approval-we would be able to build at locations which could be integrated with our urban public transport investment. Job opportunities could be created for people living on the fringes of a city, and many Commonwealth public servants who now have to travel 30 kilometres or 40 kilometres each way a day to and from the central business district could work near where they live. That is our policy. When we give people job opportunities we must give them cultur:tl, social and recreational facilities as well. It is one of the many failures of this Government that it has not done that.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) (8.5)-In speaking to the estimates of receipts and expenditures for 1982-83 for the Department of Administrative Services I firstly say to the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) that I have the greatest admiration for the public servants who work in his Department. As a member of parliament I have always found them to be very co-operative, both in my offices in Canberra and in Brisbane, and also as a member of the Joint Committee on Public Works. I have a few questions to ask the Minister this evening, and I hope he will be able to answer them. I also wish to point out a few relevant facts with regard to the razor gang decisions, which affect his Department considerably. In regard to disposal sales, I draw to the Minister's attention section 2, the estimated proceeds from the sale of Government enterprises as a result of the decisions of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions. The Minister Esimates that he will receive $92,219,042. I would like the Minister to point out to the House exactly what he intends to sell in order to receive that $92m plus. I would be very interested to know, as I am sure would all honourable members and members of the public who are listening tonight. I quote from an article in the Courier-Mail by Wallace Brown entitled 'Farce of the Razor Gang cuts'. He states:
Australians can only hope, fondly, that the latest major review of the public service announced by Prime Minister Fraser in the wake of the Costigan and Woodward Reports is more efficient than the last.

The Razor Gang cuts, orchestrated by Sir Phillip Lynch-
The right honourable member for Flinders-
and his colleagues in what was officially a Review of Commonwealth Functions, have turned out to be a farce at worst. and false economy at best.
As far as can be ascertained, and that has been difficult because of a great official reticence, the basic outcome at this stage has been two-fold: Either many decisions have, in fact, been abandoned. Or apparently quite often, what has been implemented has cost more than it saved.
It has been a story of things done, not done, and undone.
There is no doubt in my mind, and, I am sure there is no doubt in the minds of honourable members on both sides of the House, that the razor gang cuts have definitely turned out to be false economy. Many decisions have been abandoned, and it would seem that quite often the measures implemented have cost more than the amount the Government attempted to save. I hope that the Minister will be able to assure me about the $92m. The right honourable member for Flinders (Sir Phillip Lynch) stated in May last year that $560m would be saved and 17,000 jobs would go. In March this year the right honourable member for Flinders told the Australian Society of Accountants that 90 per cent of the decisions of the Review of Commonwealth Functions had been implemented or were very close to implementation; but no details of the decisions which have been implemented or abandoned have yet been released. I am hoping that the Minister will release a few of those details this evening. Obviously, the 90 per cent of decisions implemented have not saved the taxpayer the $504m that could reasonably have been expected if we are to believe the razor gang's recommendations.
As we are all well aware the razor gang cuts have not resulted in savings. They have resulted in plenty of hardships but I feel sure no savings. If there have been savings I hope the Minister will be able to point out where there have been savings in his Department. The Government has seen that its decisions have not worked. It is ready to admit that the Review of Commonwealth Functions was not meant to be an exercise in cost cutting. The Review of Commonwealth Functions recommended that the Government withdraw from certain services and that these services be given over to private contractors. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has been a keen observer of this ideology, stating that the exercises are not primarily for cost cutting purposes or for economies.
I will give some examples. The cleaning contract for Commonwealth buildings was turned over to private contractors on the advice of the razor gang. We now find that the cleaning bill has increased by more than $900,000 in the past year.

2416 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

,4ppropriation Bill (No. I)

The Minister has to find that $900,000. We are all aware of that. So I cannot see that that was a saving. If we are going to subtract all the extra costs from the savings I hope the Minister will be able to explain that to us this evening also.
Similarly, as a result of the Government's eagerness to turn government functions over to private enterprise Australia Post has recorded a $20m revenue shortfall even though there has been a rise in the cost of postage stamps. This year the Government paid a private mailing firm $122,000 to disseminate information papers produced by the Government Information Unit. Perhaps the Minister can explain that to us.
I also remind the Minister that the Review of Commonwealth Functions recommended in 1980 that work on the Townsville Commonwealth Offices be stopped. The projected cost of the building at the time of that recommendation was $8.7m. Earlier this year I asked a question of the then Minister for Housing and Construction concerning the final cost of building the offices. The Minister in his answer stated that the building would be completed in 18 months. The estimated cost in terms of February 1982 prices was $1O.75m. The taxpayer will have to foot an extra $2.05m. The cost of deferring the project will be much more when the other unforeseen costs are taken into account. For example, there will be an extra year's rental for accommodatiori of various Commonwealth Government departments which will eventually occupy the new premises. I hope the Minister can teU me the extra cost involved in rental which we will have to pay because the building was not built to schedule. I remember going up to Townsville with the Joint Committee on Public Works, listening to the evidence and on coming back to Canberra deciding that the building was needed; that it would save the Commonwealth a lot of money.
Mr Les McMahon~ That is right.
Mr HUMPHREYS~As the honourable member for Sydney pointed out, that is correct. After the Public Works Committee recommendation was made we found out that the right honourable member for Flinders set the project back and it is going to cost the taxpayer another $2.05m. I hope the Minister wiU explain that to us. TownsviUe, with thousands of unemployed at the moment, does not need construction workers added to their ranks simply because of the ~overnment 's bad business planning. If the same Incompetence and lack of economic foresight were shown by a private company it would soon be bankrupt, and bankruptcy is where this Government is heading. We must very soon get

our act together. It is this sort of thinking and incompetence which has caused a Budget deficit of nearly $1 billion already.
I turn quickly in the time left to the staffing level of the Department of Administrative Services which was decreased by 13 per cent last year. I hope the Minister can explain that and tell us why he has agreed to that staffing cut. There has also been a corresponding reduction in the staffing level in the Australian Taxation Office as a result of the recommendations of the razor gang. The number of staff in that Department has been cut by 167. As a result of staff shortages in the Taxation Office there have been massive setbacks in tax avoidance investigations. Every honourable member~on both sides of the Parliament~ knows how much that has cost the nation and the ordinary little working man.
It is highly conceivable that similar bureaucratic damage has been done to organisations under the control of the Department of Administrative Services. Nowhere is this more obvious than in the Australian Federal Police even though staff numbers increased by 50 last year. I hope the Minister can explain the huge overtime bill that has been allocated in the estimates for the Federal Police. Surely we can employ more policemen and not have to pay all this overtime. Surely we can get on with the job of saving this nation millions of dollars to catch all those people involved in frauds who are running around free at the moment. I am on the side of the Federal Police all the time.
The CHAIRMAN (Mr MiIIar)~Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass~Minister for Administrative Services) (8.15)~There are a couple of matters that perhaps I can clarify immediately. I cannot answer all the questions that the honourable member for Griffith (Mr Humphreys) asked. I will attempt to answer those questions for which I have information immediately to hand. I will let the honourable member have the answers to the other questions separately. I refer first to the $92m that is estimated to be realised with the sale of government properties. The sorts of enterprises or installations, et cetera, that would be included in that list would include the Belconnen Mall, the Commonwealth hostels in Canberra~a variety of them~Mugga Quarry, the National Materials Handling Bureau and other properties. They are examples that might be of interest to the honourable member.
On the question of cleaning costs, the figures given do not allow for the escalation of costs which have to be written into the various contracts to allow for increases in wages. Nor do the

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2417

figures take into account the once only payment of severence pay to former employees who elect to accept their entitlements under the Public Service Board arrangements. I think the honourable member would find that these factors would account for the escalation in costs to which he referred. On the general question of moving what was a public enterprise to private enterprise I point out that, of course, those sorts of costs which I have just mentioned-particularly the once only costs-have to be set beside the medium and longer term effect of moving those enterprises into private hands. So it would be wrong for the honourable member to assume that the figures he used relate to long term trends in using private enterprise.
On the question of staffing in the Department of Administrative Services, I think the honourable member would be well aware that it is government policy to reduce, wherever it can, having regard to whether efficiency can be maintained, Public Service numbers. We make no apology for that. In relation to the Australian Federal Police it is true that, unlike the ceiling restrictions for government departments, the Australian Federal Police has not only been excluded from those ceilings but also last year had an increase of, from memory, 43 or 45 policemen-I might be wrong on those figures-the remainder being Public Service staff. That action sets the AFP aside from other establishments, whether they be departments or statutory authorities, and recognises the priority that we give to the tasks which the AFP has to meet. In fact, I hope to be in a position soon to make a major announcement on other initiatives for the AFP which again will give recognition to the importance that we place on the AFP and its current work. I think that picks up the major questions asked by the honourable member. If there are other questions I have not answered I
will take those up separately.
Mr UREN (Reid) (8.19)-Perhaps the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) might answer some of my queries. He might tell me why the Government has failed so miserably in not using Commonwealth employees and instrumentalities in a proper planning way to develop our major capital cities. Perhaps he can tell me why his Government and Liberal-Country Party governments from the early 1950s through to 1972 have allowed Commonwealth public servants, particularly the heads of departments, to determine where public servants will be located. Why has the Government not used its planning powers to influence a more rational development of our capital cities instead of encouraging overcentralisation? Why has it not used its need for

office space to house Commonwealth public servants in sub-metropolitan locations? Why has it not been able to encourage the private sector to build offices in sub-metropolitan centres of the major capital cities and to move away from overcentralisation of the central business districts? Why has it not used its powers to take jobs to the people where they live, in areas such as Parramatta, Penrith or Campbelltown in Sydney?
Mr Cohen-Gosford.
Mr UREN-As the honourable member has interjected, there is no doubt that there are opportunities for Commonwealth public servants to be located in regional areas such as Gosford. Which government policy-making body really made the decision to create a northern region office of the Australian Taxation Office at Chatswood on the North Shore instead of in an area where there is a great deal of unemployment and a great many social problems such as Gosford or Newcastle? It seems to me that to locate a regional office in such a location would be a progressive planning decision. Let me illustrate the Government's stupidity. The Taxation Office wants to locate an office at Chatswood. Because of the topography and geography the sandstone areas of the North Shore of Sydney are the most costly places in which to develop and service a major undertaking. We should be minimising the population of the northern part of Sydney, particularly because of the pressure on the Sydney Harbour Bridge and other transport problems. We should be building in more suitable places. As honourable members well know, when we were in government we leased Macarthur House at Parramatta. Employees of the Taxation Office were allowed to volunteer to move there. We needed 1,000 applications and in fact 1,500 Taxation Office employees applied to work at Parramatta instead of travelling a further 15 miles into the central business district of the city.
In the last six months of the Government of 1972-75 the present Property Section of the Department of Administrative Services was under the administration of the then Department of Urban and Regional Development. I was the Minister at that time. That was a planning weapon used to bring about a more rational development of the cities. We need such development not only as rational planning but also to give people jobs in areas in which they live, particularly with falling employment amongst blue collar workers. We have to make white collar employment opportunities available, in particular on the fringes of most of our capital cities, especially in Sydney and Melbourne. We should be able to

2418 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

make jobs available, particularly in the Commonneed office accommodation to be built in Towns-

wealth Public Service. Not only should we underville. I understand that the land, the plans and the

take such development, but also we should intespecifications are available. All we need is the will

grate cultural, social and recreational facilities of the Government to give leadership to build the

into those buildings, as we planned to do in offices. Private capital should be available; con-

Parramatta.

tractors could be available. We could enter into

I stress this to the Minister for Administrative Services because he knows that the construction and housing industry is today suffering more than it has for decades. In fact unemployment in the construction industry has increased by 67 per cent since March of last year. I gave the figures this morning during Question Time. Unemployment in the industry has increased from 21,000 to 36,000. If this Government had any vision at all, and if the Minister had any muscle or clout within

agreements with private builders to construct those office buildings and to lease them back with the option to buy in 15 or 25 years time. This is a legitimate business undertaking. I am quite sure that private business would agree to it. It certainly would give a stimulus to the Townsville region. Unfortunately this Government does not have the will to do it. I will make sure that a Labor government will do it, and we certainly will carry out these programs.

the Government, it certainly would be making Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Adminis-

sure that it encouraged the construction industry. trative Services) (8.29)-1 will respond very

As I said earlier, we should have a plan to stimuquickly to the comments of the honourable

late the construction industry. The Government member for Reid (Mr Uren). The honourable

could stimulate the construction industry by getmember readily admitted in the example he gave

ting the private sector to build according to plans that over the period he was talking about the in-

and specifications drawn up by the Commoncrease in rents was only 10 per cent, although I

wealth. It could construct buildings in suitable loagree with him that in city areas, particularly Syd-

cations in such a way that they not only fit in with ney, rent levels are escalating at a quite alarming

the overall social and transport plan of the rate. That is something that the Government has

Government but also stimulate the construction under active consideration. The question whether

industry.

the Government should be interfering with the

One of the sad things about this Government is
that it has not used its Commonwealth powers in conjunction with State and local governments and
the private sector to bring greater balance to the development of our major capital cities. Govern-
ment impetus to the construction industry is long overdue, and the opportunity is there. I pointed
out in a previous speech that the Government is paying $96m in rent. Most of that rent is being
paid for office space in the central business districts of most of our major capital cities. It seems

development of cities marks the quite distinct difference between the approach of this Govern-
ment and that of the Opposition. We do not believe it is our job to intrude into the development
of State cities. We certainly believe we have to
provide services in regional areas, if they are required. If those services involve the Common-
wealth Employment Service, the Department of Social Security, the Australian Taxation Office, or whatever, we plan around those sorts of consider-
ations rather than intrude into State functions.

to me that the Government is forcing workers to There is no smokescreen with regard to Par-

live something like 50 kilometres away from ramatta. I have been to Parramatta and spoken

where they are employed. For instance, 52 per about this matter. I can only say that the Govern-

cent of employed people who live in or around ment has that area under active consideration. On

Campbelltown have to travel into the central the question of the Australian Taxation Office in

business district of Sydney every day if they want Sydney, which the honourable member also men-

white collar employment. Of course, most young tioned, I point out-I hope I am recalling the facts

people, if they can get a job, are employed in that .correctly-that the Taxation Office did a consul-

field. People travel a similar distance from Pennth tancy study on the requirements in that area. It

into the city. It seems to me that a sensible apfound that Parramatta was well served with what

proach would be to try to bring Commonwealth it had then. The move to North Sydney was based

offices into such areas. I have given the example of on the consultant's study which showed that by

Sydney, but the same situation occurs in Meldoing so the cost of servicing taxpayers in the Syd-

bourne and other areas.

ney area would be considerably reduced.

The honourable member for Griffith (Mr Humphreys) mentioned the regional centre of Townsville. In Townsville the construction and
housing industries are at an all-time low. Yet we

Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (8.30)-This evening I wish to address myself to a couple of matters relating to the Department of Adminis-
trative Services but prior to doing that I think it is

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2419

necessary to say that I find this method of dealing with the Estimates quite unsatisfactory. The previous system adopted by the House of Representatives in years gone by, of having Estimates committees whereby members of the Public Service could appear before parliamentarians and answer questions, was a whole lot more satisfactory than standing here and addressing oneself to a Minister who is not even bothering to listen. The Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) gives one a look when one says that. That, quite frankly, points to the absurdity of this type of arrangement. One cannot get any sense out of the Minister. The Minister probably is not aware of the full gamut of the administration of his Department.
One is a whole lot better off if one can deal with the public servants who are involved in the day to day running of the Department. Indeed, the Senate Estimates committees have shown this year that one gets far more sense out of the Public Service than one gets out of Ministers of the Crown. I think the House-and, indeed, the Government-has made a grievous mistake in going into this form of discussion of the Estimates rather than continuing with the previous system. One might even think that the Government has done this because it is running away from scrutiny by the Parliament. We have seen evidence of that, of course, in the last day or so. A Minister of the Crown has attempted to deprive the Joint Committee of Public Accounts of right and proper access to documents held by his Department.- We are seeing in this exercise here tonight a government of secrecy. We are seeing a government being afraid to stand up before the Parliament and have itself quizzed on what is happening in the various departments. Honourable members are not being afforded the opportunity to perform their right and proper function of getting to what is behind the Budget Estimates. This procedure is most unsatisfactory and most secretive. It is unfortunate that the Government has attempted to hide its inefficiency and incompetence behind this charade that the Committee is going through tonight.
Be that as it may, I know that the Minister for Administrative Services, who is at the table, is very interested in law and order. In fact, he puts himself forward as the first among equals who would like to see law and order pursued to its nth degree. I find it rather interesting that a Minister who believes in this principle has presided over the demise of the Australian Federal Police. There are vast staff shortages in that area. Indeed, the Australian Federal Police, in a submission to the Public Accounts Committee, stated:

At present the unavailability of resources in AFP divisions is a significant factor when it is determining the effectiveness of any concerted action taken to suppress medical fraud or for that matter any form of criminal activity. There were long lead times in training and ever increasing demands on the services of skilled investigators and it has been said that offences of a fraudulent nature coming to the notice of police are merely the tip of a very large iceberg. Medical frauds would be no exception.
That is what the Australian Federal Police said in a submission to the Public Accounts Committee of this Parliament. The Government is not pursuing its responsibilities if it allows the manning of Australian Federal Police to fall below a level at which it can effectively and efficiently pursue those people who are ripping off the Australian taxation system, be they doctors engaged in medical fraud or people engaged in taxation conspiracies or bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. It would seem that the Government is saying one thing out of one side of its mouth about the need to prosecute people and investigate these types of conspiracies, and on the other hand is not increasing the resources of the Australian Federal Police so that officers may do their job. Indeed, in the edited version of chapter 10 of the report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union it is stated:
Police forces, including the Australian Federal Police, do not have sufficient personnel or the appropriate intellectual capability and training to undertake that difficult analysis of facts which is necessary to identify major criminal organisations.
The report stated further:
The forces are not properly equipped.
That was said by Mr Costigan in paragraph 10.24 of his report. The Woodward Royal Commission into the Australian Meat Industry pointed out:
when police were called in, their work was ineffective.
That was stated by Mr Justice Woodward in paragraph 1.8 of his report. He went on to say:
. . . the police officers assigned to most of these inquiries usually managed to impress the people they were interviewing with their ignorance of the matters under discussion.
He said that in paragraph 8.30 of his report. This points to the fact that the activities of the Australian Federal Police are considered unsatisfactory. This police force should be the best trained police force in this country; it should set an example to the State police forces; and indeed to my mind it should be seen as the training cadre for the other police forces. Yet, those expert investigators who are running royal commissions on behalf of this Government-Mr Costigan, Mr Justice Woodward-and the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly), who is running the Public Accounts Committee inquiry into medifraud,

2420 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

are not satisfied with the activities of the Australian Federal Police. In fact, the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, the honourable member for Bradfield, told us Ian Federal Police officers: 'Frankly, ou are finding yourselves in a crisis situation". The Committee had already been told that up to $200m was lost each year to the Federal revenue through malpractice by doctors and that the police were unable to do
anything about it.
What has been the Government's response to the situation? The Government's response has been to increase the size of the Australian Federal Police in the last year by a paltry 50, when it is obvious that that force needs many more people, much more training and a great deal more expertise. The Government is talking about bringing in a Bill to institute a national crimes commission, which it is quite fitting and proper to do in Australia, that commission will have to be staffed by skilled investigators. One would hope that such skilled investigators would be drawn from the Australian Federal Police. But it would seem,
when one reads the statements that have been made by Messrs Costigan and Woodward and by the honourable member for Bradfield, that the skill and training is not there. The Government has an obligation to ensure that the Australian Federal Police is the best equipped police force in Australia. The Government has an obligation to see that members of the Australian Federal Police are the best trained and the best educated police in Australia. It would seem that in the recent past this Minister and this Government have failed in that responsibility. It is only when we have a properly trained and competent police force that the government of the day can ensure that these types of law breaking are prohibited. It is only when we have a police force such as that that the members of that force can have confidence that they can properly prosecute the people with whom they are dealing. The type of people about whom we are talking who are engaged in the medifraud, in the meat substitution racket and in the taxation rackets are not little criminals who are robbing shops; they are the big league criminals. They are the people who are sheltered by high priced lawyers and Queen's Counsel. They are the people who are sheltered by the best accountants that money can buy. If the Australian Government is to prosecute these people successfully it needs to have working on its behalf the best trained officers that are available. It does not have those officers at present. It is time the Government did something about providing officers of that calibre. It is time the Government did the right and fair thing by the good, honest,

diligent officers in the Australian Federal Police and provided the training, the expertise and the staff needed to carry out the job that the Government will not allow them to do. I would like the Minister's comments on that matter.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) (8.40) - Yes, I would be delighted to comment on the speech made by the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay). The honourable member has misread the reports that he quoted from or has deliberately set out to denigrate the Australian Federal Police or to mislead this Committee. Whilst I do not have the reports in front of me, I can quickly demonstrate why I believe that probably the latter is the best assessment of his speech-that is,
that he deliberately set out to mislead this House. Let us begin first of all with the Woodward Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Meat Industry. The honourable member quoted some paragraphs from that report. I think we will find that Mr Justice Woodward was referring to the Commonwealth Police-that is, prior to 1979-and not to the Australian Federal Police. In fact, if the honourable member would like to refer to the Woodward Royal Commission report and examine it properly-perhaps he has done so and that is why he deliberately set out to mislead the House or perhaps he was fair dinkum in quoting from it-he will find that Mr Justice Woodward said that the law officers who assisted him and the joint task force of the Australian Federal Police and the Victoria Police materially assisted in producing the evidence which led to the successful prosecutions or recommendations for prosecutions that Mr Justice Woodward made.
Let me go over that point again. What Mr Justice Woodward was saying in his report, prior to 1979, was that the Commonwealth Police force was inadequate. We have admitted that. Not only have we admitted it; in late 1979 we set out to reform the Commonwealth Police. We took in other elements of our law enforcement agencies and produced the Australian Federal Police. Mr Justice Woodward recognised quite clearly the work and expertise of the AFP in the Royal Commission but, more than that, said that it was instrumental in the success of the Royal Commission.
I now deal with Mr Costigan. He has said, as everybody recognises, that all police forces in this country are stretched. The enormity of the crime that we face in this country is such that all police forces are having to make decisions as to the priorities of the level of crime to which they will commit their police officers. Again, the honourable member deliberately set out to mislead the

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2421

House because it is the officers of the Australian Federal Police who are assisting the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. This has led to the success and the importance of the Commission's report. The Commissioner himself, Mr Costigan, has recognised to me in private conversations, and I think even in correspondence but I would have to check that, the value and expertise of the Australian Federal Police.
I wish to make a couple of points for the honourable member on the work of the Joint committee of Public Accounts. Again, he quoted selectively. If he went back to the report and really examined what the Commissioner said, he would find that the picture is totally different. I want to make it clear to the honourable member and to the House that the system of investigating fraud against the public health system is such that in the first instance it is the investigators of the Department of Health, assisted by their computer, who carry out the basic investigations. But when those investigations are carried out and it is found that there has been a conspiracy against the system or a major imposition against the Commonwealth, there are. resources within the Australian Federal Police which will immediately deal with that reference from the Department of Health.
Dr Theophanous-Why don't you read the public transcript? You have not read it.
Mr NEWMAN-I am saying this very clearly and precisely.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr NEWMAN-I point out to the honourable member and to other honourable members who are interjecting that the Australian Federal Police is all but three years old. I recognise that the Australian Federal Police has a number of difficulties and problems to overcome; we are working to do that. It might be of benefit to the honourable member if I point out that it takes something like five years training and experience to produce a detective-the very officer that he is demanding we have more of. We just simply have not had the time for officers to encompass the necessary experience in the force. I point out, nevertheless, that if we exclude the protective services element of the Australian Federal Police-I hope my memory is correct-I think of the order of 16 per cent of the force is made up of detectives. That is a bigger percentage th~n in any other police force in the Commonwealth. I point out again that the honourable member deliberately set out to misquote the three reports he used. If he is complaining about the way in which Estimates committees

are to be operated, I note that he did not ask questions; he deliberately set out to mislead this Committee. I think that is a very poor reflection on the process we are now going through. I repeat one final point which I made to the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) when he was asking questions about this matter: A number of decisions concerning the Australian Federal Police have been taken, upon which the Commissioner is already taking action. I hope that in the very near future when other decisions are taken I will be in a position to make a statement about them.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler)-Mr Chairman, I claim to have been misrepresented. The Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) suggested that I deliberately misled the Committee and I would like to make a personal explanation.
The CHAIRMAN. The honourable member for Grayndler may proceed.
Mr LEO McLEAYThank you, Mr Chairman. The Minister, in his usual rather flamboyant style-
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member is not free to embellish his comments with extraneous matter. He will simply point out precisely the manner in which he was misrepresented.
Mr LEO McLEAYThe Minister asserted that I attempted to mislead the House this evening. He asserted that I engaged in selective quoting. Indeed, the Minister asserted that I had not considered the transcript of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts hearings or the evidence given to that Committee by the Australian Federal Police. The submission of the Australian Federal Police to the Public Accounts Committee stated that there were insufficient resources to deal with medical fraud and that the procedures led to unsatisfactory prosecution levels. My colleague the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous), who is a member of that Committee, will substantiate that that is what the witnesses said. That is what they said, and I said so. The Minister is obviously the person who has not read the transcript and does not know what his own Department said to the PAC.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member is debating the matter. He will resume his seat.
Proposed expenditure agreed to.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Mr Chairman, I suggest that the order for the consideration of the

2422 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

proposed expenditures agreed to by the Committee on 21 September be varied by next considering the proposed expenditure for the Department of Science and Technology, the Department of Social Security, the Department of Health, and the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
The CHAIRMAN-Is the suggestion of the Minister agreed to? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Department of Science and Technology
Proposed expenditure, $453.446,000.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (8.48)-The Department of Science and Technology estimates in the current Budget are woefully inadequate in two important respects: Firstly, in relation to the specific programs which already exist, the funding is grossly insufficient for Australia's needs in the area of research and development; and, secondly and more particularly, the philosophy of the Government in relation to this area of science and technology is mean and short-sighted. It shows a total failure to understand the importance of scientific and technological developments for present and future needs. As my colleague the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) has persistently pointed out, scientific and technological development is absolsutely crucial not simply for the development of our society but for its very survival. We are now commencing the revolutionary transformation of the means of production throughout the world. The extraordinarily rapid development of computers and microprocessors continues daily to replace many jobs, both in manufacturing industries and in general services. This revolutionary transformation creates serious employment difficulties. However, there is also a positive side to the matter.
Developments in relation to microprocessors create exciting new possibilities for the accumulation and storage of information and for making such information available more quickly and cheaply to more people. The Government has, of course, stubbornly refused to face up to the problems created by these and other technological developments. I refer to the increasing developments in the area of videotapes and discs. It has refused to look at the question of reductions in working hours so that the work which is available can be more evenly distributed. It refuses to create genuine opportunities for increased access to educational facilities for all persons, whether or not they are employed.
What is more serious, what in fact is unforgivable, is that the Government has not attempted to develop Australia's potential in the scientific and technological fields. The Government has failed

totally to ensure that Australians are employed in the research, developmental and production stages of these high technology industries and the information services associated with them. The Government has failed completely to encourage Australian creativity, the development of technological skills, and the development of information and research skills in the population. Thus research and development in our universities is going through an extreme crisis, with the morale of both lecturers and research students at its lowest point for many years. Promotional opportunities for researchers have been so restricted that many people have felt that research work, especially work for a higher degree, is a waste of time. Others who have not taken this view have had to work in intolerable circumstances and maintain their creativity in conditions which research scientists in other parts of the world do not have to put up with.
This is illustrated by the Government's Budget estimates. For example, research grants and fellowships-the Australian Research Grants Committee scheme-are up by 9 per cent from $18m to $19.6m; not even the rate of inflation. It is totally woeful. Yet the ARGC scheme represents very good value for money. The failure to increase this value in real money terms is scandalous. Furthermore, the amount appropriated for the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives projects was $32.68m in 1981-82. But only 37 per cent of that appropriation was spent. What was the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) doing? Dreaming? I put it to him that his responsibilities in this area have not been met. Treasury would give no firm commitment earlier this year that the scheme would be funded for this and subsequent years. As a result the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board felt unable to approve projects which were due to run for three four-year periods and applicants were dissuaded from going ahead with projects or even from applying. Until now we have been unable to obtain any confirmation of just how severe has been the effect of Treasury pressure. Given the needs of Australia in research and development, this is an absolute scandal.
The actual amount appropriated for 1982-83 is $32.8m, an increase of 0.3 per cent, or in actual terms a 10 per cent fall when inflation is taken into account. In the IRDI public interest projects only 40 per cent, or $2.4m of the amount actually appropriated, which was $6m, was spent in 1981-82. The amount appropriated this year is still less than last year's figure, at a time when we are facing an enormous challenge in the area of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2423

technological development and scientific research. What is going on with this Government in relation to these activities? Let me take another area. The grant to the Industrial Design Council of Australia is to be abolished altogether. In Division 540, the 1982-83 appropriation is down 0.4 per cent on the 1981-82 figure but it is up 34 per cent on the 1981-82 expenditure. On past form this increase must be regarded as totally imaginary.
. The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, which spent every cent appropriated for it in 1981-82, has had an increase of only 12 per cent in 1982-83. This is an absurd level of increase, given the work and activities of the CSIRO. To follow up this point in relation to the CSIRO, there is no getting away from the total failure of this Government to have a coordinated approach to the whole area of research and development. Everyone knows the great work the CSIRO does, notwithstanding its limited resources and the failure of the Government properly to support it. Indeed, it is appropriate to say that creativity in Australia, both in the arts and the sciences, has been remarkable and continues to be remarkable, notwithstanding the efforts of the Government to stultify and frustrate it.
The tragedy is that even when Australians have created new products, new devices and new approaches in the production of goods and services, this Government has failed totally to take up those inventions and ideas and put them into practice. Instead, it has relied entirely on the notorious mythology of the wonders of the private sector. It has relied entirely on the view that, somehow, the private sector is imaginative and creative whereas the public sector is not. In reality, the reverse is true in relation to research and development. Most of the research takes place in the public sector. However, it is often the case that when products or inventions are put forward they are not taken up. This is because of cowardice and lack of imagination in many sectors of private industry. I should add that in some cases patents of the CSIRO have been taken over by foreign corporations, not to be produced in Australia but to be produced in other countries. So Australians have been paying for the research and development of products which are then produced elsewhere. This is a disgraceful situation which reflects the stupidity of the economic approach taken by this Government.
In order to solve these problems it is necessary for Australia to develop a co-ordinated program in the areas of high technology. We need to think

of a whole process, from research and development right through to the production process. This means that if the private sector is not prepared to enter into such projects then the Government must be prepared to put forward capital to ensure that these dev,elopments take place. This can be done either by direct establishment of corporations or bodies to take up venture'capital in these areas or, alternatively, by further encouragement of the private sector so that it will be prepared to go into those areas. The science and technology policy of the Australian Labor Party is concerned with this; these are its aims. These aims will be outlined by the honourable member for Lalor in a few weeks time and they will show up the stupidity and absurdity of the Government's approach, which is totally unsatisfactory.
Can we afford to allow our new ideas and inventions simply to be taken over by others? Can we afford to allow to continue this haphazard situation that exists at the moment, where there is no co-ordination of research, development and production? Certainly we cannot. Indeed, if one looks at the Government's policies one often gains the impression that it has no idea of the character of the changes that are taking place in our society. Alvin TofHer in his book Future Shock referred to the situation where the individual is unable to keep pace with technological and other changes which are taking place in society. This Government suffers from future shock.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr WHITE (McPherson) (8.58)-1 enter this debate on a very narrow subject but one which is causing me a considerable amount of concern. I refer to the decline in high technology development in this country. If we look at the electronics industry, and I have before me some figures for which I am indebted to the Electronics Industry Advisory Council, in 1970-71 approximately 35,000 people were employed in that industry but by 1980 the figure had dropped to approximately 20,000. That is a decline of 15,000 people over a base of 35,000, which is significant in anybody's terms. Over the same period, in 1970 Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Ltd employed 7,000 people, but by 1980 this figure had dropped to 4,200. I regret to say that the indications are that this decline in employment in these high technology areas is continuing, and there are many reasons for it.
Australia is a small country with a small domestic population, which in turn means a small domestic market. It is true, as other speakers have

2424 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

said, that neither the Government nor industry place enough emphasis as a matter of policy on research and development in this country. The fact is that it is much cheaper to import many of the parts that are needed. I believe there is also a general lack of education and understanding in our schools and colleges on the impact and importance of these high technology areas. For all those reasons I do not think that we can really afford to allow this decline to continue. It is not in Australia's interests in high technology or in any other field of manufacture to be totally dependent on overseas countries. We have all seen from time to time what happens when we become dependent on people and they choose to cut off the supply. If we do become dependent the time will come when we will want something and we will not be able to get it. From a defence point of view, apart from anything else, such a situation is
disastrous.
If we look at the imports of office machines and automatic data processing equipment, we find the same sorts of figures that I have just mentioned. In 1981 we imported roughly, on the figures that are available to me, some $466m worth of data processing equipment. This year, in the nine months to March, that amount has risen to nearly $600m. That is an enormous amount of capital to be going out of this country, a lot of which we hope, with some energy and determination, we could be manufacturing in this country. I think it is realistic to talk about the development of high technology industry in Australia in the same way as we talked about the development of a car industry in the post-World War II period. The time has come to encourage the high technology industries in the same way that we deliberately set out as a matter of policy in this country to encourage and establish a motor car manufacturing industry in 1946-47.
It is unrealistic to believe that we are going to compete with some of the well-established industries in other parts of the world, such as Japan and America, where they have long high volume runs. But there are specialised areas where we can, for example, design and produce components and manufacture data processing machines. Computer systems have been developed in Australia and manufactured in this country. They have been examined overseas and favourably received and there are certainly some select areas in which our expertise can be developed. It is up to us in this Parliament and elsewhere to give encouragement to the groundwork that has already been laid and to develop it further.
The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation deserves congratulations,

as do two or three universities in Australia where such strides have been made. I would particularly like to congratulate the Minister who is responsible in this field, the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) who is at the table, for the efforts he has put into this area in the last year or so. He has encouraged an awareness of high technology requirements in Australia. Some industries in Australia also deserve congratulations and encouragement. We would all like to see considerably more encCJUragement by those industries and certainly a lot more money spent on research and development in Australia. We need-it has been mentioned and I agree with it-a more comprehensive high technology policy for the whole of Australia. The Government probably has to undertake this responsibility to co-ordinate such a policy. I believe the Government will also have to look very seriously at the level of its research and development funding to industry and universities in this country.
I would like to expand a little on universities. I make this point in conclusion. We are not only talking about universities. I believe the time has come for the Government, as a matter of policy and as a program, to put computers in every school in this country.
Mr Dawkins-You have been reading my policy.
Mr WHITE-I am not unaware that statements have been made by members of the Australian Labor Party on this matter. I do not intend to dispute that here. I agree with them. I think this is something that we should be taking up. The provision of computer training facilities in schools and other institutions in Australia has become a matter of necessity. In the 1960s the Federal Government funded a program for science laboratories in schools and institutions throughout Australia. In the 1970s we undertook a similar program for libraries. I believe the time has now come for a similar program for computer training in our schools. There is a general lack of understanding in the community about the use of computers. Some of us are perhaps a little old to fully understand and grasp the concept of what they are capable of in the future, but we are surely not too old to encourage the youth of this country to be aware and to take up this particularly important field. The field in the computer industry lies with our young people.
A similar program has been introduced in schools in the United Kingdom in the last three or four years and I understand also in New Zealnd. It will be an expensive program. It would cost perhaps up to $15,000 at today's prices for a school to

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2425

put in sufficient terminals and computers to make it a worthwhile program. 1do not imagine that the Commonwealth Government would have to pick up the whole tab. The States and the schools can assist, as they have done in the last few years, by raising funds in many schools in Australia to put in these computers. 1 believe if we do not grasp this high technology nettle we are in danger in due course of reverting to a gigantic farm in this country. We have seen our standard of living slip over the years. One of the reasons is that if we do not become competitive in modern technology, we will have problems in the future. We cannot afford to ignore this field. We should be creating jobs in this country if we want to develop the technology for the future of Australia and if we want to encourage understanding and training in our schools and other institutions. I have already written to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Minister for Education (Senator Peter Baume) on this matter. 1 hope the Government will take up this project, have a look at it and adopt it.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (9.6)-1 want to make a contribution on behalf of the Opposition in this debate on the estimates for the Department of Science and Technology. In doing so I want to acknowledge formally the absence of my colleague the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) who is now in my home town of Perth.
Mr Thomson-We are very disappointed he is not here.

Mr DAWKINS-The Minister's disappointment is only a minute portion of the disappointment of the honourable member for Lalor. Whilst the honourable member for Lalor is obviously enthusiastic in his endeavours on producing the .1982 Curtin Memorial Lecture, 1 am sure that he regrets mightily the fact that he is not able to participate in this debate, particularly to put a number of fairly pointed questions to the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson). He has asked me to make a number of points on his behalf. Surprisingly, I want to make a few points of my own.
The first point that my colleague wants to be made in relation to the Opposition's attitude to the estimates for this Department is that at a time when the rest of the industrialised world is passing through the most rapid and far-reaching period of technological change with all its social and economic implications, Australia amazingly is falling backwards. In Table 2 of the Commonwealth Government Budget Outlays by Function which appears on page 330 of Budget Paper No. 1 for 1982-83 it is shown that the expenditure in relation to scientific research has in fact fallen by 10 per cent, from one per cent to 0.9 per cent of total outlays in this current year. 1 take this opportunity to seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which illustrates this point.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Table 2
COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT BUDGET OUTLAYS BY FUNCTION AS PROPORTIONS OF TOTAL BUDGET OUTLAYS 1972-73 TO 1981-82 AND 1982-83 (estimated) (Per cent) (a)

Function

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

Defence

12.0

10.9

9.2

8.5

9.1

8.9

9.0

9.5

9.8

10.0

9.8

Education Health

4.3

7.0

9.3

8.7

9.2

9.0

8.7

8.2

8.1

8.1

8.1

7.7

7.7

7.2

13.5

10.5

10.1

10.0

10.0

10.1

(b)7.0

(b)7.2

Social Security and Wel-

fare

20.6

20.3

20.8

23.0

26.4

27.8

27.9

27.7

27.3

27.8

28.2

Housing

(c)0.8

2.8

3.9

2.6

2.3

1.9

1.3

1.1

0.9

1.1

1.2

Urban and Regional De-

velopment nee and the

Environment

0.5

1.2

2.1

1.9

1.1

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.2

Culture and Recreation

1.1

1.3

1.3

1.2

1.1

1.0

1.0

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.1

Economic Services-

Transport and Co-

mmunication

7.3

7.1

7.2

6.1

4.1

3.2

2.5

2.6

2.7

2.9

3.1

Water Supply. Elec-

tricity and Gas

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.2

Industry Assistance and

Development -

Primary Industry

2.1

2.0

2.6

0.8

0.2

0.7

0.9

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.7

Other

1.9

1.5

1.8

0.8

0.6

0.2

0.7

1.2

1.8

1.7

1.5

Labour and Emplo-

yment

0.9

0.9

0.9

1.0

1.0

1.1

1.1

1.0

1.1

1.1

1.1

2426 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Function

1972-73

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1982-83 1981-82 (estimate)

Ot her Economic Ser-

vices

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.3

Total

13.0

12.2

13.2

9.4

6.6

5.8

5.6

5.8

6.5

6.7

6.8

General Public Services

Legislative Services

0.2

OJ

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.3

Law. Order and Public

Safety

0.4

0.4

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

Foreign Affairs and

Overseas Aid

2.7

3.0

2.4

2.2

2.1

2.1

2.1

2.1

2.1

2.1

2.0

General and Scientific

Research nee

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.8

0.9

0.9

1.0

0.9

Administrative Services

3.4

3.6

3J

3.0

3.0

3.0

2.9

2.9

3.0

3.0

2.9

Total

7.6

8.2

7.2

6.6

6.7

6.7

6.6

6.8

6.8

7.0

6.8

Payments to or for the

States. the Northern

Territory and Local

Government Authori-

ties nee

(c)25.7

22.6

20.7

20.3

21.2

22.1

22.7

22.4

22.0 (b)24.0 (b)23.3

Public Debt Interest

6.6

5.8

5.0

4.4

5.9

6.2

6.8

7.0

7.1

7.0

6.9

Allowances for Wage and

Salary Increases (Non-

Defence)

0.4

Total Outlays

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

(0) See Notes on Tables. (b) Changed arrangements for health funding affect comparability of the functional classification between \980-81 and subsequent years. Adjusted for these changes. outlays under the 'Health' function in 1981-82 and 1982-83 represent 9.9 per cent and 9.3 percent of total Budget outlays respectively and outlays on 'Payments to or for the States. the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities nee' represent 21.2 per cent and 21.1 per cent respectively. (c) See Notes on Tables. If the outlays under the two functions are adjusted to provide a comparable series. the proportion of outlays on 'Housing' to total
outlays in 1972-73 becomes 2.4 per cent, while the proportion for 'Payments to the States nee' becomes 24.1 per cent.

Mr DAWKINS-This is a 10 per cent fall at a time when the rest of the world is going forwards. It has to be acknowledged that 10 per cent in money terms represents something like at least a 20 per cent fall in real terms once inflation is taken into account. When considering Australia's performance in this regard we have to consider what is happening in the rest of the world. For instance, Canada has undertaken a doubling of its research and development expenditure for the period 1979 to 1985.
The President of France, President Mitterand, has committed himself and his Government to a doubling of his country's expenditure during his first seven-year term from 1981 to 1988. If we look at West Germany and at the United States of America we find that there have been quite substantial increases of 7 per cent and 9 per cent respectively in relation to their 1982 research and development budget allocations. What is particularly astonishing about Australia's preparedness to oversee a situation where the public expenditure on research and development is going backwards at a time when the expenditure on research and development in the rest of the world is going forwards at quite a rapid rate is that even the leaders of the rest of the developed countries have recognised the importance of this activity. Frank Press said this when writing of the recent summit conference at Versailles:

Something extraordinary happened at the recent summit conference at Versailles: science and technology were explicitly recognised as essential to the future welfare of the industrialised nations. Moreover, they are already on the agenda of the next heads of state conference in 1983 in the United States . . .
It is intriguing, to say the least, that the rest of the countries of the industrialised world have this matter on the top of their agenda in relation to international discussions about the future of the international economy. Those countries are individually taking action to expand their activities in this regard whereas this Government is apparently prepared to accept a 10 per cent cut, or a cut of 20 per cent in real terms, in the amount of public expenditure on general and scientific research. What has to be acknowledged is that Australia, perhaps more than many of these other countries, relies very much on its ability to develop its own latent capacities, the resources of our people. We will be able to develop those capacities only if we make some very definite and deliberate commitments to the development of scientific and general research. Regrettably, at a time when the rest of the world is doing this, Australia, of course, is going backwards. It is not just a matter of concentrating on research; it is a matter also of making a national investment in the education of our people and in the educational institutions of our country. Again we find that Australia is falling behind in so many regards. When we look at

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2427

the matter of participation in education, particularly at the senior secondary levels and also at the tertiary levels, we find that we are falling behind when other countries are going ahead in terms of the number of young people who are involved in full time education.
There are a few specific matters which I want to put to the Minister for Science and Technology. I hope that he will quite specifically respond to them. Will he explain what has happened to the Patents Amendment Bill which was introduced in this House in 1981 and discussed on 29 April 1981 together with the Designs Amendment Bill and the Trade Marks Amendment Bill? The other two Bills that I have mentioned have been passed by the Parliament whilst the Patents Amendment Bill has apparently been lost. Secondly, what has happended to the report of the Antarctic Research Policy Advisory Committee chaired by Professor David Caro which covered the period 1979 to 1981 ? Why is it that that report has apparently not been tabled when we understand that it has been in the hands of the Minister since the beginning of this year? We want to know why that report has not been tabled. We ask the Minister to respond to that point this evening.
Thirdly, we want to know from the Minister what positive steps the Government is taking to promote work in biotechnology. Canada, for instance, has pledged a- $500m investment over a 10-year period in this area. What is Australia doing? We have to have regard particularly to the fact that Australia's expertise in many of the areas associated with biotechnology is really quite well advanced. In relation to agriculture, some aspects of medical technology and some aspects of alternative energy sources we have to ask the Minister what he is doing to encourage that sort of activity in Australia. The last thing I want to refer to quite specifically is the urgent need for the promotion and encouragement of some additional research activities particularly in our universities and also in colleges of advanced education. What we have at the moment is a national program to support post-graduate research which supports students working towards masters degrees and doctorates of philosophy. But there is nothing to support graduates once they have completed those programs. A large number of Ph.D graduates are walking around this country with nothing terribly positive to do in relation to research activities. We on this side of the chamber, at least, believe that the Government could do a great deal by encouraging Ph.D graduates to continue their work in relation to research activities in universities and to some extent in CAEs as well.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr FREE (Macquarie) (9.16)-I rise this evening along with my colleagues on the Australian Labor Party side of the chamber to express disappointment at what this Budget sets out to achieve in the field of science and technology in 1982-83. Whilst noting the overall increase of 15 per cent in the 1982-83 appropriation over the expenditure in 1981-82, I point out that half of this apparent increase is, in fact, the result of underspending last year when $28.6m allocated was not spent. The increase in appropriation of only 7.8 per cent this year compared to the appropriation of last year is, of course, far less than the rate of inflation. It is an indication of the low priority that this Government gives to science and technology.
A further indication of the low priority given to the Department of Science and Technology by this Government is the cut in staffing. Salaries, I note, are down by some 14 per cent. That is, of course, a consequence of the mauling inflicted on this Department by the razor gang. This Department was a particular object of attention by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions. The Department in fact rated three pages in the report of the razor gang. I remind the Committee that among the etTects of the treatment meted out to this Department by the razor gang were the following: Eleven advisory bodies were abolished, eight committees were amalgamated, four activities were terminated and seven activities were phased out or transferred. I put it to the Committee that this is false economy. It is an illustration that science and technology under this Government simply do not matter.
I draw the Committee's attention to the crucial role that the development of skills can play in revitalising the national economy I want to highlight the Budget's failure to encourage the development of skills and innovation. Between 1955 and 1982 the nations with the greatest advances in per capita gross national product may have lacked mineral resources but they put an emphasis on the development of the skills of their people. The nations which have relied on their mineral wealth and neglected skills have declined. Less than 5 per cent of Australia's export earnings can be attributed to research, design, innovation or invention. On the other hand, more than 60 per cent of the export earnings of countries like Japan, France and Sweden can be attributed to intellectual skills. Their skill-based earnings will grow. As long as this country sutTers from policies which fail to encourage research and innovation

2428 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

our earnings will contract. To illustrate where
Australia stands in the international pecking
order in relation to the development of skills and innovation I refer to two tables showing patents
granted world wide in 1975. I seek leave to have these tables incorporated in Hansard.

Leave granted.

The tables read as follows-

PATENTS GRANTED WORLDWIDE 1975 PER MILLION POPULATION

Switzerland Sweden .
West Germany
United States of America
Japan
Netherlands Austria . . .
United Kingdom France
Czechoslovakia Belgium Denmark
Finland Poland Canada .
Greece Israel Australia Norway
Italy . . Spain
New Zealand Argentina Portugal

2,486 842 763
500
500 447
421 407 368 350 315 289 210 210 176 160 145 132 125 105
79 68 53 50

(Australia ranked 18th of 24 nations listed). Source: ICI Australia Ltd. Submission to Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment. Reproduced in tabular form in its report Industrial Research and Development in Australia, AGPS, Canberra, 1979, page 132.

PATENTS GRANTED WORLDWIDE PER $1,000

MILLION (US) OF GNP

Switzerland

1,030

West Germany

385

Netherlands

370

Sweden . . .

300

United Kingdom

270

France

.

240

Greece

210

Belgium

200

Czechoslovakia

180

United States of America

170

Argentina

140

Denmark . . . . .

135

Spain

110

Norway

100

Israel

85

Canada

65

Australia

60

Brazil

45

Portugal

35

Yugoslavia

30

India

25

(Australia ranked 17th of21 nations listed).
Source: Broken Hill Pty Ltd. Submission to Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment. reproduced in tabular form in its report Industrial Research and Development in Australia, AGPS, Canberra, 1979, page 134.

Mr FREE-I thank the Minister for Science
and Technology (Mr Thomson) and the Committee. The first of these two tables shows patents
granted world wide in 1975 per million of popu-
lation. Of the 24 nations listed Australia ranked
eighteenth. Australia had 132 patents granted world wide per million of population compared
with the nation at the top of the table-
Switzerland-which had 2,486 patents granted per million of population. In other words,
Australia's output was 5.3 per cent of that of
Switzerland. The second table ranks 21 nations according to patents granted world wide per
billion United States dollars of gross national
product. Again, Australia is well down the list. It is seventeenth out of the 21 nations listed. Sixty
patents were granted to Australia; 1,030 were granted to Switzerland. Australia's 60 represents
5.8 per cent of the Swiss total of 1,030. Lest honourable members opposite point out that
those figures refer to 1975 and that perhaps things have changed since then, I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a third table indicating
Australian trends since that time.

Leave granted.

The table read as follows-

Patents, Trade Marks and Designs

Patents Patents for inventions are granted under the Patents Act
1952, which applies to Australia and to the Territory of Norfolk Island and which is administered by the Commissioner of Patents. Either a 'petty patent' or a 'standard patent" for an invention may be applied for and granted under the Patents Act. A 'standard' patent has a term of up to sixteen years, while a 'petty' patent has a term of up to six years.

PATENTS: AUSTRALIA

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

Total applications Applications claiming priority of date under convention arrangements
Petty patents lodged Complete specifications lodged
Complete specificatons accepted Letters patent sealed
Letters patent renewed
Letters patent ceased

14,082
8,483
10,929 11,473 12,161 51,034 9,895

14,117
8,666
11,003 10,850 11,074 51,028 10,052

14,246
8,675
11,087 9,911 9,626 57,850 9,147

14,131
8,542
10,910 8,445 9,038 56,878 10,598

14,640
8,656 57
10,032 8,761 6,513 59,455 2,348

15,936
9,354 84
10,697 7,327 8,434 52,989 15,265

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2429

Trade marks and designs
The Trade Marks Act 1955 and the Designs Act 1906 are also administered by the Commissioner of Patents. These Acts provide for the registration of trade marks in respect of goods and services, and the registration of industrial designs.
Mr FREE-I thank the Minister and the Committee. This third table shows the numbers of patents granted in Australia over the years from 1975 to 1980. Whilst total applications grew slightly from 14,000 to 15,936, those with complete specifications lodged and those with complete specifications accepted declined over that period. Those with complete specifications accepted, for example, declined from 11,473 in 1975 to 7,327 in 1980. Our position certainly has not improved since that time and those figures suggest that, in fact, our position has declined.
There has been a lack of encouragement. By way of illustration I refer to the estimates figures for industrial research and development incentives grants. Expenditure in this area in 1980-81 was $50.7m. The expenditure in 1981-82 was down to $24.2m and the amount estimated for this financial year is $49.lm. Superficially, this Budget provides for an increase of $24.9m over last year. When one looks at the details of the Budget Papers one finds that in 1981-82, $49.2m was allocated but that only $24.2m of that amount was actually spent-less than half of the amount was actually spent. In fact, when one looks more closely at the project grants under this scheme as distinct from the commencement grants one discoves that, of the $32.7m appropriated last year, only $12m or 37 per cent was actually spent. We need to know the reasons for this underspending. We need to be in a position to judge whether the $49.1 m allocated for this year is another rubbery Budget figure. It appears to me that it is a very rubbery figure indeed, because the scheme is due to expire in 1986 and it will be subject to a review at some time before that date. In the absence of any guarantee or even reasonable expectation of continuity of support in what is, after all, essentially a dollar for dollar arrangement, it is hardly surprising that potential applicants are viewing the scheme with something rather less than wild enthusiasm.
I note that the Technology and Innovatron Program has been allocated $700,000, an allocation which is down in real terms on what it was last year. Research grants have received an increase of $2m, which will not even keep up with inflation. This is occurring in a year when the Australian Research Grants Committee has reported an increase from 292 to 372 in the number of good quality projects which have had to be rejected. I

ask the Committee: How many potential employment generating opportunities have been lost in those 372 rejected projects?
In commenting on these estimates I want to refer to the Minister's speech at the tabling of the science and technology statement on 25 February this year. It was a sad speech in many ways-a rather curious amalgam of good intentions and gloomy predictions. In February of this year the Minister said:
A nation without innovation succumbs to deterioration and decay.
We agree. He stated:
The development of our own capability in industrial innovation must remain a high priority.
We agree. He went on to state:
Our vitality as a nation, and our ability to respond to rapidly changing demands, depends on our success in this task.
We agree; they are all fine intentions indeed. But what about the reality? Elsewhere in the speech we find the reality. The Minister stated:
The ratio of private sector to government funding of research and development remains a matter of concern to the Government. In real terms, Rand D expenditure by private enterprise fell by nearly 50 per cent between 1973-74 and 1976-77. There was a small growth of 5 per cent in real terms between 1976-77 and 1978-79. However, in the same period, manpower effort devoted to Rand D by private enterprise fell by 7 per cent. Private sector Rand D spending as a percentage of gross domestic product remains very low compared to other Western countries.
Despite this poor performance all the Minister did then was to wring his hands. He said:
Industry must take the primary role in the innovation process.
Quite clearly industry is not and, equally clearly, it will get no lead from this Government. It is clear that the Government is not interested in this field. It is not doing enough. I want to pass particular comment on the content of this debate compared with that of last year's Estimates committee hearings on the estimates for the Department of Science and Technology. I am sure the Minister would agree with me that last year's Estimates committee proceedings for this Department were very good. I recall them very clearly. There was good discussion, there were good people from the Department and there was a free flow of information and questions. We had a very good evening on that occasion. This year the arrangements are far less satisfactory. We have had, I think, three people from the Labor Party side speak tonight. We had one speaker from the Government back bench who did not even use his full allocation of time. We had a thoughful contribution by the honourable member for McPherson

2430 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

(Mr White). But really and truly, if that represents the combined wisdom of the Government parties back bench, I am very sorry for them.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (9.26)-1 thank the Committee for this debate. I must say that it has been much more negative than positive. The whole portfolio expenditure for my Department of Science and Technology increased by 10.8 per cent this year, slightly more than the rate of inflation. In times of budgetary discipline I think this was a very good result. There were a number of very positive measures in this Budget-the decision to build the Australia Telescope, the decision to fund a feasibility study into Starlab, and greatly increased spending on Antarctica. While I am discussing Antarctica I can tell the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) that the Antarctica Research Policy Advisory Committee report was released today. I very much regret that it took so long to release it, but it was released today. There was an ARPAC meeting in Melbourne today.
Mr Dawkins-Will you table it?
Mr THOMSON-It will not be tabled. It was released and is public. There was a Press release. Honourable members will find that most of the recommendations of the ARPAC have already been taken up and many more will be taken up in the next Budget.
Mr Dawkins-Mr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order. Is the Minister saying that the report will be tabled?
Mr THOMSON-No, I said it was issued today-not tabled.
Mr Dawkiits-Will you table it?
Mr THOMSON-I do not have a copy here to table.
Mr DawkinsWill you get one?
Mr THOMSON-It was issued today with a wide distribution. The honourable member for Fremantle asked also about the Patents Amendment Bill. That Bill went through this chamber and went to the Senate. The major clauses in it were designed to correct a problem caused by rulings of some lower courts and tribunals. While the Bill was in the Senate a High Court of Australia ruling made those amendments unnecessary, and the major parts of the Bill were withdrawn. Some minor clauses were put in the Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill. 1 undertake to write to the honourable member for Lalor (Mr

Barry Jones) and give him the details on that matter.
I refer to biotechnology. The Government has taken a very positive stance on biotechnology. In November last year a major seminar was held in Sydney which was funded jointly by my Department, industry and the Bank of New South Wales. People from all over the world attended-leading experts, people from industry and people from academia-and it has had a very great spin-off. A number of other seminars have been held since. One was held in Brisbane earlier this year. One is about to be held in Sydney. I think one was held in Melbourne last year. As a result of these seminars a number of new industries have been developed by Australian innovators. People have taken risks in this very important field and a number of new companies have been formed.
I will not take up any more of the Committee's time. I thank the Committee for this debate. I can assure honourable members that 1 will continue to be concerned with the future of science and technology and that 1 will do my best to make sure that the financial priorities are met as far as possible.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (9.31)-1 just want to make a short contribution to this debate-
Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Proposed expenditure agreed to.
Department of Social Security
Proposed expenditure, $613,361,000.
Department of Health
Proposed expenditure, $491,792,000.
Department of Veterans' Affairs
Proposed expenditure, $596,536,000.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (9.32)-1 do not intend tonight to speak on the substantive issues raised by the estimates. 1 intend to take that line because I, with many others in this place, share the extremely critical view of the way the Estimates committees have been arranged this year. It is, of course, easier for shadow Ministers to do this because we get plenty of opportunities to speak on the issues related to our shadow portfolio responsibilities. However, 1 hope that in what I say tonight I speak for at least most of the back benchers in this chamber. First of all, I want to protest quite clearly about what has been substituted for the Estimates committees which have operated for the past three years. Whatever the flaws and whatever the inadequacies of those committees-we would all recognise ways in which they could be improved-they could not be

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2431

worse than the farce that has been perpetrated here this week in the way the Estimates have been dealt with. We have had to deal with 13 departments in five hours. Ministers have sometimes been present-I will give them that-but on the whole they have contributed very little, far less than Ministers do at Estimates committee hearings. There has scarcely ever been a quorum present in the chamber. In fact, I think it is true to say that while the Estimates have been debated, the numbers in the House have usually been less than what is required for a smaller single Estimates committee.
The farce that we have here is the result of the actions of the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen), actions which he said arose 'from a profound respect, admiration and love for this place'. I think this place could do with a little less of that respect, admiration and love if this week's superficial gallop through the Estimates is the result of that affection. Mr Deputy Chairman, I think you would very much agree with that. What this profound respect, admiration and love for this place has done is to deprive the House of one of the few small changes designed to keep it up with the information revolution of the twentieth century.
For the past three years we have had a set of small Estimates committees which at their best could probe the appropriations of the Government, which went a small way to breaching the insulation of the Executive from the Parliament by opening up Ministers and civil servants to sustained questioning. Indeed, it was the only forum avaiable in this Parliament for sustained and consecutive questioning of a Minister. Surely such respect, admiration and love that the Leader of the House has must be misplaced if it has the consequences of ending these Estimates committees.
When he defended the action that he has taken, the Minister did confess that his was a very old fashioned view. It is certainly a very old fashioned view. It is an antidilvian view because the Minister seems unable to realise that this Parliament can no longer be the cosy debating club for gentlemen that seems to be his ideal. He seems unable to comprehend the dramatic changes that have taken place in Australian society which impel change in the way we organise this Parliament. Societal change compels parliamentary change. If we do not do it, this Parliament will simply become increasingly ineffective and increasingly irrelevant. As my colleague the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) and the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) have pointed out, there has been an enormous spread of functions of the Parliament in the twentieth century-in particular, a spread of

functions since the Second World War-which requires, if it is to be satisfactorily supervised, a subdivision of labour and hence a development of the committee system generally and in this case Estimates committees. In addition, those functions have been increasingly more dense because of the proliferation of information that this Parliament has to deal with. This forum, this kind of committee, gives no opportunity to probe in depth for that information.
Secondly, the Minister claims to be a great supporter of the authority of this House.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Order! I remind the honourable member for Bonython that we are dealing with the estimates of the Department of Social Security, the Department of Health and the Department of Veterans' Affairs. I think that his remarks should be related to those estimates. He would assist the Chair if he related his remarks to the estimates of those departments.
Dr BLEWETT-In previous years we have always been permitted in the debate on the estimates to discuss the operation of the committee system which we have used. I and others have done-
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! That discussion takes place in the context of the estimates which are before the Committee. I am directing that to the attention of the honourable member for Bonython. I am sure that he is of sufficient wit to be able to accommodate the usual practice of the Committee.
Dr BLEWETT-If I am required to do it in that way, which seems to me peculiarily artificial, I will do so. I point out that when we are dealing with the estimates of the Department of Social Security we are dealing with one of the most significant Budget items that the Parliament has to deal with. We hear year after year from the Government that one of its great problems is how to contain the massive Budget that we are now discussing. Therefore, it seems to me that if we have this massive Budget we need an effective authority in this House to probe the details of social security. When the Minister says that he is a great supporter of the authority of the House it seems a fairly hollow claim when he has denied the House any effective way of dealing with the social security estimates. If the Minister is concerned for the authority of the House, he should bear in mind that what he is doing with these procedures is deliberately undermining the authority that the House can exercise over the Social Securityestimates.

2432 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

What is happening is that the other chamber is dealing with the social security estimates and health estimates in a much more effective way than we are. The Senate is usurping one of the most distinctive roles of the House of Representatives. It has a very thorough questioning of the officials from the Department of Social Security. It went on for a considerable period during which the Senate exercised a real authority in relation to
the estimates before it. We have been denied that kind of opportunity to deal with the social security estimates. We have not been able to review and scrutinise the details of those estimates in the way that the Senate has been able to. The Senate was able to probe in detail a whole series of social security changes contained in the Budget which affected the Estimates.
This debate, which I presume will last no more than an hour, gives us no chance to do the kind of probing that the Senate was able to do. Therefore, if the Minister is really concerned with the authority of the House he is, in the vital matter of finace and the vital matter of the estimates, allowing the authority of the House simply to slip away to the Senate because of the weakness of our probing and inquiring systems. We are giving away our ability to match the Senate supervision of Social Security estimates, and I give an example of that. No Press story about the Estimates has come fro{ll this House, from the rather superficial IO-minute speeches we make here partly to replace the speeches we missed out on making on the Budget. All of the Estimates stories come from the Senate Estimates committees. If we want to increase the authority of this House, if we want to get it noticed, if we want to have effective reporting on what we do in the field of social security, then we need to have a better system of probing Social Security estimates than making a series of mostly unrelated speeches for a period of an hour.
Sir James Killen-I invite my honourable friend to reflect: Does he question Ministers or is his anxiety to question civil servants?
Dr BLEWETT-With your permission, Mr Deputy Chairman, I will now come briefly to the point the Minister has raised. I know the Minister believes that ministerial responsibility is endangered by Estimates committees. Too often ministerial responsibility is a platitude to justify any denial of information, any innovation or departure in political practice; although when this Government comes really to applying ministerial responsibility that seems to be an extraordinarily elusive concept. I know the Minister really dislikes back benchers asking public servants questions and dislikes even more public servants answering those questions. It seems to me that if

the Minister is able clearly to distinguish between policy and information questions, is clearly able to exercise his own authority in the committee, then it is possible to distinguish between questions--
Sir James Killen-Mr Deputy Chairman, may I ask for an extension of time for the honourable member?
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- The Minister cannot move an extension of time in Committee. The honourable member for Bonython could continue to speak for a further period if no other honourable member rose. Order! The honourable member's time has expired. I call the honourable member for Bonython.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (9.42)-1 will be very quick to finish this matter. What I have been pointing out is that the fact that civil servants are there and the Minister is there need pose no threat to ministerial responsibility, need in no way infringe ministerial prerogatives, where the Minister is competent and clear about the distinction between policy questions and essentially information questions and where the Minister is sufficiently quick and able to recognise the point at which the pursuit of information has clear policy implications. I think it is really a judgment the Minister must exercise. I am sure good Ministers are capable of doing it.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah) (9.43)-1 listened with interest to the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett). Like a lot of contributions from the honourable member, his speech was very interesting but totally irrelevant to the subject under debate here tonight. I wish to speak on an area of the Budget where I very firmly believe the Commonwealth is not doing enough. In fact, it is not doing anything. The area I am speaking of is that of preventive health and the lack of a national health promotion program. When I say that, I am in no way overlooking the responsibilities of the States, which do have a responsibility to undertake programs which educate the population about better health. The States, quite rightly, should undertake those programs, but I strongly believe there is still a need to provide a co-ordinated Australia-wide campaign for better health, supported by the Commonwealth, with advice and perhaps even a financial contribution from the States.
At present in Australia we have a general health status which is good by world standards but which could certainly be very much better. By world standards we rank high on measures of longevity. Our infant mortality rate is comparatively low but our population suffers from the diseases

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2433

of affluence, most of which are distinctly avoidable. The promotion of an awareness and an avoidance of lifestyle and behaviour which lead to some of these conditions and illnesses is to my mind ever more important. It is becoming clear that the high quality curative medical care provided by medical practitioners and hospitals in Australia is having less and less impact on improving our health status. In fact, if we look at the way our health services are run right throughout Australia we find that the curative side of things is of a very high standard indeed. The practitioners of medical and allied medical care in Australia, lose nothing by comparison with their overseas compatriots.
However, our present health care system is providing little more than a catchment net for the victims of ills caused by adverse environmental factors and personal behavioural risks. There is a growing recognition that many of today's health problems are related directly to the way we live our lives and are largely preventable by action at individual, family and community levels. It is for this reason that I believe the Commonwealth should be actively engaged in promoting better health. It is a sad commentary on modern society that as we become more successful at providing what are called the better things of life for our people we are in many ways and in many cases unwittingly providing them with more and more health problems.
Quite understandabiy, in the past the emphasis has been on treating illness. This is costly, and it is imperative that we all work together to change the word 'health' back to its original positive meaning with its connotations of well-being. I remember when I was first appointed Minister for Health ~omebody said to me that I really should have been called the Minister for ill-health, because that is really what we were looking after. What we were doing was treating the illnesses present in the community and doing very little to prevent their coming into existence. In saying that I remind the House that the Commonwealth took steps in 1980 to create a new awareness of better health when it launched a very successful pilot program called Help Yourself to Health, which used traditional marketing concepts to reach mass audiences. That program was further enhanced by the 'Life. Be in it.' campaign. I doubt whether many people in Australia would not have heard of the 'Life. Be in it.' campaign and the attitude and appearance of Norm.
Now, with no money being allocated to the Federal Department of Health for a health promotion program, I am concerned that hospital beds might be taken up by people whose illnesses

are largely due to personal behaviour and lifestyle patterns. The user pays principle for health care was introduced by the Commonwealth in order that the public would become more aware of the costs of the health services they use. This in turn would lead to a downturn in demand for expensive health services. Obviously the user pays principle is working. It has made States more responsible in the way they spend their health dollars and has gone a long way towards educating the public about the high cost of health services. A great deal more can be done, for in pursuing health promotion campaigns we are not only improving the nation's health but also reducing the sizeable burden of national expenditure on health. That is what health promotion is all about. It is about keeping people healthy and out of institutions.
Prevention should be our number one priority. I strongly believe that the Commonwealth must lead the way. By prevention I am talking not only about occupational health, an area where business and governments already spend a large amount of their time educating workers, but also about outside hazards such as smoking, alcohol abuse, preventable stress and the like. The link between smoking and lung cancer is well established, as is the effect of smoking on the severity of illnesses such as pneumonia and bronchitis. Yet so many Australians continue to prejudice their health by smoking. Similarly, too many people continue to disregard the accepted link between excessive alcohol consumption and diseases such as cirrhosis of the liver and alcoholism. They turn a blind eye too to the involvement of alcohol in many other deaths, such as those due to motor vehicle accidents, drownings and homicides. If we look at the influence of alcohol in so many areas of health, not only in the death syndrome but also in those debilitating illnesses and accidents which cause a great deal of disability to the individuals concerned, we will see that this particular aspect of our modern life has a massive contribution to make to the total health costs. High blood pressure is a known cause of heart attacks and strokes. People who are overweight, who get insufficient exercise and who are subject to stress are known to be more prone to developing high blood pressure and heart disease. Indeed, moderate diet and exercise are essential to good health.
I know that this is flogging a dead horse in many ways. So many of us are still failing to heed these simple health messages. That is why I say that money must be allocated to the Federal Health Department for a national health promotional program. The benefits of such a program are, I believe, extremely obvious. It need not cost much

2434 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

money for a well run program because such a program could in fact be self-supporting. Some months ago it was suggested to me that a health promotion program could be instituted along the lines of the Advance Australia campaign and that it would eventually be self-supporting and ongoing. Once an appropriate logo has been designed it would be sold to manufacturers for use on their products. It would show that a team of experts had endorsed that product as being useful for a healthy lifestyle. This is a suggestion which I believe has a lot of merit and should be considered in the near future, as quality of life is important to us all.
The maintenance of good health is essential to the quality of life. It is an element that needs support and promotion within our current social environment. We need to promote a better understanding of the close relationship between lifestyle and health and to encourage a community-wide philosophy of health advancement and personal responsibility for health. A healthy lifestyle does not require radical changes in lifestyle, but it does require positive action by the Commonwealth. I believe the Commonwealth must lead the way in providing a health promotion program that will educate members of the public not to abuse their health, thereby leaving those expensive health facilities to those who genuinely need them. So often we come up against the cost benefit argument, particularly from the Treasury: 'Can you prove that such a promotional campaign will lead to a diminution in costs in the future?' I believe that such a program, such a campaign, is a long term one whose benefits will obviously be seen in the long term. If and when it is successful all Australians will be able to say that they have a better understanding of the way in which they should lead their lives so that they can enjoy-I know this sounds a little trite-that most precious of all commodities, a healthy and happy life.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (9.53)-1 want to address my remarks to the affairs of the Department of Social Security and the Department of Veterans' affairs. In many ways the Budget presented in these two areas is to the credit of the Australian Labor Party because every reform implemented in this Budget in respect of the Departments of Social Security and Veterans' Affairs has been advocated for a very long period against the most stringent opposition from the Government, some of that opposition extending virtually from the time when the Government came to office in

1975. I speak particularly of the increased maximum permissible earnings for pensioners in all categories. I speak also, in respect of the Department of Veterans' Affairs, of the repatriation benefits extended to those involved in peacekeep-
ing forces before November 1981; of the eligibility for Service pensions for all Allied ex-merchant mariners; and of the extension to World War I
veterans and to veterans of the wars in Malaya and Vietnam of the broad eligibility criterion for disability pension applicable to World War II veterans.
All those reforms had been advocated by the Labor Party for a very considerable time over opposition from the Government not only on the grounds of the nature of the economy at the time and the impossibility of finding funds to meet these needs but also on grounds of principle. In all these instances grounds of principle for not extending those benefits have been found by Government members. Fortunately those principles have been jettisoned, at least temporarily, for the purposes for which this Budget was established. Unfortunately, however, we cannot be confident that that will continue into the future. What has not occurred in the Budget is the establishment of a decent basis of life for pensioners in this country. This Budget has not reversed a slide in the value of the pension to those in receipt of it from about 24 per cent of average weekly earnings when we were in power to a little below 22 per cent now. That slide continues. Also we cannot look forward with any confidence to the value of the adjustments in the maximum permissible earnings before amounts are deducted from the pension being maintained in the years to come. Certainly no principle in that regard has been announced by the Government in the various statements on social security questions in this Budget.
What can be expected if this Government is returned is that the value of that concession will be permitted to decline in the way in which it has been permitted to decline from 1975 to this point. The purposes served by having this earning capacity granted to pensioners will be largely dissipated because they will have no confidence that it will be retained. Many of the sorts of problems pointed to by honourable members opposite in particular-not on this side of the chamber-of people not declaring their incomes in order to retain their pensions or to avoid paying tax will continue if that confidence is not developed. For example, under this Budget the maximum permissible earnings of a single mother with two children before she starts to lose money from her pension have effectively gone to $42 a week. That is no encouragement at all. Had those maximum

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2435

permissible earnings the value that they had in 1975, that single parent could earn upwards of $80 a week and could get into the areas of part-time work, whose value is funy declared to the Department of Social Security and the Australian Taxation Office, which could be reasonably pursued. This would be to the very great benefit of the Australian taxpayer in that a person gaining that sort of working experince would be placed in a position of being likely to be employable once more.
That has not been advanced in this Budget because this Budget has quite clearly been presented as a one-off Budget. It is a Budget whose benefits cannot be expected to extend beyond 12 months, as some honourable members opposite would argue, or beyond a few months, as we on this side would argue. There can certainly be among people in these categories no confidence of their capabilities in this regard being improved in the future. I think it is time we got away from these marginal arguments about improving in a piecemeal fashion the position of people on pensions in an categories and started a more comprehensive approach to an aspects of social security funding. We are moving in that direction-very slowly-in respect of retirement benefits, but not in other areas. If we started to move into contributory benefit schemes we would stop being involved in the archaic debates which we often have in this chamber as to whether there are 'deserving poor'. That is demeaning. We would move more effectively into discussing questions of equity and rights and into examining whether retirement benefits and other pension adequately supported the lives of people in receipt of them. In the few minutes left to me I want to raise another item in respect of the Department of Veterans' Affairs which has been raised previously on this side of the chamber. It relates to Vietnam veterans. One thing that has not happened, despite the fact that the Government has moved closer to the Labor Party in a number of areas of veterans' benefits and implemented them-
Consideration interrupted.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr Jenkins)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I shan report progress.
Progress reported.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Sir James Killen-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require the question to be put forthwith without debate.

Question resolved in the negative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Mr BEAZLEY-Before the putting of the question for the adjournment I was discussing the situation of Vietnam veterans and their request for a judicial inquiry into the impact on their lives of herbicidal spraying of which they were unwitting victims during the period of their service in Vietnam. We on this side of the chamber simply cannot understand why the Government has not been prepared to enter into a judicial inquiry on this matter when it has been prepared to set up royal commissions on such a vast variety of other less important matters with gay abandon. I would have thought that honourable members on the other side of the chamber particularly would have felt a very considerable moral obligation to do what has been requested of them by the Vietnam veterans in this regard. In fact, they have done nothing about it. They have fudged it; they have resisted at every point at which an inquiry has been adopted. They now in their statements on this matter, when anyone seeks to raise the question, refer to the fact that a Senate inquiry is proceeding into the matter. They know very wen that that Senate inquiry was started by us on this side of the chamber. We attempted to get at least something going, when it was within our powers at least to assist in getting something going. They resisted those Senate moves. They have been resisting the Senate inquiry effectively ever since, but have been using it, quite inegitimately, to lay aside the requirement for judicial investigation.
I think that the failure of the Government to act on that matter is very much to be deprecated. Even if there were no evidence to support the requirement for an inquiry-and the evidence in favour of an inquiry is massive-one would think that the fact that a very large number of servicemen who served in Vietnam believe that it is necessary would be enough to get members of this Government, given that it is composed of t~e parties that sent people to Vietnam, off their backsides and into action. At the very least we would expect that of the Government. We have seen absolutely nothing in that regard. There has just been delay and resentful and tardy compliance with the inquiries of that Senate Committee and that was set up over the stringent opposition of honourable members opposite. We on this side of the chamber find ourselves completely unable to embarrass the Government into performing what ought to be a bare minimum requirement for the-

2436 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Mr Leo McLeay-They have no conscience.
Mr BEAZLEY-No, none at all. We are not to be surprised about that. But honourable members opposite have a fairly keen sense of embarrassment in a number of areas. We just wish that that sense of embarrassment would be extended to this area as well. Even the counselling services, the provision of which is the bare minimum that has been done for the Vietnam veterans who 'believe themselves to have a grievance in this regard, have been a product of a very long period of agitation and resentful implementation. It is operating now and I welcome that fact, but I do not give any credit to the Government for it. Now the Government, having given way on that point, ought to bend with the wind on this point as well. As I said, it is the bare minimum that it could do for the veterans.
I am very sorry to see that one of those veterans is standing out in this chamber against the positions that have been adopted by many of his colleagues on this matter. He is a lone voice on this question. The other Vietnam veterans who come to see me are quite emphatic that an inquiry is what they require. It is very disappointing that he and the Government have taken that position.
Mr White-Mr Chairman, I raise a point of order. I wish to make a short personal explanation. We are hearing--
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- The honourable member---
Mr WhiteThe point of order is--
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! I imagine that the honourable member wishes to claim that he has been misrepresented.
Mr White-The point is, Mr Deputy Chairman--
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. If he cannot claim that he has been personally misrepresented, he is out of order.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (10.6)-The honourable member for McPherson (Mr White) was not only a brave soldier but also a Military Cross winner. I think the attack on him tonight was quite unfounded and unnecessary, particularly in a debate such as this one. He was one of the best soldiers ever to leave Australia and he is a very fine man. I am surprised that the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley), who is not a bad sort of member, should launch an attack such as that, quite unnecessarily, when the honourable member for McPherson has never had an opportunity to express his opinion on the matter. I think the attack was quite unnecessary. Anyway, I return to the purpose of the estimates.

Mr Uren-I'll say something about the 2/40 battalion.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The honourable member for Reid will not interject.
Mr GOODLUCK-Mr Deputy Chairman would you keep that gentleman at the table quiet? I cannot concentrate with him making a noise.
Mr Uren-I've got connections with the 2/40 battalion.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-There is no point of order.
Mr GOODLUCK-I support the social security aspects of this Government's Budget. I believe that the Department of Social Security has grave problems. My colleague on the other side of the chamber made an interesting point. He said that we should stop the arguing, get down to earth and realise the problems within the Social Security area. The Department has grave problems. Care of the sick and the aged and the welfare of the many who are needy in our community is becoming a difficult and complex task. One could argue the political point that during the period of high inflation people on fixed incomes were affected. The backlash on those people caused difficulties. They found it very difficult to get support. Admittedly, now that inflation is decreasing we still have a difficult situation with the unfortunate aspect of high unemployment. Regrettably, when people cannot get jobs the social implications flow right back into the family and many people are affected. A fair bit of lip service is paid to this matter by the Opposition. It makes certain propositions but it never seems to'come up with anything constructive. It knocks, knocks, knocks. I have listened on many occasions-
Dr BlewettYou accepted all our suggestions; everyone of them.
Mr GOODLUCK-Oh, it is very easy for you to utter platitudes. You have said that several times.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member--
Mr GOODLUCK-Sorry. He left Tasmania. He could not stand it in Tasmania. He got out of it and came back over here.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member will address his remarks to the Chair and not to the audience in general.
Mr GOODLUCK-Certainly. I think that it is the earnest desire of the Government to assist these people. Of course it finds it very difficult, and any government would find it difficult, to care

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2437

specifically for everybody. We cannot as a government make rules for the family. We cannot stop broken marriges and we cannot stop all the other things that are occurring in our community. It is difficult to allot money to stop those sorts of things. I read in the Daily Telegraph today that one family in four is heading for a breakup. I am not being critical of any marriage breakup but it has implications for the family. It is extremely difficult for any government to care for the children of broken marriages and for the problems that arise as a result of them. I just use that as an example. The situation is extremely complex and we should all start working together to overcome it. Money cannot overcome it and government decisions cannot overcome it. People are looking to us for a little guidance and I think it is about time we got down and started to work together. I was talking to a group of people tonight who asked me: 'Do you ever talk together? Do you ever have a discussion and try to help each other in these days of need?' I said: 'No, we usually work in reverse'. As a matter of fact, I said to one of my friends that it is like playing a game of football; if you can kick and win you do. That is one of the problems we face today.
Mr Leo McLeay-That is how you blokes play the game.
Mr GOODLUCK-The honourable member is just as much to blame as I possibly am.
Mr Groom-Fraser is the king.
Mr GOODLUCK-Right. The way we work is one of the problems we have. I think we need to start working together. A very important part of the Budget which is sometimes forgotten concerns disabled p~ople. The Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill reflects the special needs of disabled people in several ways. Apart from the increases in general income limits for pensioners and income limits for pensioner health benefits referred to previously by the Minister, it introduces a series of measures that will be of special assistance to disabled people who are in the work force or who want to be in the work force.
Clause 90 of the Bill adds a new Part to the Social Security Act establishing a mobility allowance of $10 a week for severely handicapped people who are in employment or are undertaking vocational training. The honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) will remember that the Road Safety Council, looking into the needs of the disabled, found that probably the most important thing in the lives of the disabled was moving from point A to point B. It is sometimes forgotten that the motor car becomes a very important part of their lifestyles if they are to get from point A to

point B. The assistance given by the Government is a move in the right direction. It may not be the be all and end all but at least it is a try. This decision is not talked about very much in this Parliament but it means a lot to the disabled and I think that we all should be more aware of it. Actually, someone said to me and to the honourable member for Braddon that being able to go somewhere by motor car was probably the most important thing in life. Imagine not being able to go from point A to point B. We talk about it, we read about it and we sympathise, but unfortunately we forget it very quickly. It is good, practical help. I think the Government should be congratulated. The Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) is a very good young Minister. I think he has an appreciation of all the problems of the aged, the sick and all the other recipients of benefits in Australia today. I think some members of the Opposition would agree with me.
Mr Leo McLeay-Who is he?
Mr GOODLUCK-Senator Chaney, of course.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The honourable member will address his remarks to the Chair.
Mr GOODLUCK~Senator Chaney is a very good Minister and has a good understanding of the massive problem. There is a lot of talk about taxation and recoupment of money wrongfully withheld. I hope, and I am sure that you, Mr Deputy Chairman, agree with me, that people who are abusing the system are caught up with because they are taking money from the people who need it. We can talk about this matter until we are black and blue in the face but a lot of money is being misdirected. If we had that money it could be directed to the needy in our community in order to help them. I think everybody would agree with that proposition.
I was going to ask a question today-I will ask the question of myself and probably I will get a good answer-as follows: Would the Minister be able to detail any evidence of abuse of sQcial security payments in the many areas of government today? In fact this abuse is widespread. Can the Minister give an estimate of the revenue lost as a result of any known abuse? If any abuse could be eliminated, would it mean that more assistance could be directed to those in need? We have a sloppy social security system. I would like to think-people will disagree with me-that we could introduce a social security identification card to every social welfare recipient in Australia. Honourable members on the other side of the chamber talk about tax evasion but they do not

2438 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

say very much about the people who abuse the system to the detriment of the people who really need the money. It hurts me when somebody is getting three or four payments when in fact somebody down the road is battling and is practically starving.
So we, the Government and the Opposition, should support this move. If the Opposition is so keen about tax evasion-and I agree with it-we should start to make certain that the people who are receiving benefits are the deserving, needy ones, the ones who really need it because of the reasons I mentioned-the breakdown of the family, sickness and other matters. They are the ones we should look after, and in pursuing that aim we should go hell for leather.

problems we find a disturbing gap. Most serious
housing problems are ignored. The few piecemeal programs that have been funded shift the distri-
bution of housing assistance to the more regressive areas. Housing has been put on the bottom of the
list of this Government's priorities. In fact, the
abolition of the former Department of Housing and Construction in May this year signalled that
housing had been thrown off the list. Housing is
now hidden in the Department of Social Security and the Department of Industry and Commerce.
Some honourable members in this chamber do not
even know that the social security portfolio covers the housing sector. The result of the abolition of
the Department of Housing and Construction is a
fragmentation of housing policy at this critical
time and is nothing short of a national scandal.

Mr UREN (Reid) (10.16)-1 did not intend to spend any time answering the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) but his remarks were so miserable that I have to say something. He worries about pensioners and the money that has been diverted from them, but he forgets about the $1O,OOOm that has been stolen by the people he represents-the ruling elite of this country. That is the sad situation. He praised the Minister for Social Security in another place, Senator Chaney, but we all know that the Liberal Party, particuiarly in the hungry State of Western Australia, and particularly that wealthy elite that runs that State, certainly rejected moves that would have brought Senator Chaney into the House of Representatives.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The honourable member should get back to the Budget Estimates.
Mr UREN-Mr Deputy Chairman, time is short and I want to confine my remarks to the housing aspect of the Social Security portfolio. Next to unemployment, housing is the most serious social problem in this country. Not since the Second World War has the housing industry been so confined or so damaged, its capacity so eroded and its activities so stagnant. Not since the 1940s has there been such tightness in the private rental market. Not since the 1930s Depression has Australia had such a high incidence of homelessness. Never before has public housing been so restricted. Never before have housing interest rates been so high. Never before has a national government shown so little regard for the social and economic importance of housing.
When we weigh the contribution of the 1982 Budget against the range and depth of housing

There is already a huge backlog in neglected housing needs. In addition we need to build about 160,000 new homes each year, at least until the end of the decade, to cope with the household formation resulting from natural population growth and immigration. The recent report of the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry estimates that only 118,000 new houses will be commenced in 1983. That level of activity will mean a shortfall of 42,000 below the requirement of one year alone. Already, three years into the decade of the 1980s, we are 85,000 dwellings below requirement. If this trend is allowed to continue we will be 380,000 dwellings short by the end of the decade, and that figure relates only to emerging needs. We still have to catch up with the backlog of the Government's neglect over the past six years. Any sensible person would think that the Government, facing economically hard times, would do its utmost to stimulate a high level of housing activity.
Housing provides the widest and fastest flow-on effects throughout the economy. Every $100 spent on housing requires an input to the value of $240 in other sectors. Every $1 OOm spent on housing provides an additional 5,000 jobs directly and indirectly. In the 1982-83 Budget a total of $333m was advanced to the Northern Territory and the States for public housing. After repayment of principal, the net advance was $290m. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard three tables which show the real net Federal payments to the States for housing from 1974-75 to 1982-83.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2439

1974-75 975

Table 1 COMMONWEALTH NET ADVANCES FOR HOUSING IN STATES AND TERRITORIES
(1982-83 Prices, $m)

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1981-82

935

835

674

460

330

299

237

1982-83 290

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania
Six States

Table 2 NET FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO THE STATES FOR HOUSING 1982-83
($m)

Federal payments Grants

Loans

State repayments

Principal

Interest

Net Federal payments

59.9

46.0

13.8

59.4

32.7

40.1

36.3

11.6

46.7

18.1

26.0

15.1

3.7

16.0

21.4

23.1

19.8

5.4

26.5

11.0

21.1

12.9

3.6

15.5

14.9

9.3

8.4

1.9

10.5

5.3

179.5

138.7

40.0

174.6

103.6

Table 3 REAL NET FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO THE STATES FOR HOUSING, 1974-75 AND 1982-83
($m in 1982-83 Prices)

Six

N.S.W.

Vic.

Qld

S.A.

WA.

Tas.

States

1974-75 1982-83

201.4

159.5

81.2

95.4

66.6

47.8

652.0

32.7

18.1

21.4

11.0

14.9

5.3

103.6

Source: Budget Paper No.7, tables 88 and 92-98, 1982-83 Budget and tables 35 and 105-11, 1978-79 Budget.

Mr UREN-I thank the House. The first table shows that the $290m advanced in 1982-83 compares with $975m advanced in 1974-75. In today's prices, the funds for housing in 1982-83 are $685m short of the 1974-75 spending. The cumulative real reduction in public housing funds over the last eight Budgets is a staggering $3,740m. If the funding had been held steady at the 1974-75 level, we would have been able to build an extra 75,000 public dwellings. We would not now be looking at 100,000 families on the waiting lists of State housing authorities. We would not now be looking at such massive unemployment in this country or at so much homelessness in our society. The second table shows the net Federal payments to the States for housing in 1982-83 after the States have repaid the principal and interest commitments for that year. We find that the six States have a total or a mere $1 04m. That third table shows that the $104m in 1982-83 compares with $652m in 1974-75. The States are now receiving less than one-sixth of the amount that they received eight years ago.

Let me make some further comparisons. The $104m spent on public housing in the States compares with $147m allocated in this Budget for the deposit assistance scheme and a further $415m estimated in revenue foregone through home loan interest rebates. About one-third of the population-those who are currently paying off home loans-are handed out $562m in a single year. That is over five times the amount of funds spent on public housing. What happened to the quarter of the population who rent their homes in the private rental market? The Government has allocated a mere $20m to be shared between these people and those who are having trouble keeping up their mortgage repayments. On the grounds of horizontal equity, this distribution of housing assistance is scandalous. On the grounds of vertical equity-a concern for the needy groups in our community-this Government's distribution is obscene. Rental vacancy rates are now the lowest on record-on average between one per cent and 2 per cent in the different capital cities. Again, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table prepared by the Real Estate Institute of Australia which sets out the respective rental vacancies in

2440 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
MOVING ANNUAL RENTAL VACANCY RATES IN CAPITAL CITIES
<%)

1980-81

1981-&2

Sydney Melbourne Brisbane Adelaide Perth

2.5

1.9

1.5

1.1

1.8

0.8

2.0

1.2

4.8

2.7

Source: Real Estate Institute of Australia, Annual Review of the Residental Property Market 198 I-82.
Mr UREN--I thank the House. The cutbacks in public housing and the reduced opportunities for home ownership are putting increasing pressures on the private rental market. Tenants are facing rental increases and many are facing eviction. We are heading back to the insecurity of the 1920s and 1930s. If comprehensive action is not taken now we will be faced with social chaos. We need a program of housing action co-ordinated at the national level. As the Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace noted recently:
There is no national housing policy upon which all governments agree.
There is no mechanism for achieving consensus about housing policy objectives. There is no Federal department of housing. This is the deplorable situation. No Federal Government department is responsible for housing. That is the low priority that housing has. That is why the Department of Social Security now controls the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement. As I pointed out earlier, since 1974-75 the Government has cut back some $3,740m. That represents one of the great transfers of wealth away from the great bulk of people to the wealthy sector. This is what this Government does. It worries about the very wealthy. There are so many people wanting a home that it is an impossible dream for about nine out of 10 people. That is why the situation will grow more difficult.
Mr ADERMANN (Fisher) (lO.26)-Because of the time constraints, I will confine my remarks to the estimates of one Department, the Department of Veterans' Affairs. Tonight the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) raised the matter of a judicial inquiry. I know that the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) has also raised the matter many times. I do not take the position of an antagonist in this matter because I believe that both honourable

members were very sincere in what they were saying. I wrestled with this problem for a long time. I spoke many times with members of the Vietnam Veterans' Action Association. I believe that we had a good relationship, that we trusted each other. But I have a point of view that I think ought to be put. I am happy to say that some good things have happened to the Vietnam veterans. The counselling service is working. I am glad to see that there has been an extension of medical treatment not only to veterans but also to their families in certain circumstances. I am glad to see that fast lane operating on urgent occasions. All those things are good.
The problem that I have with the judicial inquiry is simply this: If it is a question of compensation, let us pay whatever compensation is necessary with the minimum of delay and debate and the minimum of time going through tribunals. I can accept that. But the matter that has worried me very greatly is that many of these veterans have come to me and have said: 'I was in Vietnam. I believe I was exposed to agent orange. I feel perfectly well but, Minister, will you tell me what is likely to happen to me in the future? Am I likely to develop cancer? What is my future likely to be? I would like to father children. I have been reading all sorts of things. Will I be able to father children without worry?'
A judicial inquiry can answer some things but I believe that we have to pursue a scientific mortality study to try to find the medical and scientific answers for those people. It is more than a question of compensation and favourable treatment. I do not believe that we should rely on any American study or any other study to find out those medical and scientific answers. I believe that the course that is followed ought to be pursued very seriously and urge:1tly because those people must have their minds put at rest. Although I accept the sincerity of the point of view that has been put forward concerning a judicial inquiry, I believe that such an inquiry will not give us these answers. I say that kindly, recognising the strength of the arguments that have been put.
In speaking to the estimates of the Department of Veterans' Affairs I do want to say that this is a good Budget for veterans. I am pleased to see that the Government has extended Service pensions to a wider range of former allied mariners. The merchant mariners have waited a long time for the Service pension. I am glad to see that extension and the restitution of the 100 per cent rate of disability allowance to service men and women suffering from tuberculosis. They fought for that. They fought for that responsibly because they had to adapt their lifestyles to a certain situation.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2441

They will be pleased about that. I am pleased that the disability pension is now going to be totally disregarded in any income test for service pensions and fringe benefits. That is an acceptance of a very important principle. A disability pension is compensation, and I am glad to see that it is no longer taken into account in the income test. I am glad to see the extension of free repatriation hospital treatment to a further group of World War II veterans, that is, those who have a disability of 50 per cent or more. I hope we can work towards the goal of full, free repatriation treatment for all World War II veterans as quickly as possible. That treatment is now available to World War I veterans. We should be working towards that goal of extending full treatment as we are able, to World War II veterans. They are getting older, their disabilities are catching up with them, and their lives are not so easy. Surely that is a goal we ought to seek to attain. Perhaps from there we could extend it to later conflicts. What was done with World War I veterans is well on the way with World War II veterans. If we could go further in the future and extend that benefit to all people who have served their country so bravely and so well, I for one would be very pleased. Some of the other benefits, such as the upgrading of funeral benefits and those for the particularly seriously disabled, have been increased again, and I am pleased about that. If indexation is not brought in, that annual adjustment to take care of inflationary trends has to continue.
I should like to raise a couple of points in talking to these estimates. As has been previously mentioned by other speakers on both sides of the House, the "long delays in the appeals procedures are the cause of very much heartbreak. The appeals system, through the Repatriation Board, the Repatriation Commission and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, and if necessary in certain circumstances the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and the Federal Court, is a very good one and a very fair one. However, if an appeal has to be taken to more than one level it does not take weeks or months; it takes years. I know that that causes considerable problems. It is far too long. I am not on my own in my concern; I know many members have similar cases and they have spoken to me about them. I refer to cases such as the particularly sad one I struck recently of veterans struggling to get disability accepted who died before they ever got even half-way through the system. Another veteran had been to the Board, to the Commission, the Tribunal not once but twice or three times because the matter was adjourned.

Finally, his case, which was very just, was accepted and he was given a totally and permanent incapacity pension. I rang his home to tell him the good news and I found that he had died the previous day. I cannot, I admit, give a full answer as to what can be done. I do know that, as a top priority, we have got to do something about reducing these very long delays because our veterans are getting older. The battle is long and the trauma is
great.
Another matter of concern is the manner in which pensions are paid. Veterans have asked for a long time to be put on a par with social security recipients. Why can they not get their pensions paid fortnightly in advance to their bank accounts? This is a hardy perennial, I know. The answer that has been given is that thjs would be very costly to institute. First up it would, but surely there is discrimination here. Surely at some time in the future, and I hope soon, we will front up to that cost and will be able to give the veterans that facility? The other answer that was
often given to me was that the computers would not handle it. In these estimates and in the estimates for last year I am pleased to see that computerisation has been very much improved in the Department. It is well advanced now, and I hope that with computerisation at least one reason has been put aside and we might be able to work towards getting this facility for our veterans.
Another matter that has been raised is the wonderful work that is done by welfare officers and those people who help their mates as advocates. That is voluntary work; it is wonderful work. They are angels of mercy, but they do it in an honorary capacity. When they appear as advocates they often have to travel some distance to the nearest city to appear for their mates and help them. Their mates appreciate the fact that there is somebody there whom they know and can trust. They feel that they cannot put their own cases. This is a pretty important facility. The problem is that many advocates say they can no longer do it because they have to bear the costs of travel and the cost of a meal while they are there and therefore they are dropping out. I hope that we can have a look at the principle of helping these advocates with some of the costs. They are doing a tremendous job, an honorary job, and a job that I would not like to see the Government have to pick up.
I should like to make one final point. I do not wish to be unduly critical of members of the tribunals. They do a good job, and the President, Mr Mahony, is doing tremendously good duty. The informality of those hearings is very important, but we will still hear from some veterans that

2442 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

appearing before some tribunals is an ordeal. They complain that it is like a court of law, an inquisition. They are regarded as being people who put up a facade to get something to which they are not entitled. They feel they have to prove their case, and the onus of proof clause is not working. I compliment the members of busy tribunals. I am not being critical in this. Their work is hard, tiring and onerous. At the end of a long session they get tired, but I want them to remember that veterans too are tired, aged, sick and frustrated from years of pleading their cause. I ask tribunal members to remember especially that the veteran often feels that he cannot adequately express his feelings and a court of law atmosphere makes it very difficult for him. There is stress and trauma, and I see this as a real ordeal for many veterans. If the tribunals would make sure that there was a human face there, this is a good system-it is the best in the world-I believe they would retain the confidence and the encouragement of the veteran.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan)-Mr Deputy Chairman, I claim to have been misrepresented.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Does the honourable member wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr BEAZLEY-I do. The honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) in the course of his remarks suggested that I had reflected upon the war record of the honourable member for McPherson (Mr White). I do not believe the remark I made could be construed in that way in any way at all. I know the war record of the honourable member for McPherson. It is an honourable and a brave one. I would not wish in this House in any shape or form to reflect upon it. I did not do so and I will not permit that misrepresentation to stand.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (10.38)-The estimates before us for the Department of Social Security show an allocation of $70.04m for expenditure on child care services, an increase of $22.7m on last year's expenditure. As well, the States and the Northern Territory will receive a block grant of $33.09m as the Federal Government's contribution to pre-school education under the Children's Services Program. This is the same level of funding as provided for pre-schools last year. In the Budget Papers, in a tone of selfcongratulation, the Government declared its intentions for children's services in 1982-83 to be the maintenance of a healthy child care sector in Australia to which people of modest incomes and high social needs have access.
The substantial increase in the Budget allocation for the Children's Services Program is an

effective response by the Government to those people who have mistakenly questioned the Commonwealth's commitment to the provision of day care services for children. However, when the budgetary allocation for 1982-83 is put into perspective against allocations in recent years, it provides scant reassurance about the future of a healthy child care sector or adequate provision of day care services for children. The ministerial statements about children's services confirm my concern about the impact this Government's child care policies is having on the community. Child care is now another under-financed welfare service and it is not the integrated program providing child care and family support that it was intended to be. The expectation that child care would be a broadly based, directly funded program was encouraged by the introduction of the Child Care Act in 1972 by the McMahon Government. That Government recognised that Commonwealth financial assistance was necessary to provide a comprehensive Australia-wide child care service. That Government acknowledged that the full cost of reasonable quality care could not be paid for by most parents and proposed that fees in federally funded centres should be around the level currently being paid in the community. The then Minister for Labour and National Service, the right honourable member for Flinders (Sir Phillip Lynch), stated:
For those fees, however, children will enjoy in Government assisted centres, a quality of care superior to that otherwise available because of the nature of the facilities and the qualified staff provided.
The McMahon Government explicitly recognised that subsidies would have to be provided to enable families to make use of child care services. It was not just a question of access for people with modest incomes and high social needs. The Government expected a broad range of families to have access to the services provided. Building on that foundation in September 1974 the Federal Australian Labor Party Government committed itself to the provision of a universal children's services program. In a major policy statement the then Special Minister of State, the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen), said that all children in Australia would have access to services designed to take care of their physical, social and recreational needs. Central to that policy was the view that services should be flexible, community-based and integrated. No rigid distinction was to be made between educating children and caring for them, as is the case with this present Government's policy of providing a block grant to the States for pre-schools and direct funding to specified groups for child care.

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2443

It was after the election of the Liberal-Country Party Government in 1975 that Labor's goal, and indeed the McMahon Government's goal, of establishing and developing a network of child care services was frustrated. Fundamental changes were swiftly made to the Children's Services Program. During the 1975 election campaign the Liberal Party had promised to protect all welfare services against inflation. In February 1976 the allocation to children's services was reduced by $9m. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced also that his Government would not proceed with the Children's Services Commission although the Bill to establish it had been passed by the Parliament and indeed had received royal assent on 11 June 1975. The program was to be administered by the Office of Child Care within the administrative structures of the Department of Social Security-where it languishes even today. This was a radical change of emphasis for the Children's Services Program. The ALP Government's policy had committed it to the goal of providing flexible, locally-based services for children and their families. The concern of the right honourable member for Flinders for reasonable quality child care to be provided for Australian families, which he expressed when introducing the Child Care Bill in 1972, is now seen as a forlorn hope sabotaged by neglect during six years of the Fraser Government. The Liberal Country Party Government in 1976 categorised the provision of child care services as a welfare responsibility and began to restrict it to the needy.
A central feature of this Government's child care policy has been its stated intention to direct services to those children whom it classifies as being in need. Indeed, $6.86m has been specifically earmarked for this purpose in the estimates before us tonight. Under the ALP Government and the Liberal-Country Party Government in 1972 children in need were given priority of access to government-sponsored services. However, it was done without the stigma of being labelled as being needy, mainly because priority of access was given within the context of a policy of providing a comprehensive range of child care services for all children in this society. The underlying attitude of this Government seems to be that a normally functioning family will either not require child care services or will be able to purchase them in the market place. I believe that this attitude cannot be supported by the available evidence. There is considerable material available to the Government to show that virtually all families need and want access to some form of child care, that it is not merely a peculiarity of the needy.

Children currently receiving access priority under the Children's Services Program are categorised as: Children from low income families, children from single parent families, children from families with both parents working, migrant children, children with sick or incapacitated parents, Aboriginal children, handicapped children and children at risk of maltreatment. Common sense would seem to say that these categories must include the majority of children in Australia, especially when evidence shows that one-third of young children have both parents working in paid employment, that 10 per cent of young children are from single parent families, and that a large and ever-increasing number of children come from low income families. It seems obvious to conclude from this that the likelihood of a family
having at least one of the specified characteristics is high.
It is difficult to obtain firm figures about children's access to federally funded children's services. However, estimates obtained recently suggest that 53,456 children in a given week, with perhaps 39,392 children being regular attenders, is the pattern of access. These estimates refer to centre-based care and family day care. Included in these figures are primary school children as well as children from 0 to school age. This means that an estimated 1.6 per cent of children between the years of 0 and 12 use government-funded children's services with an estimated 1.2 per cent being regular attenders. What this Government means, therefore, by ensuring access to services for those people of modest income and high social need is that they will be represented among the few who have access to government-funded services.
The estimated level of access to governmentsponsored services of 1.6 per cent mocks the assertion of the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) that this Budget has provided a substantial increase in the provision of services for children. Indeed, it mocks his assertion that this is a measure of this Government's commitment to the provision of day care services for children. The Family and Children's Services Agency of New South Wales estimates that during the period from 1976 to 1981 there has been a 37 per cent reduction in real terms in child care expenditure. In recent years funding for new child care services appeared to cease. In 1981, because of the lack of funds for new services, the Office of Child Care rejected between 400 and 500 submissions for new services throughout Australia. This includes 120 submissions from New South Wales. Many of these rejected submissions had been classified as having high or very high priority in terms

2444 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

of this present Government's needs criteria. The $5m for new projects this financial year provided in the estimates will pay for the capital and recurrent costs of an estimated 25 new projects only. This is a mere pittance which will scarcely make an impression on the rate of access of children to Government-funded centres.
In Sydney, for example, approximately 100,000 children under the age of five live in the western Sydney region-more than the total population under five in the whole of South Australia. Almost a quarter of all New South Wales children and a third of those with working mothers live in this region which is the most disadvantaged in New South Wales in terms of pre-school, long day care, family day care and services for children aged 0 to two. It has been estimated that to raise the level of services in this region alone to that of the inner western region, which itself is not overly endowed with services, would cost $40m. The Government has provided only $5m for the whole of Australia.
But the Government, with its propensity for free enterprise, has provided a pilot scheme for commercial centres. The announcement in this Budget of $200,000 for a pilot scheme to test the feasibility of providing a subsidy for needy children using commercial centres is seen as further evidence of the Government's desire to reduce public sector spending and divest itself of responsibility for a range of health and welfarerelated services. The proposal is not designed to increase the number of children with access to subsidised services; rather it is aimed at transferring resources from the public to the private sector. These estimates do little to assure me that the Government has a strong and continuing commitment to a range of community-based services for children and their families. That particularly progressive policy was thrown out in 1976 when this Government began to dismantle peicemeal the Children's Services Program. The Government has forgotten also that it governs for all of society, not just a particular sectional interest within it. In 1982 the goal of providing reasonable quality care to Australian children and their families no longer exists, except as a vision in the minds of those who expect better things from an elected and responsible government.
Progress reported.
NEW BUSINESS AFTER 11 P.M.
Motion (by Sir James Killen)-by leaveagreed to:
That Standing Order 103, II o'clock rule, be suspended for this sitting.

DROUGHT ASSISTANCE (PRIMARY PRODUCERS) BILL 1982
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-3
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (10.50)-The first thing I want to say regarding the estimates for the Department of Social Security is that the budgeted expenditures for 1982-83 in both the pensions and family support areas constitute a significant advancement for these recipient groups both in the new initiatives contained in the Budget and in the extension of existing services in a way which responds to many of the problems incurred by these groups. In the pensions area this Budget has responded positively to the major problems pensioners have raised with me in recent years.
Increasing the income levels determining pensioner entitlement for age and invalid pensioners by 50 per cent for single pensioners and 45 per cent for pensioner couples means two very important things. Firstly, it means that some 430,000 pensioners in Australia with private incomes above the existing free areas will receive substantially higher pensions in the near future. Secondly, it means the eradication, at least for the short term, of the problem whereby people approaching retiring age were being discouraged from making some provision for their retirement. As these limits had not been increased since 1972, pensioners with indexed private incomes such as superannuation would have found that a cost of living adjustment to his or her superannuation would have led to some reduction in the pension.
As a result, each adjustment would reduce, rather than protect, the real income of the pensioner or the pensioner couple. For the same reason, I welcome the increased income limits determining pensioner entitlement to health benefits. These measures, which are estimated to cost some $72m this year and $llOm in a full financial year, together with the initiatives to remove any tax liability from some 300,000 pensioners and low income earners this year, effectively meet the major problems which pensioners have been bringing to my attention in my electorate office in recent years.
I also want to support the proposed additional expenditure on behalf of families. The family income supplement, a new initiative involving an expenditure of some $30m in a full year, is an important and much needed support for low income

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2445

family units. The 50 per cent increase in the family allowance for the first and second child, following the same percentage increase for third and subsequent children in the last Budget, will also provide welcome support for the family unit in our society. These income support measures, together with the taxation relief provided for the typical family unit, make this latest Budget the most pro-family Budget in my memory. That is a social welfare priority and direction which has my full support.
I still maintain that in implementing a sensible national family policy we must move away from the ad hoc approach of the past so that decisions in this critical policy area-critical from both a social security and a taxation viewpoint-are administered from a sound data base involving all departments which have an impact on the welfare of the family unit and involving each level of government in each State. I will not elaborate further on this point because I have constantly raised this matter in this Parliament and did so again as recently as last week. But there is no doubt in my mind that the preparation of official family impact statements should be undertaken as soon as possible in order to ensure a co-ordinated and properly informed approach to family welfare matters.
In this Committee debate I would like to refer to a problem which was brought to my attention by a constituent. I refer to the administration of the class B widow's pension. I want to draw the attention of the Committee to the plight of a widow who, because her son found employment just two weeks prior to her 45th birthday, no longer qualifies for a widow's pension of any kind. She has now been forced into a position where, because of arthritis and a commitment to her aged dependants, she cannot find work and must submit to being certified as medically unfit for work every three months so that she can claim the sickness benefit. I find this situation unacceptable. Had the son intended to continue on to tertiary studies he would not have been aware of whether he had gained admittance to an institution of learning until December or even January and would not have commeQced his studies until February. In these circumstances his mother could have retained her entitlement to the pension for all time. In fact, had he commenced tertiary studies, left after one week and then started work-even in these circumstances-his mother would have retained her widow's pension.
For those women who remained at home to raise their family rather than enter the work force and who then lost their husband and/or provider, this is a frightening prospect, particularly in the

present unemployment situation. These women often do not have the skill or expertise to find employment at that age. They are not able to compete in the market-place for jobs and yet, by the way we administer this pension, we are basically abandoning them. We say that they are secure as long as they have children who are still studying, regardless of their age. But at precisely the age when their prospects of employment are low and their children leave school, we take away their family allowance. We also take away their widow's pension if they have not yet reached the age of 45 years. Instead, after being out of the work force for up to 20 years in order to raise a family, we ask them to find employment, collect the unemployment benefit or subject themselves to regular medical check-ups to prove that they are too sick to work.
I see this part of our system as flying in the face of the very values which have so recently been advocated by this House-the encouragement of the basic unit in our society, the family unit. How can we properly support those mothers who stay home and care for their families when we are prepared to abandon them at the very time when they most need our help-when they have lost husbands and their children are commencing to live their own lives with some relative degree of independence? I believe that every effort should be made to give some vestige of security to those who have chosen to make their career in the home. In this case a mother in unique circumstances failed by two weeks to qualify for the class B pension and has been denied the security and confidence she deserves as a result of undertaking her parental responsibilities. I believe there ought to be sufficient flexibility in the administration of these pensions to ensure that such people are properly protected. I ask the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) to examine this matter with a sense of urgency.
Solving this problem would not unduly affect the estimates, as the widow will receive some other form of income anyway-the unemployment benefit or the sickness benefit. My argument is simply that she deserves the security, confidence and recognition a widow's pension would provide. We should be able to provide an element of flexibility through an appropriate appeals process for special cases of this kind.
It appears to me that there is a degree of inconsistency in the way in which people in similar circumstances are treated by different classes of entitlement in the social security area. I urge the Minister to examine this matter and similar cases because they can be solved relatively easily and at

2446 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

(lppropriation Bill (No.1)

small cost. That would certainly assist many people.
Another example of this inconsistency was also brought to my attention earlier this year by another constituent. This Budget, incidentally, has rectified this inconsistency. My constituent was concerned at the way in which a widow is discriminated against when compared with the recipient of a supporting parent's benefit. The Social Services Act had provided that money paid throught maintenance to a deserted wife or divorcee for the support of a child should be taken into account in the assessment of entitlement to a widow's pension as the claimant's own income. It was intended that this provision should also apply when the supporting mother's benefit was introduced. But that legislation did not give effect to that intent.
Because of that anomaly-I admit that this has been rectified in the Budget-my constituent cancelled her divorce proceedings in order to benefit from the discrimination. But if this anomaly did not exist it would have been her preference to proceed with her divorce to clarify with some degree of finality her non-married status. The Government decided to amend the Social Services Act and has proceeded to do so in order that the treatment of maintenance for the children of supporting parent beneficiaries will be brought into line with that applying to widow pensioners.
This matter may not have been resolved in a way that would please supporting parents or supporting mothers. But I simply make the point that it does indicate that the Minister is prepared to remove these inconsistencies which cause a lot of concern to many people. Although I have reservations about the way in which that inconsistency was removed, I congratulate the Minister for moving in the direction of putting some degree of consistency into the social welfare system whereby people in similar circumstances are entitled to be subjected to the same criteria in receiving certain entitlements. I have brought a number of these matters to the attention of the Minister throughout the course of this year. I ask him to address his attention to them. Although they do not involve many people or a lot of money they cause a lot of concern, worry and hardship to the people directly affected.
Mr LES McMAHON (Sydney) (11.0)- Tonight I will speak on the estimates of the Department of Social Security. I wish to raise the issue of the Australian family, which is currently and has been for some years under attack. Since

1973 marriages and births have been on the decrease while divorces have rapidly increased. During the period from 1973 to 1979 the number of marriages entered into in Australia decreased by over 8,000; during the same period the number of divorces more than doubled. It is a fact that Australians are not marrying and having children as past generations have done. The greatest proportion of families in Australia today have only two children.
Whilst we are experiencing this dramatic decline in marriages and a rapid escalation in divorces, we are witnessing an increase in the number of children born outside marriage. In 1974 just over 9-!- per cent of children born in Australia were born outside of marriage. In 1979 the figure had increased to just over II -!- per cent, which represents an increase of 2,703 in six years. In 1982 it is not decreasing. Do not misconstrue what I am saying. I am not attempting to pass judgm~nt. There is only one who is capable of passing fair judgment and we will have to face that judgment one day ourselves. What I am concerned about is that many of these children will not experience a full family life. I realise the importance of a stable family environment in the development of any child.
But why the decline in marriages and births and an increase in divorces? Why should people marry, have children and stay married when it is so easy to get divorced and when, in many cases, divorce presents a far better economic proposition? Similarly, why should people marry and have children when, in many cases, it is also a far better economic proposition to have children outside of wedlock and pursue a single lifestyle and in some cases a de facto marriage lifestyle? Once again, do not misunderstand my views. For many lone-parent families the situation is grim. By the same token the situation for many two-parent families is equally grim. Thousands of families are trying to exist on one wage which, in effect, is less than the combined social security benefits paid to many unmarried supporting parents and divorced supporting parents.
One of the primary reasons, as I see the situation, for the decline in marriages and births and the increase in divorces is the economic climate of Australia. It is not a bright prospect for many people to marry and have children and struggle to survive on a single income. It is not a bright prospect for many women who see themselves becoming second class citizens totally dependent on their husband's income. The financial pressures placed on families by the Government's unsound economic policies are undoubtedly responsible for

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2447

many divorces. This Government has a responsibility to Australian families, be they loneparent families or dual-parent families, to assist them financially indirectly and directly and thereby better their lot. If that were done we would see an increase in births and marriages and a decrease in divorces~ I hope.
In the 1981 Budget the Government sought to show that it cared for families by increasing the family allowance for families with three or more children. Typical of this Government, it was a calculated move to regain face with the Australian people while giving away as little as possible. This decision was made by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and his advisers in full knowledge of the fact that the majority of Australian families have no more than two children. The Government, in its latest Budget, has once again sought to show that it cares by increasing the family allowance for families with fewer than three children and introducing dubious tax cuts. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) claimed that, owing to the Government's commitment to the family, Australian families would be $16 a week better off. What utter bunkum! To look at the Government's concession in realistic terms rather than through the rose-coloured glasses of the Treasurer, the 'Howard family'-comprising a sole breadwinner, dependent spouse and two dependent children-with a mortgage will be only $3 or $4 better off. What of the families which, unlike the 'Howard family', do not have a mortgage but are renting accommodation and watching the deposit gap get wider and wider and which, owing to the policy of the Government, will be renting for the rest of their lives? This Government has done nothing to help people who are already in the process of buying their own homes. It is only helping those who are trying to keep up with the ever-increasing interest rate rises in their existing mortgages brought about by the Government's unsound economic management. The families which are renting will be lucky to be 40c a week better off as a result of this Government's alleged concern for Australian families.
The concessions announced by the Treasurer do little realistically to alleviate the hardship that Australian familes are suffering. But as a result of the typical give and take manner of this Government people will payout more dues to the Government in sales tax and excise increases. Most give and take relationships involve give and take by both parties. The Liberal Party's idea of a give and take relationship is giving and then taking back more than it gives. What the right hand giveth the left hand taketh away. The most

spurious facet of this latest give and take procedure of the Prime Minister is that he is taking two and a half months before he is giving.
These concessions come too late. They come seven years too late. Australian families have been subjected to seven years of hardship by this Government, this so-called caring Government. As I have said, the Government has woken up to the plight of Australian families far too late. In its awakening, it has performed minor surgery on the Australian economy in an attempt to ease the lot of Australians.
Mr Leo McLeay-It has no conscience.
Mr LES McMAHON-As the honourable member for Grayndler states, the Government has no conscience. What is needed is major surgery-massive job creation programs, realistic tax cuts, tax reforms, greater relief from crippling interest rates, further assistance to home buyers, assistance to prospective home buyers, increases in social security assistance, increased child care spending, a fair universal health insurance scheme, and increases in spending on housing and education. What is needed is a government transplant. What is needed is a Federal Labor Government.
Let us look briefly at this Government's record in just five key areas which directly and drastically affect Australian families. I refer firstly to housing interest rates. In 1976 housing interest rates were 9 per cent to 10 per cent per annum. Six years later in 1981-82 housing interest rates had risen from 11.5 per cent to 13.5 per cent. In the six years from 1976 to 1981-82 the price for a litre of petrol rose by 23.4c, that is, from 14.7c to 38.1 c.
Mr Wallis-It is 48c in my electorate.
Mr LES McMAHON-That is right-48c. The conversion to metrics has aided the Government in regard to petrol prices. By expressing petrol prices in litres rather than gallons the cost increase is, somewhat hidden. Expressing petrol prices in gallons, we see that petrol has risen by $1.04-that is, from 65.4c to $1.69in six years.
In 1976 health insurance cost approximately $1.90 a week. In 1981-82 it cost $8.40 a week on average. The most discriminatory factor here is that the honourable members for Wannon (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and Bennelong (Mr Howard) pay the same for their health care as the lowest paid public servant. The fourth area of Government failure to support families is inflation. It is no use talking about inflation in percentage points. The thing people understand is how inflation affects their pockets. In 1976 the retail cost of 10 basic consumer items was $10.30. Because of

2448 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Bill

this Government's inflationary policy the same 10 basic items cost $17.54 in 1981-82.
Finally, the Government's record on taxation has been aired well and truly over the last month in this Parliament. How has this Government's taxation record affected the Australian family? The average wage earner is now paying $20 a week more in direct taxation than he did in 1976, thus subsidising the tax cheats that this Government has been aiding and abetting. Not only has direct taxation risen to record levels but also in an effort to make up for lost revenue the Government has been increasing indirect taxation. This form of taxation is hidden and is discriminate in that no matter what income a person has he or she has to pay the same indirect taxation. It is on record that this Government is the highest taxing government in Australian history. I have said it before, my colleagues on this side of the chamber have said it before, and the people of Australia will say it at the next election, whenever that may be, that Australia and Australian families have no hope under a Liberal-National Party Government. The only hope for Australia and its people is a Federal Labor Government. Australia has a future only under a Labor Government.
Proposed expenditures agreed to.
Department of Primary Industry
Proposed expenditure, $124,445,000.
Progress reported.
TAXATION (UNPAID COMPANY TAX) ASSESSMENT BILL (No.2) 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (11.10)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Some four weeks ago I introduced into the House a Bill by this title that set out to recover from former owners of companies that were stripped of pre-tax profits the amount of company tax that has been evaded as a consequence of such strips. The Bill that is now before the House replaces the earlier Bill. The revised Bill not only covers the same ground as the earlier Bill, but extends its scope to require promoters of these schemes also to effect some recoupment of the evaded tax. The legisation is thus now in a form that will result in both groups-vendors and promoters-who have benefited financially from the evasion of company tax being called on to make restitution. Subject to some exceptions that I will speak about later, the present Bill does not, in relation to vendorshareholders, vary from the earlier Bill and I think

I can draw the attention of the House to its main features in that respect by referring honourable members to my second reading speech on 23 September last.
Having done that, I turn now to describe the basis on which promoters and their associates will be liable to recoupment tax. The popular conception of who is a promoter of schemes to strip companies of untaxed profits does not help us all that much in framing the kind of tests which the legislation must express. The connection of promoters with the schemes they devised or marketed was one that varied substantially from promoter to promoter and is not capable of simple expression. Accordingly, the Bill contains a series of formal tests that describe which persons are to be treated as 'promoters' under the legislation or, in
the terms used in the Bill, as being members of the eligible promoters class.
Not only are promoters, as popularly understood, to be put into the eligible promoters class, but so too are those people, typically members of a promoter's family, who directly or indirectly had ownership rights in the companies and trusts through which promoters normally operated, and in that way received or stood to receive benefits. Included within the eligible promoters class will be those who purchased shares from vendorshareholders, were shareholders or directors of a purchasing company, were beneficiaries or trustees of a purchasing trust or were directors of a corporate trustee. Also included will be legal or beneficial owners through one or more further companies or trusts in a chain of ownership extending behind the purchasing company or trust.
Similar provision will be made where the promoter's formal connection was as agent for the purchaser or as broker, and where a person who was an associate of a purchaser from vendorshareholders gave financial assistance in the purchase of the shares. If by a loan that had the real character of a distribution of income or capital a person stripped moneys from a company or trust that is in the eligible promoters class, the person will also be included in the class. The Bill places Qn all the persons who are in the eligible promoters class in relation to a stripped company, a joint and several liability for recoupment tax in relation to that company. That means that each person in the class is fundamentally, but subject to rights of contribution, liable for the whole of the recoupment tax attaching to that group of persons. That feature, allied with the necessity to put persons into the eligible promoters class on the basis of their formal legal connections, for example as shareholder in a company, could lead

Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2449

to some people such as an office secretary being made liable when she does not either really participate in or benefit from the scheme otherwise than as an employee. Simply for that combination of reasons, there is provision in the Bill under which a person can achieve exclusion from the eligible promoters class by obtaining a Federal Court declaration excluding the person from the class.
And, as another aspect of the joint and several liability on persons in an eligible promoters class, a person who has in consequence been obliged to pay some or all of the recoupment tax attaching to that class may seek through the courts an appropriate contribution from other members of the class. The basic tests for determining whether 'promoters' are liable to recoupment tax will accord with those for vendor-shareholders, except that there will not be the test, applicable to vendors, that measures sale proceeds against the pre-sale net assets of the target company. The effect of the Bill will be that the 'promoters' group will generally be liable to recoupment tax equal to 20 per cent of vendors' liability, that is, 20 per cent of the total of unpaid primary company tax, any unpaid Division 7 tax and any late payment penalty accruing after vendors are notified of the company's liability.
However, in those pre-tax profits strip cases where vendors are not liable to recoupment tax, for example, where a tax provision was paid to a promoter who did not use it to pay the company tax, the relevant 'promoters' group will be liable for recoupment tax equal to the whole of such unpaid company tax. For those situations where the 'promoters' share of the evaded tax is 20 per cent, the Bill retains a full liability on the vendors, but to the extent that the 'promoters' group pays its 20 per cent share, the recoupment tax liability of the former owners of the company concerned will be correspondingly reduced. I mention that 20 per cent reflects the average amount of evaded tax that promoters took as fees for the service they provided to vendor-shareholders.
I turn now to some adjustments to the 'vendor' parts of the Bill and begin by speaking about some changes that have, in the light of representations, been made about aspects of it that could have given rise to elements of unfairness. A principal change on this category concerns service of notices of assessments for the stripped companies concerned. Under the original Bill, the service or re-issue of a company assessment notice that is a necessary preliminary to a recoupment tax assessment was to be one only of the former owners of the company. That person was the one who could object on the company's behalf. The Government

has now concluded that all former shareholders should be served with the company assessment notice, the only qualification being that the person's whereabouts is known or, in the case of a company, it is not dormant. Further than that, to ensure that the group that can object on the company's behalf is sufficiently representative, the representative group, each of whom is to get a copy of the company assessment, is to include up to five further people who were owners of the company further along a chain of ownership. The representative group, acting by majority, may under the Bill as altered then appoint one of their number to act on its behalf in any contest against the company assessment. The Government believes that this solution meets, within the bounds of practical administration, the point that has been raised.
Another change of broad significance is the offer of limited time to pay to former owners who decide not to contest their liability under the legislation and who make satisfactory arrangements with the Commissioner of Taxation for payment of the unpaid company tax on which their liability to pay recoupment tax would be based. The general background is, of course, that as I have indicated before, the Government hopes that former owners will simply arrange to pay the company tax and the Bill is structured so that any payment of company tax by them will not operate to diminish promoters' liability to the tax in respect of the stripped company concerned. The kind of arrangement for which the Bill makes provision is one where the former owners agree to pay the unpaid company tax in instalments over a period-normally of up to 12 months. They would, at the time of making an arrangement with the Commissioner, need to make an initial payment of part of the tax and, if the arrangement for subsequent payments was adhered to, they would not be liable for any late payment penalty; nor would they be liable to pay recoupment tax.
The provision in the Bill for this time to pay recognises that some persons who will be liable under the legislation may need to dispose of assets and takes into account such things as possible effects on employment that immediate payment of the tax could have. Yet another change in the original Bill will mean that if the underlying company tax liability is contested by some of the former owners of the company, but others wish immediately to pay their share of the evaded tax, they can do so without incurring any liability for late payment penalty that would arise from the delay brought about by the company assessment being put into dispute.

2450 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Taxation (l!npaid Company Tax) Bill

In another area again, we have now concluded that the situation does not warrant the Commissioner of Taxation being specifically authorised to name in his annual report to Parliament persons who do not pay the recoupment tax payable by them. Yet another significant area of note
concerns those situations where companies which have been sold had entered into tax avoidance schemes. The Government's intention has always been that the tax recouped under this Bill should be that tax that remains unpaid as a result of arrangements which have resulted in illegal evasion of tax.
In speaking about this area, let me immediately lay at rest a notion entertained by some that the legislation will recover tax that was escaped only because of the involvement of the companies in such schemes. It will not. The only tax to be recovered under the legislation is tax that was legally payable, and the paym-ent of which has been illegally evaded. This follows from the provisions in the legislation that make recoupment tax payable only where company tax legally payable remains unpaid, former owners having had the opportunity to contest the Commissioner's contention that company tax is payable. If the Commissioner, with full knowledge of the situation, has allowed a deduction created under a tax avoidance scheme, that would conclude the matter and there would now be no claim for tax based on challenge to that scheme.
The Bill as now before the House is set against the background of three broad situations in which companies have been sold and company tax legally payable remains unpaid. The first and most obvious one is a straight out asset strip with a clear intention of leaving the company unable to pay its tax liabilities. Included within that category are those situations where a company is sold after it has been assessed to tax by the Commissioner following his rejection of an earlier avoidance scheme that the company had entered into. A second category is the one where after the sale of the company the company has been put into what purports to be a tax avoidance scheme but it is one that, in substance, is part of an arrangement to render the company unable to pay its tax. The third situation is one where after the sale of the shares the company was also put into an avoidance scheme which could reasonably have been regarded at the time as being effective of its simple tax avoidance purpose.
In relation to each of the second and third categories I note that the Commissioner's action in contesting the legal efficacy of the schemes is not something that he is only now doing. He has had the widest range of avoidance schemes under

challenge and, as I have already indicated, a situation of any possible relevance to the Bill would only arise when, and to the extent that, when the courts do pass judgment on the schemes they find them to fail at law, so that tax is legally payable. The Bill now before the House puts the first and second categories within the scope of the recoupment tax. Each clearly has some element of fraud attaching to the arrangement at some point or another.
The third category is different, as it can fairly be put that, because the avoidance scheme could not be said to be part of the arrangement to leave the company unable to meet its tax liabilities, an element of fraud is not present. Accordingly, there is now specific provision in the Bill to the effect that if the target company was the subject of a post-sale attempted avoidance scheme which, objectively viewed, would have had reasonable prospects of succeeding in its purpose, and the scheme is not part of the stripping arrangement so that the arrangement carried no purpose of rendering the company unable to pay, there will be no recoupment tax liability. In line with that, the recoupment legislation wiII also not apply where there was a pre-sale avoidance scheme which, though ultimately shown to be unsuccessful, might reasonably have been expected to have worked, if at the time of the sale the Commissioner had not raised an assessment rejecting the claims made under the scheme.
Coming to technicalities I mention first one provision that treats for what it is, a sale and purchase of shares, an arrangement under which former owners mortgaged their shares in return for receipt of a loan, and then, as pre-arranged, defaulted in repayment so that the shares were forfeited or otherwise fell into the hands of the promoter. The loan proceeds were of course effectively the sale price of the shares and the legislation will apply accordingly.
Yet another strengthening change is one that concerns the tracing through of recoupment tax liability to former owners and will treat, as involving effective capital distributions from a trust, further variants of schemes to strip funds from trusts. An example is a 'blind trust' in which those who are intended to be beneficiaries are not named as such in the trust instrument but can become beneficiaries in pursuance of the exercise of powers of appointment vested in the trustee or someone else. Yet again, the Bill has been varied so that its basic test of disposal of shares carrying more than 90 per cent of the voting power of the company will be operative in those situations where shares are sold by a person who had formerly exercised control by reason of holding an

Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Bill

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2451

office such as that of governing director, and also where the purchaser controls the company by reason of assuming such an office. It has also been found necessary to correct, in relation to companies that have gone out of existence, the test that there had to be an arrangement that rendered the company unable to pay its tax.
That completes my explanation at this stage of the main features of the Bill. More detail will be contained in a revised explanatory memorandum no.w being completed. It will be apparent, I believe, that the Government, after careful consideration of the many points of view that have been put about this legislation, is sticking to it and its basic concepts, whilst making a number of necessary improvements. It will be clear that we have positively responded to reasonable criticisms of the measures. In the same vein, the Government will be willing to consider further amendments of a technical kind which further examination of this somewhat complex Bill shows to be necessary. In that light, I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
TAXATION (UNPAID COMPANY TAX-VENDORS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (11.28)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill, like the one that I have just spoken about, is a revision of an earlier-introduced Billthe Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Bill 1982. That is a Bill that the Government also will not be proceeding with. The present Bill, like the Bill it replaces, will formally impose recoupment tax on former owners of companies stripped of pre-tax profits and does so on the basis of the rules contained in the assessment Bill.
As I have explained, liability for the vendors recoupment tax will fall initially on the persons who sold their shares, but where it is impracticable or inappropriate to levy the tax at that primary level it will be possible to trace through to more remote links in the ownership chain and levy the tax at levels below the primary level. This Bill imposes on the taxable amount-which in the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Bill is called the vendor's taxable amount-fixed for each former owner a recoupment tax equal to that taxable amount. It is by this means that evaded company tax is to be recovered. I commend the Bill to the House.

Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
TAXATION (UNPAID COMPANY TAX-'-PROMOTERS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (11.30)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is to be read with those additional provisions of the main legislation that set out the basis on which persons classed as 'promoters' will be liable to pay as promoters recoupment tax a share of the tax evaded in strips of pre-tax company profits. In speaking to the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Bill 1982 I have outlined the basis on which this share of evaded tax is to be arrived at. The amount so determined is described in the legislation as a promoters taxable amount and this Bill will formally impose a tax of that amount. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
House adjourned at 11.31 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Macphee to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Mr Lionel Bowen to move-
That the following matter be referred to the Standing Orders Committee for consideration and report:
The practices and the standing and sessional orders which govern consideration of proposed expenditures for departments and services contained in the main Appropriation nill for the year for the ordinary annual services of government and the main Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill for the year, taking particular account of the allocation of the call during consideration of the Bills in committee of the whole House.
Dr Everingham to move-
That this House(I) supports in principle the Constitution for the Feder-
ation of Earth adopted at the 2nd session of the World Constituent Assembly, lnnsbruck, Austria, 1977, and sponsored by national representatives, leaders and jurists of some 50 countries, and
(2) calls upon the Government to send-
(a) a delegate or observer to the 2nd session, in 1983, of the Provisional World Parliament, confirmed by the 1st session of 4-17 September 1982, Brighton, England, with over 100 delegates representing over 3 million constituents, and
(b) a delegate to the 1985 World Constituent Assembly which is to review the Constitution for Federation of Earth, acknowledging the need to reject

2452 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Requestfor Detailed Information

absolute sovereignty of nations in international disputes and to assert the sovereignty of a uniting humanity to save succeeding generations from the scourges of war and want, and to ensure freedom of speech and creed.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 21 October 1982, pursuantto statute:
Air Navigation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 270.
Lands Acquisition Act-Lands acquired for Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority purposesWest Denison, N.S.W.
Public Service ActDetermination-I 982No. 12.
Radiocommunications Licence Fees Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1982, No. 269.
REPLY TO REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mrs Kelly asked Mr Speaker, upon notice, on 21 September 1982:
(I) When was the radio and television transcript service established by the Parliamentary Library.
(2) How many requests for transcripts of radio and television programs monitored have there been in each year since its inception.
(3) Has there been any increase in the number of transcripts requests in any year from 1974-75 to date; if so, what was the extent of that increase by year.
(4) What (a) radio and (b) television programs were monitored by the Library as at (i) 30 June 1976 (ii) 30 June 1979 and (iii) 30 June 1982.
(5) What was the actual and estimated allocation of funds by the Library in each fiscal year for this service from its inception to date.
(6) If the funding of this service has not been treated as a separate item in Departmental accounting to date, will the Presiding Officers now give an assurance that this will be done in future; if not, why not.
(7) If there has been any increase in transcript requests in the period referred to in part (3) has any consideration been given to an increase in (a) the number of staff employed, (b) the salaries paid due to the specialised nature of staff positions in this service and (c) the quality of any or all requisite equipment used for this service.
(8) On what date was this service transferred from Parliament House to the Hotel Kurrajong.
(9) What are the details of all discussions on this matter held prior to that transfer.
(10) Has the Acting Parliamentary Librarian or the Presiding Officers, received any protest regarding diminution of service since the transcription service was transferred; if so, what are the details.
(II) What is the ultimate destination of any (a) recorded and (b) transcribed, material which the transcription service monitors.
(12) If any of this material is forwarded to the National Library, does it ultimately form part of any historical collection.

Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Library's transcription service was started in 1971. (2)-

Year

Requests

Percentage increase over previous year

1971

31

1972

205

561.3

1973

396

93.2

1974

367

-7.3

1975

1212

230.2

1976

1166

-3.8

1977

1762

51.1

1978

1751

-D.6

1979

2560

46.2

1980

4410

1981

6059

37.4

- Note: The method of counting transcript requests was altered in 1980. Prior to 1980 transcript requests which formed part of a broader enquiry or a series of questions to the Current Information Service were not counted separately. It is therefore not possible to calculate a meaningful figure for percentage increase for 1980 over 1979.
(3) See (2) above.
(4) (i) 30 June 1976
Radio: 7.45 a.m. News Radio I A.M.; 6.00 p.m. News Radio 2 P.M.; lateline.
T.V.: T.D.T.; A Current Affair; Four Corners; Willessee Show.
(ii) 30 June 1979
Radio: 7.45 a.m. News Radio I A.M.; 6.00 p.m. News Radio 2 P.M.; Broadband.
T.V.: Willessee at Seven; Nationwide; Four Corners; Countrywide; National Press Club.
(iii) 30 June 1982
Radio: 7.45 a.m. News Radio I A.M.; 6.00 p.m. News Radio 2 P.M.; News Commentary; Notes on the News; National Press Club Luncheon; Doubletake; Background Briefing; Education Now; World Wednesday; Newsvoice; The Science Show; Correspondent's Report; Monitor; Resources '82; Technology Report; The Law Report.
T.V.: Countrywide; Four Corners; ABC Evening News; 60 Minutes; Capital Seven Evening News; Sunday.
(5) The funding of the service has not been treated as a separate item in departmental accounting to date.
(6) A form of program budgeting for the Department of the Parliamentary Library is being studied. As part of that, the media monitoring service could be identified and costed in relation to other programs, but until the study is completed no such assurance can be given.
(7) (a) 1971-19750nefull-timetypist.1976-19800nefulltime typist. One part-time typist working 27 hrs per week. 1980-1982 One full-time typist. One part-time typist working 35 hrs per week.
(b) In May 1981 a special classification was obtained from the Public Service Board for the transcript typists. This is Typist (Current Affairs) and carries a salary of $13360 p.a. which is equal to a Typist Grade 3.
(c) The equipment used in this service is full hi-fi quality sound receivers and recorders with digital precision time clocks. The video equipment includes both production quality

Request/or Detailed In/ormation

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2453

Sony U-matic machines and Betamax video recorders which are at the top of the home market range.
(8) 14 August 1982.
(9) Original discussions resulted in the Librarian-in-Charge of the Unit selecting rooms in D Block some months ago. Subsequently temporary rooms in C Block were made available pending the completion of electrical and other work in D Block. Discussions near the time of the actual move took place at various times and between various parties. Final determinations were made in discussions between the Acting Parliamentary Librarian and the Librarian-in-Charge of the Unit, following discussions with the Combined Library Unions Committee. By the time the move took place therefore, those involved in one way or another in discussions included: the transcript typists, the typist supervisor, the clerical assistant, the Librarian supervising the Unit, the Acting Chief Librarian of the Current Information Service, the Acting

Head Librarian, the Head, Systems, Co-ordination and Management Services, the Acting Parliamentary Librarian, the Combined Library Unions Committee, and the Acting Senior Executive Officer.
(10) No.
(II) and (12) Audio cassettes are supplied by the National Library and all sound recordings are returned to the National Library's Oral History Collection.
Video recordings are kept for one month, with the exceptions of news broadcasts which are kept for one week. Tapes are then re-used.
Transcripts are filed by subject into the information files of the Current Information Service. A copy of each transcript is also sent to the National Library together with program notes which are used as a finding aid.
Transcripts are also listed in the Index to Current Information, the bulletin issued by the Alert Service.

2454 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 4815)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Capital Territory, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2) Organisation

Amount

Abortion Counselling Service Access Newspaper Association
ACT3 . . . . . . . . ADPACT . . . . . . .
Ainslie Village Management Pty Ltd Arts Council of Australia, ACT Division
Australia Air League . . . . . .
Australia Day Sports Carnival
Australian Association of Dance Education Australian Council for Health, Physical Edu-
cation and Recreation
ACT Amateur Athletic Association ACT Amateur Basketball Association
ACT Amateur Gymnastic Association
ACT Amateur Judo Association ACT Amateur Volleyball Association
ACT Amateur Water Polo Association
ACT Asthma Association. Speld & Epilepsy ACT Australian Football League Inc. ACT Badminton Association
ACT Baseball Association ACT Calisthenics Association ACT Council for Children's Film and TV ACT Council of Cultural Societies ACT Council on the Ageing
ACT Cricket Association ACT Darts Council ACT District Amateur Water Polo Association
ACT Epilepsy Association ACT Equestrian Association
ACT Formula 500 Speedcar Association ACT Gymnastics Association ACT Hang Gliding Association
ACT Heritage Committee ACT Hockey Association ACT Ice Hockey Association
ACT Junior Ten Pin Bowling Association ACT Koories Club ACT Netball Association ACT Olympic Sports Association ACT Orienteering Association Inc. ACT Pistol Association ACT Playgroups Association . ACT Regional Amputee Association ACT Rowing Association Inc. ACT Rugby League ACT Rugby Union
ACT Ski Association

$ 5,000 2,100 2,500
315 110,000 62,500
1,600 44,450
600
700 4,140 21,750
250 2,252 12,920
756 405 22,750 13,950 2,200 1,400 1,955 2,342 14,000 5,000 870 500 7,500 5,700 300 4,930 350 8,000 35,610 3,612 1,180 1,000 9,940 9,860 2,394 1,000 3,280 200 5,780 11,000 2,750 1,820

(I) and (2) Organisation

ACT Soccer Federation Inc.

ACT Softball Association

ACT Squash Rackets Association Inc.

ACT Storytelling Guild

ACT Swimming Council

ACT Tennis Association

ACT Touch Football Association

ACT Women's Cricket Association

ACT Women's Hockey Association

ACT Women's Soccer Association

Australia Day Council

.

Australian Junior Women's Volleyball Team

Australian National Eisteddfod Society

Australian Railway Historical Society

Australian Red Cross Society, ACT Division

Australian Underwater Federation, ACT Branch

Baptist Community Service

.

Baringa Gardens' Community Association

Belconnen Community Service Inc.

Birthright

......

Black Mountain Community Child Care

Blind Society of the ACT Inc.

Blind Sporting Association.

.

Blue Folk Community Arts Association Inc.

Caltex Fund

... . .

Campus Community Broadcasting Association

Canberra Adult Swimming Club

Canberra Amateur Cycling Club

Canberra Amateur Judo Club .

Canberra and District Historical Society .

Canberra and District Minor Rugby League

Canberra and South Eastern Regional Environ-

mentCentre

Canberra Archery Club Inc.

Canberra Art Workshop

Canberra Barefoot Water Ski Club

Canberra Children's Choir

Canberra Choral Society

...

Canberra Civic Rehabilitation Committee

Canberra Community Arts Front

Canberra Community Legal Service

Canberra Consumers Inc.

Canberra Dance Ensemble

Canberra Drag Racers Club

Canberra Festival .

Canberra Gliding Club Inc. . . . .

Canberra Marriage Counselling Service Inc.

Canberra Movie Makers

Canberra Netball Association Inc.

Canberra Old Boys' Amateur Cycle Club

Canberra Opera Society

Canberra Opportunity for Deaf Child Inc. .

Canberra Pensioners' Social & Recreation Club

Canberra Philharmonic Society Inc.

Canberra Pistol & Miniature Rifle Club

Canberra Police and Citizens Youth Club

Canberra Rape Crisis Centre Inc.

Canberra Repertory Society

Canberra Rifle Club Inc.

Canberra Senior Citizens' Club

Canberra Spinners and Weavers

Canberra Symphony Orchestra . . .

Canberra Toy Library (Noahs Ark Centre)

Amount
$ 16,500 7,585 13,357
110 11,430 37,412 4,500 2,370 7,024 3,260 4,500 2,000 1,500 20,000 3,000 3,270 1,000 15,490 12,000 5,400 1,000 6,800
712 25,000 12,000 13,000
717 250 2,800 8,250 1,183
4,900 450 150
2,012 1,650 4,250 3,000 4,450 5,000 1,500 5,000
500 134,000 20,000
8,000 939
9,000 150
112,450 1,500 2,200 10,000
30,000 8,000 9,000 20,000
75 10,100
300 80,250 6,081

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2455

(I) and (2) Organisation

Amount (I) and (2) Organisation

Amount

Canberra Women's Bowling Club Inc.

Canberra Women's Refuge Inc.

Canberra Youth Orchestra

Canswim . . . . .

Capella CoreIIi

Careers' Display Society

Catherine Beall

Catholic Social Services

Cherie Christensen

Citizen Advice Bureau of the ACT Inc.

Council of Social Services of the ACT

Craft Council of the ACT Inc.

Dickson Neighbourhood Centre Inc.

Diedre Brocklebank

Disabled Adults Residential Establishments

Dr Barnardos in Australia

Domenico Mico

Drug Referral and Information Centre

Emergency Housekeeper and Home Help

Ethnic Communities' Council ACT

Exhibits Concerts and Community Arts

Federal District Bowling Association

Federal District Women's Bowling Association

Festival of Australian Drama

First Mount Rogers Scout Group

First Weston Scout Group

Fools Gallery

Forrest Tennis Club

Fortune Theatre Company

George Dimitriadis

Girl Guides' Association (ACT Region)

Gorman House . . . . . .

Guide Dogs for the Blind Association

Handicapped Citizens Association ACT

Heraldry and Genealogy Society

Human Veins Dance Company

Indo-China Refugee Association Inc.

International Year of the Disabled Person

Jobless Action Incorporated

Judith Clingham

Kaleen Community Association Inc.

Keep Australia Beautiful Council (ACT)

Korea & S.E. Asian Forces Association~

Australia . . . . . . . .

L'Arche Australia . . . . . .

Lanycn Restoration and Acquisitions Committee

Legacy Club of Australia

Life Be In It Program

Malaria Control Project

Malkara Special School

Marymead Children's Centre

Marist Judo Club

Megalo Industrial Silk Screen Collective

Microcare Inc.

Mini Bike and Cycle Club (ACT) Inc.

Monaro Folk Music Society

Motor Cycle Club of Canberra Inc.

Multiple Sclerosis Association

National Trust ACT

National Fitness Trust Account

NSW Field and Game Association

North Belconnen Community Child Care Assoc-

iation

..... .

Northside Community Service Inc.

Outdoor Concerts Arts Exhibition

Paraplegic and Handicapped Association ACT

Parent Support Service

Parents Without Partners ACT Inc.

$ 1,900 1,300 4,500 6,600 2,500 10,500
200 17,000
258 9,094 68,000 23,500
300 500 3,376 19,100 2,000 6,000 239,000 8,000 200 614 412 5,000 2,182 14,000 14,500 18,000 100,000 3,000 6,800 15,600 13,300 107,000 1,000 42,275 2,870 4,000 30,000 2,000 300 500
500 600 5,000 2,000 38,000 1,290 7,718 25,000 1,500 5,000 2,000 500 735 5,575 1,900 13,000 1,500 911
3,000 6,000 32,985 3,445 5,000 11,500

Pegasus~ Riding for the Disabled Philatelic Society of Canberra Phillip Badminton Club Physically Handicapped Children ACT Pregnancy Support Service ACT Inc. Reid House Theatre Workshop Richmond Fellowship of the ACT Road Safety Council Rotary Young Achievement Program Royal Life Saving Society (ACT) Inc. RSPCA (ACT) Inc. Rupert Public Interest Movement Inc. Salvation Army St Johns Ambulance Association ACT St Thomas Aquinas School~ P & F Association St Vincent de Paul Society Scout Association Smith Family Society of Women Writers Southern Districts' Hill Climb Association Southern Districts Motor Sports Association Southern Highlands Polo Crosse Association Southern Tableland Girls Marching Association Southern Zone Yachting Association of NSW Spence Children's Cottage Association Inc. Spiral Club Sporting Shooters Association of the ACT Sports' Medicine Federation ACT Stephen Payne TPI Social Welfare Club ACT Tenants' Advisory Service Theatre Organ Society The Duke of Edinburgh Award Scheme The Questacon (ANU) Tuggeranong Amateur Players Inc. Tuggeranong BMX Club Tuggeranong Community Service Inc. Tuggeranong Family Action Inc. Weston Creek Community Association Weston Creek Little Athletic Centre Weston Valley Archery Club Wild Life Foundation ACT Woden Community Service Woden Senior Citizens' Club Woden Valley Youth Choir YMCA YMCA Sailing Club YWCA Young Music Society Youth Refuge
Total

$ 500 1,400
202 6,890 10,000 38,000 1,500 2,750 1,250 11,350 24,000 2,000 61,400 7,400 3,000 107,650 16,050 100,576
700 10,000
240 330 1,110 800 1,350 300 240 450 3,500 500 2,000 6,900 25,000 \3,570 1,000 2,100 10,360 46,000 15,600 1,350 1,000 1,400 76,000 1,500 7,000 97,727 3,210 31,000 1,000 5,000
2,937,333

Department of Health: Counselling Doctors
(Question No. 4583)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) What is the role of counselling doctors attached to his Department.
(2) By what means maya doctor ascertain the correct Medical Benefits Schedule Item to charge for each procedure.
(3) Did his Department allow overpayment from June 1981 to February 1982 to Dr B. Wainer in relation to disputed claims relating to Item 797; if so, why.

2456 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(4) What guidelines govern the relationship between the Minister for Health, doctors with his Department and private medical practitioners.
(5) Ifpatient histories are to be seized, is it the practice for this to be done by police officers or by medical practitioners; if not the latter, why not.
(6) Why was the warrant to search Dr Wainer's clinic and home on 19 February 1982 sought in such wide terms.
(7) Were there documents seized in the raid that were not related to Dr Wainer's medical practice; if so, why.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The role of a counsellor is to counsel, to advise, to discuss, to clarify and interpret the Medical Benefits Scheme and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. In specific circumstances, a warning may be given regarding possible future reference to a Committee of Inquiry.
(2) By reference to the Medical Benefits Schedule Book. This Book is provided to doctors as the primary means for ascertaining the correct item for a medical service. Each item has a description of the medical service to which it applies.
It also contains explanatory notes for interpretation of the schedule, and on the Medical Benefits Scheme generally. If a doctor is uncertain about the particular item number which applies to a medical service, he should contact the Commonwealth Director of Health in his State.
(3) During that period, benefits were paid in accordance with claims lodged. My Department is reluctant to disadvantage doctors or their patients during a period when the Department is identifying and quantifying any possible breaches of the medical benefits legislation.
(4) The relationship between the Minister and doctors within his Department is the normal Minister-public servant relationship governed by the Public Service Act and Regulations, and the General Orders relating thereto, and amplified in the Official conduct Guidelines for Commonwealth Public Servants issued by the Public Service Board.
The relationship between doctors within the Department and private medical practitioners is governed by those sections of the guidelines referred to above which have regard to the relationship between officers and members of the public, coupled with the relevant sections of the Health Insurance Act and the National Health Act, and other legislation pertaining to the activities of the Department. There are also specific guidelines on action to be taken by a Departmental medical counsellor who becomes aware of a possible breach of the law during a counselling interview, set out in a procedural directive circulated to State Offices of the Department on 9 June 1982.
(5) It is a responsibility of the Australian Federal Police (AFP) to investigate alleged offences against Commonwealth law. The gathering of evidence is part of that role. In each case where a search warrant is sought, the police must satisfy a Stipendiary Magistrate by evidence on oath that sufficient grounds exist to justify the issue of the warrant. In executing the warrant, and in the conduct of the subsequent investigation, procedures have been devised by the AFP in consultation with the Australian Medical Association and my Department to protect the privacy and confidentiality of the patient's medical history, and to prevent unauthorised access to records under police control.
(6) I am advised that the scope of the warrant was appropriate to the suspected offences and complied with guidelines set down by recent decisions of the Victorian Supreme Court. The terms of the warrant were drafted on the advice of the Office of the Deputy Crown Solicitor, Melbourne.

(7) I am advised that only documents relating to Dr Wainer's medical practice were seized.
Special Subsidies for Aviation Services
(Question No. 4599)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Did the Prime Minister promise, in his policy statement on 30 September 1980, to continue to provide special subsidies for aviation services to remote centres.
(2) If so, which services were being subsidised by the Government at 30 September 1980.
(3) Which services are currently being subsidised by the Government.
(4) How many passengers were assisted annually and at what total annual cost in each case.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Bush Pilots Airways Ltd: Cairns-Chillagoe-Stations Cairns-Weipa-Stations Cairns-Normanton-Kowanyama-Stations Cairns-Georgetown-Croydon Mt Isa-Stations Longreach-Rockhampton
Skywest Airlines Pty Ltd: Perth-Mt Magnet-Cue-Meekatharra Perth-Meekatharra-Yeelirrie-Wiluna
Northern Airlines< (Operations) Pty Ltd (formerly Connair Pty Ltd):
Complete network.
Helicopter Operators Pty Ltd: Mt Isa-Stations (East Barkly Tableland)
Ord Air Charter Pty Ltd: Kununurra-Stations
Chartair: Alice Springs-Stations
Tennantair Pty Ltd: North West Barkly Tableland-Stations
Tillair Pty Ltd: Katherine-Eastern, South Eastern and South Western
Stations
Trans-West Air Charter (WA) Pty Ltd: Port Hedland-Marble Bar-Nullagine-Newman
PAGAS Airlines: South Channel Country
Cooktown Air Services: Cooktown-Cape York.
(3) Air Queensland Ltd (formerly Bush Pilots Airways Ltd):
Cairns-Normanton-Kowanyama-Stations (other services formerly provided by Air Queensland were transferred to Cooktown Air Services and Air Mount Isa in July 1982)
Skywest Airlines Pty Ltd: Perth-Mt Magnet-Cue-Wiluna-Yeelirrie
Air Mt Isa (formerly Helicopter Operators Pty Ltd): Mt Isa-Stations (East Barkly Tableland) North Mt Isa
Region
Ord Air Charter Pty Ltd: Kununurra-Stations
Chartair:

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2457

Alice Springs-Stations
Tennantair Pty Ltd: North West Barkly Tableland-Stations
Tillair Pty Ltd: Katherine-Eastern, South Eastern and South Western
Stations
Trans-West Air Charter (WA) Pty Ltd: Port Hedland-Marble Bar-Nullagine-Newman
PAGAS Airlines: South Channel Country
Cooktown Air Services Pty Ltd: Cooktown-Strathgordon-Killarney-Stations Cooktown-Coen-Heathlands-Stations Cooktown-Laura Hmsd-Yarraden-Stations Cairns-Chillagoe-Abingdon Downs-Stations Cairns-Wrotham Park-Palmerville-Stations.
(4) The subsidy is paid to operators to ensure essential air services to remote localities are provided for educational, welfare and medical reasons on a regular, year-round basis. Users of the services do not receive the subsidy. Details relating to passenger statistics are not readily available in respect of the services which are being subsidised.
Subsidy paid to operators in 1980-81 and 1981-82 is as follows:

1980-81

1981-82

Air Queensland Ltd (formerly Bush Pilots)
Cooktown Air Services Pty Ltd
Air Mount Isa Trans-West Air Charter (WA)
Pty Ltd Skywest Airlines Pty Ltd
Ord Air Charter Pty Ltd Tennantair Pty Ltd
Tillair Pty Ltd
Chartair PAGAS Airlines

$
173,550 27,082 5,489
9,000 14,448 11,200 28,060 37,160 14,202 5,920

$
219,687 _ 29,479
2,954
9,000 12,000 10,823 20,760 39,181 20,105 4,670

326,111

368,659

The subsidy agreement with Northern Airlines expired on 30 September 1980. The full amount of the subsidy payable to Northern Airlines for operations to 30 September was paid in June 1980.
The Government has provided $440,000 in 1982-83, the allocation of which is currently under consideration.
Public Hospital in Broadmeadows Area, Victoria
(Question No, 4660)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Have both the Federal Government and the Victorian State Government acknowledged the need for a public hospital in the area of Broadmeadows.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the long standing request from the members of the Broadmeadows Hospital Society to transfer the old Commonwealth Serum Laboratory's land in Camp Road, Broadmeadows, to the State of Victoria for the purposes of a community hospital in this region; if so, when can an answer to that request be expected.
(3) Has the Victorian Health Commission made a firm offer to the Department of Administrative Services for the

Camp Road land based on a figure provided by the ValuerGeneral; ifso, when can an answer to that offer be expected.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Matters relating to location and development of health services and facilities, including public hospitals, are the responsibility of the Victorian Government.
(2) and (3) The Department of Administrative Services has provided the following information:
'Negotiations for the sale of part of the former Commonwealth Serum Laboratory's land at Broadmeadows have been continuing between the Commonwealth Department of Administrative Services and the Victorian Health Commission for some time. The Commission did make an offer in December 1980, subject to certain conditions including the availability of funds. Subject to advice from the Commission as to availability of funds in 1982-83, negotiations for the sale of the property to the Commission will be resumed.'
United Nations: Restructuring
(Question No_ 4680)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to President Carter's report on restructuring the United Nnations system submitted to the United States Congress in the 1978 fiscal year (Public Law 95-105).
(2) If so, is he able to say whether the President called for (a) strengthening the UN, (b) a UN Charter Review Conference, if a substantial majority of member states believe it likely to be productive, (c) review and promotion of peaceful dispute settlement measures, (d) yearly Foreign Minister meetings on peace, (e) the International Court of Justice to give advisory opinions to national appellate courts on international laws, (f) wider compulsory jurisdiction for the ICJ, (g) national contingents trained in peace-keeping as a UN reserve force, supported by national airlift facilities and a fund of the order of then $USloom, (h) UN associate membership for very small states, (j) independent revenue sources for the international community and (k) UN agencies to be the major channels for international technical aid.
(3) To which of these principles does the Australian Government subscribe as they apply to Australia.
(4) What has been done to implement each of those principles Australia has accepted.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a)-(j) Yes.
(k) This is not a wholly accurate rendition of what was contained in the earlier report. The report called for a strengthening of the role of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as the major channel for voluntary contributions for the technical assistance programs of the UN system.
(3) and (4) The Foreign Affairs Committee of the United States House of Representatives held hearings on this report, but there was no specific follow-up in the United Nations. The recommendations of the report appear to have been left simply for the record, implicitly to be pursued only if and when the climate becomes favourable.
Australia is in broad sympathy with a number of the principles enunciated in the report and spoke accordingly under

2458 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

relevant individual agenda items in the Sixth (legal) Committee of the UN General Assembly. It is to be regretted that
to date a broad international consensus on reform and restructure of the UN system is lacking, but, as the report notes, until such a consensus develops, it is unlikely that any of those principles will be implemented.

(b) See (a) above.
(c) According to advice given to my Department by specialist professional bodies, there are no clinical indications for such a wide range of pathology tests, particularly on a routine basis.
(d) See (c) above.

Orthomolecular Medicine
(Question No. 4683)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
What definitions are accepted by his department for (a) the pattern of diagnostic tests known to be used by practitioners of orthomolecular medicine, (b) the range of tests routinely ordered in this form of treatment, (c) the accepted indications for such a pattern or range of tests and (d) the methods used to determine and review these indications.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The pattern of pathology tests ordered by practitioners of orthomolecular medicine commonly involves the following tests in various combinations:

Medical benefit item number
1342/1343 1345/1346 1888/1889 1891/1892 1897/1898 1903-1906
1918/1919
1924-1927 1971/1972 1995/1996 1011/1012/1013
1310/1311/1312
1452/1453

Description of tests
Quantitive estimation of biochemistry
Quantitive estimation of immunoglobulins
Radioallergosorbent tests for allergen identification
Immunofluorescent detection of tissue antibodies
Test for tissue complement Neutrophil or monocyte tests for phago-
cytic activity Three or more procedures relative to
blood count including calculation of erythrocyte indices Six or more estimations of chemistry of body fluids and tissues Hormone assays using gamma emitting labels or any other unspecified technique

National Acoustic Laboratories: Hearing Tests
(Question No. 4724)
Mr Cadman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) How many hearing tests were conducted by the National Acoustic Laboratory, Parramatta, N.S.W., in each of the last 3 years.
(2) What was the total number of staff employed at the Laboratory in each of the same years.
(3) What brands, types and models of aid to each age group have been fitted in each year.
(4) How many persons are on waiting lists for aids in each age group and how long has each been waiting.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)-
1979-80-5,387 1980-81-5,033 1981-82-3,448.
NOTE: Testings reduced from 1909 in 1980-81 to 498 in 1981-82 in respect of clients to age 21. This resulted from a policy decision late in 1980 that such clients would be screened or treatment-related tested by other agencies before being accepted by National Acoustic Laboratories (NAL).
(2)-
1979-80-12 1980-81-12 1981-82-12.
(3) NAL conducts hearing tests and fits hearing aids to the following groups of clients: persons up to age 21 years, aged and invalid pensioners having health benefits entitlements and their dependants, certain Repatriation and Service pensioners, war widows, Social Security rehabilitees, armed services personnel and recipients of supporting parent's allowance or sickness benefits. At Parramatta hearing centre these groups are fitted from the same range of aids. In the last three years the range has been-

Body-worn aids Behind-the-ear aids
In-the-ear aids

1979-80
Calaids C and G Calaids HL, HH, HM,
P, PE, PH, and RE Calaid E

1980-81
Calaids C and G Calaids HL, HH, PM,
PE, PH, and RE CalaidE

1981-82
Calaids C and G Calaids HL, HH, PM,
PH, RE and Phonak Calaid E

(4) Clients of the Parramatta hearing centre do not have to
wait for hearing aids. However, eligible pensioners who made their initial applications for hearing tests on 31 August 1982 should have waiting times of about six months before their first appointments. At that date, there were 393 eligible pensioners waiting for their first appointments. Applications for urgent initial appointments are considered when accompanied by evidence that other incapacities make urgent fitting imperative or that clients could suffer severe hardship if aid fitting is delayed.

Clients to age 21 years who are potential hearing aid cases are not required to wait for their first appointments. Conductive clinics are held for others in this grouping (usually those over age 4 years who are unlikely to benefit from a hearing aid fitting).
First appointments are not given to Veterans' Affairs clients at Parramatta hearing centre.

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2459

Independent Audit: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 4769)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
None: As indicated in answer to Question No. 4795, no grants or payments in the nature of grants, were made by my Department in the 1981-82 financial year to non-government organisations.
Independent Audit: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 4776)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The conditions for funds administered by the Department of Primary Industry and granted to non-government organisations require that unless the grantee organisation's accounting records are required by statute to be audited by the Commonwealth Auditor-General or the Auditor-General of a State, the grantee must furnish a statement of the receipts and payments on the project during the financial year to which the grant relates. The statement must be accompanied by an audit certificate given by a qualified auditor who is not a member, employee, or public officer of the grantee organisation.

Independent Audit: Department of Social

.

Security

(Question No. 4780)

Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice,
on 18 August 1982:

What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.

Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honour-
able member's question:

With reference to the provisions of Finance Directions issued under the authority of the Audit Act 1901, grants administered by the Department of Social Security whether or
not covered by specific legislation are made subject to the condition that evidence is to be provided to show that the pur-

poses for which the grant was made are being met. Organisations are required to produce statements of expenditure on those purposes, supported by audit certificates. Audit certificates are required to be given by a qualified public accountant who is not an officer of the organisation.
Organisations receiving general support grants, as distinct from grants for specific purposes, are required to supply copies of their audited financial statements covering the periods for which the grants were made.
Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 4795)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(1) In the 1981-82 what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) No grants, or payments in the nature of grants, were made by my Department in the 1981-82 financial year to non-government organisations.
Service Guards of Honour
(Question No. 4821)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) On what occasions are guards of honour accorded (a) the Governor-General and (b) other persons.
(2) On what occasions in the past 2 years have Service guards of honour been provided and in which locations.
(3) From which units have the guards of honour been drawn and where are these units normally located.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Guards of Honour are provided for the Governor General as required by Federal and State Governments for formal visits and ceremonies of State and when he is received on board HMA Ships and at Service establishments.
Guards of Honour are accorded HM The Queen and members of the Royal Family on both formal and informal occasions.
Guards of Honour are provided for distinguished personages to whom such an honour is appropriate (as indicated by the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet) and for other entitled persons for formal visits and ceremonies of State. These other entitled persons include:
a. A Foreign Sovereign;
b. The Head of State of a foreign country;
c. An ambassador presenting credentials;
d. State Governors and Administrator of the Northern Territory; and
e. Australian and foreign senior Service officers.
(2) The occasions in the past 2 years in which Service guards of honour have been provided in each State and Territory are:

Serial
I. 2. 3.

Required occasion
Governor-General Federal Government State Government

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

ACT

NT

3

5

2

3

1

I

5

3

7

6

20 5

2460 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Serial
4. 5.

Required occasion
Services Civic

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

ACT

NT

5

17

4

2

6

2

I

12

5

6

3

6

2

I

6

(3) Guards of Honour have been drawn in the past 2 years from the following units:

Unit
(a) Navy HMAS Cerberus HMAS Cairns HMAS Moreton HMAS Coonawarra HMAS Nirimba Sydney establishments HMAS Albatross HMAS Leeuwin HMASPerth HMASHarman
(b) Army 6 Royal Australian Regiment 8/9 Royal Australian Regiment 25 Royal Queensland Regiment Aviation Centre
5/7 Royal Australian Regiment 2 Cavalry Regiment 3 Royal Australian Regiment I Field Engineer Regiment 3 Royal Australian Regiment I Armoured Regiment 4/19 Prince of Wales Light Horse 16 Air Defence Regiment 22 Construction Squadron Composite Army Guard 121ndependant Rifle Company Composite Army Guard 16 Field Battery . . . . . 7 Independant Rifle Company
HQ7 Military District NW Mobile Force 8/12 Medium Regiment

Location
Melbourne Cairns Brisbane Darwin Sydney Sydney Nowra Fremantle Fremantle Canberra
Enoggera Enoggera Toowoomba Oakey Holsworthy, NSW Holsworthy Holsworthy Holsworthy Woodside SA Puckapunyal Melbourne Woodside SA Karrakatta WA Perth Launceston Hobart Launceston
Darwin Darwin Holsworthy

-U-n-it------------------------L-oc-a-ti-o-n--------

104 Signal Squadron

Holsworthy

Army Office

Canberra

RMC Duntroon

Canberra

(c) Air Force

RAAF Pearce

WA

RAAF Fairbairn

ACT

RAAF Edinburgh

SA

RAAFDarwin

NT

RAAF Richmond

NSW

RAAF Williamtown

NSW

RAAF Amberley

Qld

RAAF Laverton

Vic.

I Stores Depot Tottenham

Vic.

RAAF Point Cook

Vic.

Questions on Use of Toxic Chemicals in Vietnam: Department of Health
(Ques'tion No. 4854)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) How many (a) questions without notice, and (b) questions on notice, has he, or his predecessors, received since I January 1978 on any matters related to or arising out of United States, Australian, and allied forces use of toxic chemicals in Vietnam during hostilities here.
(2) Who was the member or senator asking the question, and what is the full Hansard reference, in each case.
Mr Carlton--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 3; (b) 12.
(2)-

Question
5327 5991 W/ONotice W/ONotice 2774
643 2733 3104 2732 3694 W/ONotice 4473 4906 4907 4908

Asked by
MrHolding Dr Everingham Senator Mason Senator Melzer Senator Mason MrHolding MrHolding DrCass MrHolding MrHolding Senator Macklin MrHolding MrHolding MrHolding MrHolding

Hansard
26/27 March 1980 (p. (293) 19 August 1980 (p. 428) 19 August 1980 (p. 87) 19 August 1980 (p. 88) 12 September 1980 (p. 944) 13 May 1,981 (p.2367) 30 October 1981 (p.2803) 18 November 1981 (p.3142) 23 February 1982 (p. 504) 23 March 1982 (p. 13(1) 18 August 1982 (p. 2ll) Not yet answered Not yet answered Not yet answered Not yet answered

Fluoride: Renal Effects
(Question No. 4858)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) Is he able to say whether A. L. Maduska and others

(Am. J. Obstet, Gynecol., 130,84, (980) have evidence that maternal fluoride levels are occasionally above 50 micromol/L with the usual exposure to methoxyflurane and with high fetal to maternal flouride ratio.
(2) Do adults vary in susceptibility to high-output renal failure with high blood fluoride.

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2461

(3) Have studies been done to suggest renal damage in the newborn from exogenous flouride.
(4) Is he able to say whether the decision to ban flouride supplements in pregnancy in New York was due solely to a belief that these supplements were ineffective: if so, what other examples of such bans of medication solely on the grounds of ineffectiveness are known: if not, on what evidence were the other grounds for the ban based.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In their study on pregnant ewes (Am. J. Obslel. Gynecol. 136, 84, 1980), Maduska and others did report serum inorganic fluoride levels above 50 micromol per litre, compared to a mean maternal baseline of 13.3 micromol. This rise in serum level followed the administration intravenously of a large quantity of sodium fluoride-20 ml of a solution of 100 parts per million were rapidly introduced. In the study, the ewes were not exposed to methoxyflurane. The anaesthetic administered was halothane, a stable fluroine compound. The study was designed to measure the effect of sodium fluoride-not fluoride released from methoxyflurane---on maternal and fetal serum flouride levels.
(2) Yes. The presence of existing kidney disease and its degree of severity, obesity and the PH of the urine are among the factors influencing individual susceptibility to this classification of renal failure.
(3) No studies have been reported in the scientific literature concerning renal damage in the newborn from exogenous fluoride.
(4) The 'ban' imposed by the United States Food and Drug Administration in 1966 in New York and other States was a 'ban' on the advertising and promotion of sodium fluoride supplements in respect of claims for efficacy. It was not a 'ban' on the use of these supplements. In the United States, 'bans' on advertisements, which claimed an effect not proven, have been imposed for many years. The 'bans' apply to many other readily available substances, including other dietary supplements, analgesics and mouth-rinses.
Aircraft Noise: Brisbane Airport
(Question No. 4874)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notic~, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the National Acoustic Laboratories and Commonwealth Department of Health Report 'Aircraft Noise in Australia: A survey of community reaction' which recommended that the new NEF index value of 20 be used to indicate areas having 'an excessive amount of aircraft noise' on maps showing aircraft noise exposure around airports.

(2) If so, when will maps showing aircraft noise exposure based on this index value around (a) Brisbane airport and (b) Brisbane's new international airport be available.
(3) What publicity will be given to their release.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable members's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) My Department is currently studying the findings of the NAL Report. Any modification to the NEF system arising from these studies will take some time to complete.
(3) Any revised NEF maps for Brisbane will be provided to the Queensland Government and Brisbane City Council. They will also be incorporated in the Brisbane Airport Master Plan. They would also be included in public displays, as appropriate, of the airport redevelopment, and at the public information centre on the new airport site.
Satellite Tracking Stations
(Question No. 4881)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) What satellites are (a) currently being tracked by satellite tracking stations in Australia and (b) receiving transmission from or sending data to satellite ground stations in Australia.
(2) What are the (a) formal designations, (b) orbital parameters and (c) dates of launch of each of these satellites.
(3) Where are these ground stations located and which stations are involved with which satellites.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The comprehensive detail sought by the honourable member is not available. Tracking of satellites in Australia is undertaken by universities, State Government authorities, and private companies and individuals for research, mapping and navigation purposes. The Department of Defence does not maintain records of such tracking activity. Nor is it concerned to monitor all users of satellite communications systems in Australia.
Details of satellites tracked from or otherwise utilised by ground stations in Australia operated by Defence or in cooperation with Defence are as follows. No information is provided in respect of classified satellite programs.
(I) (a) 5 UN NAVSATS, GEOS-C and 5 NAVSTAR GPS; (b) DSCS, FLTSATCOM, GAPFILLER.
(2)-

(a) Designation (international designation in brackets where known)
NAVSAT (1967-48A)
NAVSAT (1967-92A) NAVSAT (1970-67A) NAVSAT (1972-8IA) NAVSAT (NOVA) (1981-44A) GEOS-C (1975-27A)
NAVSTAR I (l978-20A)

(b) Orbital Parameters The US Navy NAVSATS are in polar orbits with a period of 107 minutes at altitudes between approximately 900 and I 100 km
Orbit between 820 and 860 km inclined at 115 0 with a period of 101 minutes The orbits for the NAVSTAR satellites are near circular at approximately 21,000 km inclined at 63 0 with an orbital period of 718 minutes

(c) Date of LilUnch
18.5.67
25.9.67 27.8.70 30.10.73 15.5.81 9.4.75
22.2.78

2462 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(a) Designation (international designation in brackets where known)
NAVSTAR 3 (1978-93A) NAVSTAR 4 (1978-ll2A) NAVSTAR 5 (1980-IIA) NAVSTAR 6 (1980-32A) GAPFILLER (MARISAT)-Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean satellites

(b) Orbital Parameters Geostationary at 75° Eand 176° E

DSCS-Western Pacific and Indian
Ocean satellites FLTSATCOM-Western Pacific sate-
llite

Geostationary at 60° E and 175° E Geostationary at 176° E

(c) Date of Launch
7.10.78 11.12.78 9.2.80 26.4.80 The particular GAPFILLER, DSCS or FLTSATCOM satellite utilised may vary from time to time due to operational requirements.

(3) (a) TRANET Smithfield--NAVSATS, GEOS-C, NAVSTAR; (b) Joint Defence Space Research Facility (JDSRF), Pine GapDSCS; (c) Joint Defence Space Communications Station, Nurrungar (JDSCS)-DSCS; (d) Advanced Electronics laboratory, Salisbury-Western Pacific GAPFlllER and FlTSATCOM (occasional experimental use only); (e) Watsonia Barracks, Macleod, VictoriaDSCS; (f) Harold E. Holt Naval Communications Station, North West CapeDSCS and GAPFlllER (receive only for FlTSATCOM access); (g) Seven portable Army Survey geodetic receivers used for mapping purposes within Australia-NAVSATS.
Hamlin Medical Trust Fund of Ethiopia
(Question No. 4912)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
Will financial aid be given to the Hamlin Medical Trust Fund of Ethiopia to assist Australian gynaecologists continue to help Ethiopian women with internal injuries received during difficult and unsuccessful births.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Financial assistance is provided for organisations such as the Hamlin Medical Trust Fund of Ethiopia only through Australian non-government organisations (NGOs) which have been approved for this purpose. Such assistance has been provided previously to the Hamlin Medical Trust Fund of Ethiopia, and notice of its work will be brought to the attention of approved Australian NGOs for their consideration.
Pensioner Health Benefit Concession Cards
(Question No. 4926)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
(I) Is a computer letter sent to all pensioners who are no longer entitled to retain their health benefit card or concession card.
(2) Does the letter advise pensioners to check with the State health authority to see if they can still receive free hospital services; if so, as Queensland has a free hospital system, should this part of the letter be censored for Queensland pensioners as it may cause them alarm.

Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes. A letter is automatically produced by computer and forwarded to pensioners who are no longer entitled to retain their health benefit card or concession card requesting the cards be returned.
(2) Yes. The text of the letter does advise the pensioner to check with the State Health Authority.
It is considered desirable for the pensioner to do so, so that he is fully aware of the situation applicable to him. The arrangements for the provision of full medical and hospital care to holders of Commonwealth health benefits cards are different from the arrangements existing in State hospitals, particularly where the pensioner has been receiving treatment by a private medical practitioner.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Aviation
(Question No. 4944)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is a follows:
(I) Notice Papers are examined every sitting day both by my Senior Private Secretary and by the Director, Ministerial and Parliamentary liaison Section of my Department.

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2463

Answers are prepared in the relevant Division of my Department and submitted by the Division Head for my approval.
(2) On the date of my appointment as Minister for Aviation, 7 May 1982, there were 48 outstanding questions on notice to the Minister for Transport which became by responsibility. From that date up to 23 September 1982 [ have been asked 40 questions.
(3) For the outstanding questions on notice on the date of my appointment as the Minister for Aviation, the average delay was II weeks. For questions asked since 7 May 1982, the average delay has been 5 weeks.
(4) (a) 36; (b) 16; (c) I; (d) 0; (e) O.
(5) There were 29 questions on notice on 23 September 1982. None were more than 12 months old.
Non-aligned Moyement Summit Meeting: Australian Observers
(Question No, 4960)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) Having regard to Australia's increasing involvement in the Middle East, and the size of the membership of the NonAligned Movement (NAM), what consideration did the Government give to sending a (a) Government and (b) Parliamentary, representative to the 7th NAM summit meeting to be held in Baghdad, 6-10 September 1982.
(2) Will any official Australian observers be present; if so (a) who are they, (b) what is their status and (c) to whom will they report.
(3) If no Australian observers will be present; why not.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Government gave no consideration to sending a Government representative to the 7th Non-Aligned Conference of Heads of State. The question of attendance by a representative of the Parliament would of course be a matter for Parliament itself. In any event, the meeting has been postponed and is likely to be transferred to another venue.
(2) and (3) Australia is not a member of the Non-Aligned Movement. It is not the normal practice of the Non-Aligned Movement to extend invitations to aligned countries to attend NAM meetings, whether as Observers or Guests.
Vietnam Veterans Counselling Service
(Question No. 4961)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) On what date (a) did the Government decide to establish the Vietnam Veterans Counselling Service (VVCS) and (b) was this decision announced.
(2) Did this decision follow representations made by the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia (VVAA); if so, on what dates were these representations made.
(3) Does the VVCS, as established, differ from the service which the VVAA sought; if so, in what ways.
(4) What is the (a) location, (b) phone number and (c) establishment date, of each counselling centre currently operating.

(5) What is (a) the 1981-82actualexpenditureand (b) the 1982-83 proposed expenditure for (i) Departmental administration of the VVCS and (ii) each counselling centre operating, by Division, Sub-division and Item, for each relevant section of the appropriations of the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
(6) How many (a) Second Division, (b) Third Division and (c) Fourth Division, including part-time and casual, officers are employed (i) on Departmental administration of the VVCS and (ii) at each counselling centre.
(7) What are the formal qualifications of each officer employed at counselling centres, and how many of these officers in each centre are Vietnam veterans.
(8) On what basis does the VVCS compile statistics of (a) services provided to clients and (b) the needs of those clients.
(9) How many clients has each centre had in each month since its inception.
(10) How many clients have resided outside the metropolitan area in each State or Territory in which a centre is located.
(I I) Has the Minister received any representations regarding the extension of the counselling services to country areas; if so, is any extension planned and when will it commence and what form will such extension take.
(12) What services are being provided by the VVCS, in descending order of demand.
(13) For each centre, what has been the (a) print, and (b) broadcast media schedule in (i) the metropolitan area serviced by that centre and (ii) non-metropolitan areas within that State, for all advertising announcing the VVCS and the centre, since its inception.
(14) Have any reviews of the cost effectiveness of that advertising been undertaken; if so, (a) what recommendations have resulted from those reviews and (b) what changes have resulted.
(15) What mechanisms exist for reviewing services provided by the VVCS.
(16) What is the nature of the relationship between the VVCS and the Vietnam Special Studies Group in the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
(17) [s the Minister able to say how many Vietnam veterans reside in (a) metropolitan and (b) non-metropolitan areas, by State and Territory.
(18) Are any outside consultants providing any services to the VVCS; if so, what are the details in respect of consultants advising (a) the Department's central office and (b) each centre.
Mr Thomson--The Minister for Veterans' Affairs ha~ provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) 21 July 1981. (b) Yes,on 24 July 1981.
(2) The first representations on this subject appear to have been on 26 March 1980 to my predecessor from Mr Holt McMinn. A proposal called 'Operation Simpson' was submitted in February 1981 and a revised version followed in March 1981.
(3) A press statement by Mr Phil Thompson, National President of the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia, on 17 July 1981 indicated that 'The V.V.A.A. accepts in principle the Government's service proposal as it is essentially the same as our submissions except for one important issue.' That issue was the creation and composition of a national executive council and similar State bodies.
[ proposed a National Advisory Committee only, with a smaller membership but generally similar composition to that apparently sought by the V.V.A.A.

2464 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

The V.V.A.A. subsequently indicated that it 'reluctantly accept(s) (my) proposal subject to negotiation of a number of conditions and recommendations'.
I declined to make appointments subject to pre-conditions and on 4 September 198 I Mr Thompson advised his acceptance of nomination to the National Advisory Committee of the Vietnam Veterans Counselling Service.
(4)-

Address

Telephone

HobartIst Floor, New

Ward Block, Repatriation

General Hospital, Hamp-

den Road, Hobart, Tas.

700 I

. (002) 3 I 0043

Establishment date
19 May 1982

Address

Establishment

Telephone

date

Ad e Iaid e -- 2 3 7 G len

Osmond Road, Frewville,

S.A. 5063

(08) 799718 29 January 1982

Sydney-Cnr Macquarie

and Smith Streets, Par-

ramatta, N.S.W. 2150 . (02) 6359733 15 February 1982

Perth--Unit 4, Delaine

House, Cnr Canning

Highway and Gwenyfred

Street, South Perth, WA.

6151

.(09)3679400 14April1982

Darwin-Casuarina Plaza,

Cm Trower Road and

Vanderlin Drive, Casua-

rina, N.T. 5792

. (089) 27 941 I

Melbourne-445 Clarendon

Street, South Melbourne,

Vic. 3205

. (03) 6905299

Brisbane-Legal and Gen-

eral House, 49 Park Road,

Milton, Qld. 4064

. (07) 3698 177

(5)-V.V.C.S. EXPENDITURE SUMMARY

II June 1982 23 June 1982 21 July 1982

Item description Expenditure

- - - - - - - - - - - = Regi-on-al o-ffi-ce - - - - - - - - - - -

Total operating

Sydney Melbourne Brisbane Adelaide Darwin Perth Hobart expenses

Departmental adminis-
tration

Total expen-
dituTe

690/1/01 Actual 1981-82

Salaries Estimated 1982-83

690/1/02 Actual 81-82

Overtime Estimated 82-83

Total

Actual 1981-82

Sub-Div.

690/1 Estimates 1982-83

690/2/01 Actual 1981-82

Travel

Estimated 1982-83

690/2/02 Actual 1981-82

Office Reqs. Estimated 1982-83

690/2/03 Actual 1981-82

Post and

Telephone Estimated 1982-83

690/2/04 Actual 1981-82

Office

Services Estimated 1982-83

690/2/08 Actual 1981-82

Furniture

and

Fittings Estimated 1982-83

690/2/10 Actual 1981-82

Incidentals Estimated 1982-83

Total

Actual 1981-82

Sub-Div.

690/2 Estimated 1982-83

Total

Actual 1981-82

Division 690 Estimated 1982-83

$ 24,746 91,000
2,301 7,500 27,047
98,500 564
5,000 4,646 3,500 3,333
6,000
3,000 8,156

$ 6,601 91,000
7,500 6,601
98,500
5,000 3,493 4,000 1,128
6,000 306
3,000 7,030

$
55,000
10,000
65,000 277
8,000 2,899 2,500
18
6,000
2,000 2,148

$ 23,420 57,000
2,600 7,300 26,020
64,300 1,692 500 4,093 3,000 2,072
5,000 138
3,000 7,558

$ 13,121 73,000
3,200 13,121
76,200 8,225 13,500 3,918 1,000
13,500
1,000 4,154

$ 13,481 55,000
222 5,500 13,703
60,500 2,282 3,000 4,255 3,000 355
6,000 268
2,000 5,056

$ 1,545 25,100
252 7,000 1,797

$ 82,914 447,100
5,375 48,000 88,289

32,100 264
3,000
955 1,400

495,100 13,304 38,000 24,259 18,400 6,906

2,500 130

45,000 842

2,000 782

16,000 34,884

$ 9,395 30,500
9,385

$ 92,299 477,600
5,375 48,000 97,674

30,500 31,352
2,000 1,488 6,000

525,600 44,656 40,000 25,747 24,400 6,906

45,000 842

16,000 34,884

4,000 586
2,000 17,289
23,500 44,332 122,000

3,000
2,000 11,957
23,000 18,558 121,500

8,000
2,000 5,342
28,500 5,342
93,500

1,000 495
1,000 16,048

1,000 603
2,000 16,900

13,500 42,068 77,800

32,000 30,021 108,200

2,000 217
2,000 12,433
18,000 26,136 78,500

1,000
1,000 2,131

20,000 1,901
12,000 82,096

10,900 3,928 43,000

149,400 170,385
644,500

47,593 38,000 80,433

20,000 49,494 50,000 162,529

46,000 89,818 76,500

195,400 260,203
721,000

It has not been administratively convenient to report on <411 expenditllre. e.g., where part of the time of an administrative officer is spent on V.V.C.S. activities. The expenditure above relates only to expenditure identified as being wholly in respect of the V. V.C.S.

(6) (a) (i) Nil. (ii) Nil.
(b) (i) One. (ii) N.S.W. 4, Vic. 4, Qld. 2, S.A. 2, WA. 2, Tas. I,N.T. I.
(c) (i) Nil. (ii) N.S.W. I, Vic. I,Qld. I,S.A. I, WA. I, Tas. Nil-Part-time assi:;tance provided as required from staff of Repatriation General Hospital, Hobart. N.T. I-However, this officer also acts as a point of information for all departmental matters.

The above figures indicate those directly and solely concerned with VVCS matters. Other staff, both in Central Office and Branch Offices, are employed in providing administrative support, developing policy, etc. It is administratively impracticable to assess the extent of these contributions but it would be minor and is done as part of overall departmental duties. Every endeavour is made to keep the Service separate from the Department.
(7)-

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2465

Centre

Position

Qualifications

Sydney Melbourne
Brisbane Adelaide Perth Hobart

Snr Counsellor Vietnam Veteran

Bachelor of Psychology, University of Tasmania 1976.

Bachelor of Social Work, Uni-

versity of Melbourne 1978.

Counsellor

Bachelor in Social Work, Uni-

versity of New South Wales 1979.

Counsellor

Bachelor of Arts (Honours), Macquarie University 1978.

Counsellor

Bachelor of Social Work (Honours), James Cook

University, Qld. 1981.

Snr Counsellor Bachelor of Arts, University of

WA.1973.

Diploma of Education, Uni-

versity ofW.A. 1974.

Bachelor of Psychology, UniversityofW.A.1977.

Master of Arts, University of Melbourne 1981.

Counsellor

Master's Degree in Clinical Psychology, University of Melbourne 1980.

Counsellor

Bachelor of Arts (Social Sciences), La Trobe University
1975.

Bachelor of Social Work, La

Trobe University 1977.

Counsellor

Vietnam Veteran

Certificate in Welfare Work,

Community Welfare Training Institute, Victoria.

Snr Counsellor Diploma in Theology, New
Zealand Baptist Theological College.

Diploma of Social Studies,

University of Auckland.

Diploma in Casework Supervision, University of

Auckland.

Counsellor

Bachelor of Arts (Honours in Psychology) .

Snr Counsellor Bachelor of Arts, University of Adelaide 1966.

Master of Arts, Australian National University 1970.

Counsellor

Bachelor of Arts, Flinders University 1975.

Bachelor of Social Administration, Flinders University

1980.

Snr Counsellor Bachelor of Arts, University of Melbourne 1968.

Bachelor of Psychology, UniversityofW.A.1971

Counsellor

Vietnam Veteran

Bachelor of Science (Honours in Psychology), University ofW.A. 1979.

Clerical Assist-

ant

Vietnam Veteran

Snr Counsellor Bachelor of Arts 1974.

Diploma of Psychology 1981, University of Tasmania.

Centre

Position

Qualifications

Darwin

Snr Counsellor

Bachelor of Applied Science
(Psychology), Graduate Diploma in Psychology (Counselling), WA. Institute of Technology.

(8) There are two components to the statistical reporting system at the national level:
(a) Workload Statistics~The workload statistics provide information on the operations of the centres by measuring the major activities conducted by the staff. This includes identifying the type of counselling (i.e., counselling new clients, telephone counselling, casual contacts) and other non-client related activities (e.g. staff development) conducted in the centres. The indicators in this system are the number of contacts and time spent on each activity.
(b) Client-Specific Data Base~This data base provides basic statistical information about the clients, the problems they are experiencing, patterns of utilisation of the centres and counselling outcomes.
As the veteran is considered to be the prime client and the system is veteran oriented, data collected on this system pertain to veterans.
The information is divided into~
(i) Veterans' details~including sex, marital status, number of children and Repatriation details;
(ii) service details~including the Branch of Service and details of tours of duty in Vietnam;
(iii) contact details~including with whom the contact was made (i.e., veteran, spouse) and the problems involved;
(iv) type of counselling~individual, group or family; and
(v) referral information~including the agency to which referred (i.e., Local Government, non-Government, voluntary) and the reason for referral (e.g., legal, drug/alcohol, employment).
(9) Statistics on the V.V.C.S., as on most other operations, are collected on a four-weekly cost period basis. This enables consistent comparisons to be made between different periods.
Statistics are also collected in terms of client contacts and tables giving these are set out below. Definitions of the terms used in these tables are as follows:
Client: for unique identification purposes the prime client is the veteran, although contacts may be with veteran and spouse/others. References to 'client' refer to the veteran or any family or other associate.
New Client Contact: the first contact at the Centre by a client, after which contact the client is registered (i.e. at the time of contact no registered client file number is held at the Centre).
Past Client Contact: a second or subsequent contact at the Centre by a registered client (i.e. a client file is held at the Centre).
Casual Client Contact: (i) an initial contact by a client after which contact the client is not registered. This could include contacts made on country visits.
(ii) a contact by a client, either registered or unregistered, which is not part of a specific counselling plan (i.e. in the case of a registered client a contact which is not part of a Counsellor's course of treatment and no record is made of the contact on the file) e.g. attendance at a self-help group.

2466 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Outside Contact: a contact with a registered client outside the Centre, e.g. home visit, hospital visit.
If a contact is made outside the Centre with an unregistered client this is included as a casual client contact.
Telephone Contact: a contact by telephone with either a registered or unregistered client. Telephone contacts are included only if they involve the provision of a professional

service by the Counsellor. Appointment making and discussions about clients are not included. [n the case of a registered client the client's file mayor may not be noted.
The number of clients registered with each Centre for each period is given by the figure in the column "New Clients".

PROGRESSIVE MONTHLY SUMMARY OF CLIENT CONTACTS

Centre

Period

Past Clients

New Outside Clients Centre

Casual

Telephone

Total

South Australia*2 week period
New South Wales*1 week period
t 3 week period
Western Australia*3 week period
Tasmania*1 week period
Northern Territory*6 week period
Victoria--~
*5 week period Queensland-
*2 week period

*11.2.82

\0

17

11.3.82

54

25

7.4.82

57

6

6.5.82

35

5

3.6.82

36

3

1.7.82

48

7

30.7.82

76

II

12

32

71

18

77

175

27

70

161

62

84

186

30

109

178

2

29

114

200

5

37

87

216

*20.2.82

I

9

18.3.82

97

64

15.4.82

102

29

t6.5.82

77

17

3.6.82

131

12

1.7.82

142

16

30.7.82

196

8

2

I

14

27

I

25

84

271

2

9

59

201

I

9

50

154

6

6

79

234

4

4

99

265

I

II

97

313

14.5.82

67

88

*4.6.82

40

16

2.7.82

66

20

30.7.82

59

14

5

24

61

245

6

12

II

85

13

19

118

8

\0

91

*28.5.82

I

15

2

I

4

23

25.6.82

32

15

26

12

5

90

23.7.82

31

12

26

48

26

143

*30.7.82

6

7

7

6

26

*30.6.82

8

13

3

2

26

30.7.82

16

3

3

3

15

40

*30.7.82

44

61

11

93

210

*31.7.82

8

18

4

20

50

Total

1440

504

\05

423

1327

3799

(10) As at 17 August 1982: New South Wales 55; Victoria 13; Queensland 27; South Australia 16; Western Australia 12; Tasmania 28; Northern Territory I.

They would be assisted through training, discussion, etc., to cope with veterans' needs.

(II) The following measures to cater for country clients either exist or are proposed:
(i) establishment of regional offices where distances from the capital city and concentration of clients warrant it. Townsville and Canberra have been suggested as sites.
(ii) acceptance by the existing Centres of reverse charge telephone calls from country clients-this already operates.
(iii) visits to country centres by V.V.C.S. Counsellors.
(iv) development of a network of counsellors and services in country areas to which veterans could be referred.

(12) No records are kept in a form which would permit this question, in the way in which it has been asked, to be answered precisely. [ draw attention to my statement to the Senate on 25 August 1982 in which [ said: 'Broadly speaking the most common problem, occurring in 26 per cent of cases, ';s family problems embracing both marital and parent/child relationships. Next, at 25 per cent are what might be termed behavioural problems, covering such things as violent behaviour, withdrawal, irritability or moodiness, insomnia, bad dreams and flashbacks, and depression. Finally, 22 per cent of cases have reported problems of a social nature such as housing and accommodation, employment and finance.'
(13) All advertising of this nature is arranged through the Australian Government Advertising Service which has provided the following information:

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2467

DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS' AFFAIRS Vietnam Veterans Counselling Centres Campaign

Press

Radio

No./lnsertions/Spots

Cost

$ SECTION A 'OPENING ANNOUNCEMENT' ONLY FOR METRO AREAS

I. Adelaide (Campaign period January /February 1982)

A. Advertiser S.Mail A. News . .

4 2
3 S. Fees

1,814.40 1,337.60 1,320.00
156.52

5AA 5AD 5DN

30x30sec 30 x 30 sec 30x30sec S. Fees

660.00 960.00 870.00
87.15

Production Reserve Grand Total

2. Sydney (Campaign period February/March 1982)
D. Telegraph D. Mirror Parramatta Advertiser Parramatta Mercury . Fairfield Advance Liverpool F. Champion Mount Druitt D. Star Blacktown Advocate W.Standard

2 2 1
I
1 I 1 1 1 S. Fees

2,128.00 2,224.00
434.40 292.00 285.60 232.00 264.00 308.00 200.80
222.91

2UE 2UW 2WS

30 x 30 sec 30 x 30 sec 30 x 30 sec S. Fees

2,250.00 1,950.00 1,680.00
205.80

Production Reserve Grand Total

3. Perth (Campaign period April/May 1982)
W. Australian D.News S. Times . .

4
3 2 S. F~es

2,086.40
823.20 1,342.40
148.82

6PM 6lX 96FM

30x30sec 30 x 30 sec 30x30sec S. Fees

660.00 780.00 900.00 81.90

Production Reserve Grand Total

4. Darwin (Campaign period May/June 1982) N.T. News

4 S. Fees

649.00 22.72

8DN

30x 30 sec S. Fees

560.00 19.60

Production Reserve Grand Total

5. Hobart (Campaign period May/June 1982) Mercury . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 S. Fees

908.80 31.81

Total $
4,628.52
2,577.15 1,794.33 9,000.00
6,591.71
6,805.80 799.49
14,197.00
4,400.82
2,421.00 678.18
7,500.00
671.72 579.60 448.68 1,700.00
940.61

2468 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers io Questions

Press

Radio
7HO 7HT

Production Reserve Grand Total
6. Melbourne (Campaign period June/August 1982) Sun Pictorial Age Herald

3AW 3DB 3UZ
Production Reserve Grand Total
7. Brisbane (Campaign period July/September 1982) C.Mail B. Telegraph

4BH 4BK
Production Reserve Grand Total
SECTION B 'FOLLOW-UP ANNOUNCEMENT' I. Adelaide (Campaign period July 1982) S.Mail
5AD 5DN
Production Reserve Grand Total
2. Darwin (Campaign period August 1982) N.T.News Darwin Star

Production Reserve Grand Total

8DN

No. /Insertions/Spots 30 x 30 sec 30 x 30 sec S. Fees
3 3 3 S. Fees 30 x 30 sec 30 x 30 sec 30 x 30 sec S. Fees
3 2 S. Fees 30 x 30 sec 30 x 30 sec S. Fees
2 S. Fees 30 x 30 sec 30x 30 sec S. Fees
2 S. Fees 30 x 30 sec S. Fees

Cost
$ 432.00 450.00
30.87

Total $
912.87 446.52 2,300.00

3,456.00 2,990.00 1,156.00
266.07
1,380.00 900.00
1,350.00 127.05

7,869.07
3,757.05 674.88
12,300.00

1,608.00 827.00 85.23
900.00 810.00 59.85

2,520.23
1,769.85 709.92
5,000.00

1,321.00 46.24
960.00 870.00 64.05

1,367.24
1,894.05 198.71
3,460.00

344.00 160.00 17.64
560.00 19.60

521.64
579.60 198.76 1300.00

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2469

Press

Radio

No./lnsertions/Spots

Cost

Total

SECTION C--POINT-OF-SALE I. Press Announcements reprints for all States
SUMMARY

Section A Total

Section B Total

Press Radio
Production

$ Adelaide
4,628.52 2,577.15 1,794.33

$
1,367.24 1,894.05
198.71

9,000.00

3,460.00

Press Radio
Production

Sydney
6,591.71 6,805.80
799.49

14,197.00

Press
Radio Production

Perth
4,400.82 2,421.00
678.18

7,500.00

Press Radio Production

Darwin
671.72 579.60 448.68

521.64 579.60
198.76

1,700.00

1,300.00

Press Radio
Production

Hobart
940.61 912.87 446.52

2,300.00

Press
Radio Production

Melhourne
7,868.07 3,757.05
674.88

12,300.00

Press Radio Production

Brisbane
2,520.23 1,769.85
709.92

5,000.00

(14) No.
(15) The V.V.C.S. is subject to continuing review on a dayto-day basis by its Director through such mechanisms as the statistical reporting system described in (8) above, the normal financial and staff reporting systems and by contact and visits by the Director to the various Centres. The Director in turn reports through the normal Departmental channels to me and

$

$

1360.00
through a Commissioner of the Repatriation Commission to the National Advisory Committee of the Vietnam Veterans Counselling Service, of which the Commissioner is Chairman, on major issues of a developmental or policy nature. The National Advisory Committee can make recommendations to me.
In the longer term, probably at the completion of a full year of operation of all the existing Centres, it is intended to carry out an evaluation of the Service embracing such aspects as statistics, professional aspects, client response and satisfaction, administration and finance.
(16) None. The records of the V. V.C.S. are confidential and are not available to the Department without the agreement of the client.
(17) The Department has information on a geographic basis for Vietnam veterans in receipt of pensions. This covers about 6,900 veterans. For the total Vietnam veteran population, the Department has used estimates provided by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, based on a sample survey carried out at the end of 1979. Some estimates were below the levels normally released by the Bureau and they were provided to the Department on the basis that they would not be released outside the Department.
(18) No, with the possible exception of Dr R. T. Anderson, Psychiatrist-in-Charge of the Elizabeth Street Clinic in Melbourne, who is a member of the National Advisory Committee. Clients of the V.V.C.S. can be referred as necessary to the full range of medical and counselling services available in the community either directly by the Counselling Service or through the Department's facilities.
Injuries and Accidents in Federal Government Departments
(Question No. 5002)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
(1) How many injuries and accidents occurred in each Federal Government Department for each year since 1977 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(2) What is the cost of these injuries and accidents.
(3) As a result of these work related injuries and accidents:
(a) how many man weeks were lost,
(b) what amounts were paid in workers' compensation, and
(c) what were the effects on each Department's productively as a result of time lost by employees in each of the last 5 years.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1), (2) and (3) (b) Federal Government injury statistics are shown in Table 1 (Consolidation and for each department/authority (Tables 2 to 6) including number of cases and cost covering the years 1976-77 to 1980-8\.
(3) (a) Average man/weeks for both total and partial incapacity cases are shown in Table 7 for 1979-80 and 1980-8 I-that is, since such records have been kept.

2470 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) (c) The information is not available.
Note: The sources of the statistical tables provided are the Annual Reports of the Commissioner for Employees' Compensation for the relevant years. Numbers of cases and costs for 1981-82 will be available in the Commissioner's Report when tabled.
Table I
INJURY STATISTICS 1976-77 TO 1980-81 RELATING TO CLAIMS UNDER THE COMPENSATION (COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES) ACT 1971

Number of claims

Year

Item I Item 2 Total Expenditure

1980-81 1979-80 1978-79
1977-78
1976-77

32763
31350 29828 28195
26885

12354
10 934 10588 9400
6896

45117 42284
40416 37595
33781

$
61190020 50206895 41215045 36772 927 25043730

Note I Item I relates to the number of cases involving injury, accident or disease in respect of which a determination of initial acceptance of liability has been made since the commencement of the financial year and in respect of which at least one payment has been made in that time.
Item 2 relates to the number of cases involving injury, accident or disease in respect of which a determination of initial acceptance of liability was made before the commencement of the financial year and in respect of which at least one payment has been made during the financial year.
Note 2 Although sub-section 122 (I) of the Act refers only to injuries, it should be noted that the above figures, for each financial year, include cases of compensable diseases. This follows from the operation of sub-section 29 (2) of the Act whereby a disease which is compensable under the Act is, for the purposes of the application of the benefit provisions of the Act, deemed to be a personal injury to the employee. The figures also include those cases where the employee was involved in an accident arising out of and in the course of his employment and the accident resulted in the loss of, or damage to, an artificial aid or appliance, but did not cause personal injury (section 28).

Table 2 TOTAL NUMBERS OF CASES AND EXPENDITURE 1976-77

Department or authority

Numbers Item I

Item2

Total Total expenditure

DEPARTMENTSAboriginal Affairs Administrative Services
Attorney-GeneraI's Business and Consumer Affairs
Industries Assistance Commission Prices Justification Tribunal
Capital Territory Construction Defence Education Employment and Industrial Relations Environment, Housing and Community Development Finance Foreign Affairs
Australian Development Assistance Bureau Papua New Guinea Office Health Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
Industry and Commerce National Resources Northern Territory Overseas Trade Parliamentary Departments Postal and Telecommunications Primary Industry Prime Minister and Cabinet
Auditor-GeneraI's Public Service Board Productivity Science Social Security Transport Treasury Australian Bureau of Statistics Australian Taxation Office Veterans' Affairs AUTHORITIESA.C.T. Electricity Authority

23 579 36 235
II I
365 1665 3083
37 126 20 67
5 10
I 248 27
24 78 20 9 22 699 9 2 16 1014 98 257 730 2 208 392 617
128

10 190 17 62
2
127 509 1701
17 33 4 12 3 2 2 59 12
II 23
7 12 4 145 3 5 2 360 48 42 203 2 23 133 276
5

33 769 53 297
13 I
492 2174 4784
54 159 24 79
8 12 3 307 39
35 101 27 21 26 844 12
7 18 1374 146 299 933 4 231 525 893
133

$
24753 601401 72 237 180307
8164 18
385007 I 938437 5966758
37533 97232 22244 61551
2888 10476
1347 223984
20530
26125 76626 21 168 2667 6379 368867 13949 15489
1749 I 541 564
87171 135888 605564
432 97799 259850 766627
82040

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2471

Department or authority

Numbers Item I

Item 2

Total Total expenditure

A.C.T. Fire Brigade
A.C.T. Police A.C.T. Schools Authority Australia Council
Australian Atomic Energy Commission Australian Broadcasting Commissioll. Australian Film Commission .Australian Institute of Aboriginal Stu.dies Australian Institute of Marine Science Australian Shipping Commission Australian National Railways Commission Australian Postal Commission Australian Security Intelligence Organization Australian Services Canteens Organization Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority Australian Telecommunications Commission Australian Tourist Commission CSIRO. . . . . . . . . . . Canberra College of Advanced Education Capital Territory Health Commission Commonwealth Banking Corporation Commonwealth Bureau of Roads Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Darwin Community College Darwin Reconstruction Commission Export Finance and Insurance Corporation Health Insurance Commission National Capital Development Commission National Standards Commission Northern Territory Port Authority Northern Territory Reserves Board Overseas Telecommunications Commission Pipeline Authority . . . . . . . .
Reserve Bank of Australia . . . . . . Snowy Mountains Engineering Commission Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority T.A.A.

26 45 100
6 133 343
II I 3
39 750 4333
7 65 18 7730
2 425
19 132 534
101 2 2 2
132 5 2 8 5
91 I
232 19 56
641

2 26 18
I 36 98
2
5 152 1210
16 5 684
89 2
31 94
2 52
8 2 I I
19
57 6
42 169

28
71 118
7 169 441
13
I 3 44 902 5543 7 81 23 8414 2 514 21 163 628
2 153
2 2 2 140 7 3
9 5 110 I 289 25
98 810

$ 3744 25797 76487
957 158984 450587
8070 5483
50 31918 747030 2955237
663 56207 16985 4642748
159 282670
3896 144530 446553
47 127940
955 283 102 36801
14753 72
11715 2530 73206
7 144 873 50908 163473 563489

Totals

26885

6896 33781 25043730

(a) Only Departments and Authorities which incurred expenses are listed. Tables include claims in respect of death. Table 3
TOTAL NUMBERS OF CASES AND EXPENDITURE 1977-78 (a)

Department or authority

Numbers Item 1

Item 2

Total Total expenditure

DEPARTMENTS-
Aboriginal Affairs
Administrative Services Attorney-General's
Business and Consumer Affairs
Industries Assistance Commission
Prices Justification Tribunal Capital Territory
Construction Defence Education
Employment and Industrial Relations Environment, Housing and Community
Development
Finance Foreign Affairs

26 639 43 208
15 2 418 1512 3900 65 150
16 102 14

8 201 24 76
I 115 649 1676
14 34
6 18 1

34 840 67 284
15 3 533 2161 5576 79 184
22 120 15

$
62300 806410 49971 211073
23310 235
541274 2349431 8257791
101466 112452
12132 118079
\3 533

2472 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982
Department or authority
Australian Development Assistance Bureau Papua New Guinea Office Health Home Affairs National Library Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Industry and Commerce National Development Northern Territory Parliamentary Departments Postal and Telecommunications Department Australian Broadcasting Tribunal Primary Industry Prime Minister and Cabinet Auditor-General's Public Service Board Productivity Science Bureau of Meteorology Social Security Trade and Resources Transport Treasury Australian Bureau of Statistics Australian Taxation Office Veterans' Affairs
AUTHORITlES~
ABC A.C.T. Electricity Authority A.C.T. Fire Brigade A.C.T. Police A.C.T. Schools Authority Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation Australia Council Australian Atomic Energy Commission Australian Film Commission Australian Film and Television School Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies Australian Institute of Marine Science Australian National Line Australian National Railways Commission Australian Postal Commission Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Australian Services Canteens Organisation Australian Telecommunications Commission Australian Tourist Commission CSIRO Canberra College of Advanced Education Capital Territory Health Commission Commonwealth Banking Corporation Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Darwin Community College Export Finance Insurance Corporation Health Insurance Commission National Capital Development Commission National Standards Commission Northern Territory Parks and Wildlife
Commission Northern Territory Port Authority Overseas Telecommunications Commission Pipeline Authority Reserve Bank of Australia Services Canteens Trust Fund Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority Stevedoring Industry Finance Committee

Answers to Questions

Numbers
Item I
8 5 268 \3 18 24 10 30 80 27 16 3 716 6 10 17 942 30 27 273 21 732 7 169 374 453
317 154 12 48 III
4 2 141 I 7 I I 58 1455 4211 9 40 7767 2 454 14 163 554 78 7 2 161 5 3
4
75 14 222 2 14 75 4

Item 2
9
63 2 3 II
13 31 10
3
134 I 2 7
386 10 22 59 6
235 2 32
85 137
76 17 7 38 23
I
50 10
7 263 I 177
18 2960
75 4 31
129 55
14 5
4 26
69
4 45

Total Total expenditure

17 5 331 15 21 35 10 43 III 37 19 3 850 7 12 24 1328 40 49 332 27 967 9 201 459 590

$
57604 10 407 260102 4616 23567 37522 20442 38076 104670 20713 4195
91 525 104
17868 15326 4503 I 626 196 74277 73700 218186 6103 904561 2217 123793 242035 846302

393
171
19
86
134 5
2
191
II 7
I I
65 1718 5388
9 58 10727
2 529
18 194 683
133 7 2
175 10 3

502909
94110
3962
25251 97379
1825
647
151069
1229 968
206
65 78355 I 063601
3737549 I 156
35824
10 458237 50
325200 5794
251 652 529853
152775 3009 2775
109675 19129
114

4

1711

4

15540

101

101781

14

3106

291

150294

2

856

18

27089

120

164 323

4

15496

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2473

Department or authority

Numbers Item I

Item 2

Total Total expenditure

TAA . . . . . . Trade Union Training Authority

$

613

206

819

716683

I

I

47

Totals . . . . . . .

28195

9400 37595 36772 927

(a) Only Departments and Authorities which incurred expenses are listed. Tables include claims in respect of death.
Table 4 TOTAL NUMBERS OF CASES AND EXPENDITURE 1978-79 (a)

Department or authority

Numbers Item I

Item 2

Total Total expenditure

DEPARTMENTSAboriginal Affairs
Administrative Services Attorney-General's
Business and Consumer Affairs
Industries Assistance Commission Prices Justification Tribunal Capital Territory Defence Education
Employment and Youth Affairs
Finance Foreign Affairs
Australian Development Assistance Bureau
Papua New Guinea office Health Home Affairs
Housing and Construction Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Industrial Relations Industry and Commerce National Development Parliamentary Departments
Postal and Telecommunications Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
Primary Industry Prime,Minister and Cabinet
Auditor-General's Public Service Board Productivity Science and the Environment Social Security Trade and Resources
Transport Treasury
Australian Bureau of Statistics Australian Taxation Office
Veterans' Affairs AUTHORITIES-
ABC A.C.T. Electricity Authority A.C.T. Fire Brigade A.C.T. Police A.C.T. Schools Authority Albury/Wodonga Development Corporation Anglo-Australian Observatory Australia Council Australian Atomic Energy Commission Australian Coastal Shipping Commission Australian Film Commission Australian Film and Television School

21 752
64 199
II I 450 4279 90 151 77 36 14
345 19
1273 48 7 14 47 26 24 7 610 28 3 17
I 245 46 306 20 711 9 86 414
627
347 133 40 72 138
3 2 5 118 45 7 10

14 231
29 82
2 101 2005 24 38 25
I II I 78 24 804 II I 2 13 15 6
134 4 6 I
451 25 75 2 305 3 38 92
219
135 18 10 26 30
I I I 49 13 I I

35 983
93 281
II 3 551 6284 114 189
102 37 25
I 423
43 2077
59 8 16 60 41
30 7 744 32 9 18 1696 71 381 22 1016 12 124 506 846
482 151 50 98 168
4 3 6 167 58 8 II

$
75625 942188 105040 278522
1945 1781 558244 8649863 103485 150843 112640 12462 52357 12054 306963 208 152 2363189 58299 12740 11797 59401 37371 16046 1068 545 190 64462 23680 6955 1783615 167498 276819 13 149 1085799 4518 106173 297861 1015287
712478 131 709 32601 54153 132461
1350 402
31285 171 165 50954
3870 7301

2474 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Department or authority

Numbers Item I

Item 2

Total Total expenditure

Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies
Australian Institute of Marine Science Australian National Gallery Australian National Library
Australian National Railways Commission Australian Postal Commission Australian Services Canteens Organisation
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Australian Telecommunications Commission CSIRO. . . . . . . . . . .
Canberra College of Advanced Education Capital Territory Health Commission Commonwealth Banking Corporation
Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Export Finance Insurance Corporation
Health Insurance Commission Housing Loans Insurance Corporation
Industrial Relations Bureau National Capital Development Commission National Standards Commission
Overseas Telecommunications Commission Pipeline Authority . . . . . . . . Reserve Bank of Australia . . . . . . Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation
Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority Stevedoring Industry Finance Committee
T.A.A. . . . . . . . . . . . . Trade Union Training Authority NORTHERN TERRITORY DEPARTMENTS-
Chief Minister Community Development Health . . . . .
Industrial t>evelopment Land and Housing Mines and Energy
Transport and Works Treasury NORTHERN TERRITORY AUTHORITlES-
Darwin Community College Electricity Commission Housing Commission Parks and Wildlife Commission Police Force Port Authority

2 2 3 19 2560 3958 23 13 7682 440 21 172 638 99 2 177 I 5 10 3 69 22 188 25 58
636 3
3 3 23 5 8 4 81 2
5 46
12 3 13

10 517 1353
25
2839 107 14 44 129 40
2
21
4
19 I
58 5
48 2
191
2 I
2 I
I I 2 I

2 2 3 29 3077 5311 48 I 13 10521 547 35 216 767 139 4 198 I 5 14 3 88 23 246 30 106 2 827 3
3 3 23 7 9 4 83 3
5 46
I 13
5 14

$ 469 196 10164 14393 2036 170 4088962 34480 3850 10 975 057 408372 7727 350010 621 227 167433 1227 87411
9 353 40290 1716 111601 18241 139101 61 147 149347 456 817 966 I 144
7307 1586 II 818 I 174 9380 10969 92260 1918
1273 35051
4160 2516 25002 9302

SubTotal

208

II

219

213 716

Total

30036 10 599 40653 41215045

(a) Only those departments and authorities which incurred expenses are listed. Tables include claims in respect of death.

TableS
TOTAL NUMBERS OF CASES AND EXPENDITURE 1979-80

Department or Authority

Total

Total

number expenditure

Department or Authority

Total

Total

number expenditure

All departments and authorities

$ 42284 50206895

All Commonwealth departments

and authorities

41810 49749585

All Northern Territory departments and authorities

474 457310

DEPARTMENTSAboriginal Affairs
Administrative Services
Attorney-General's
Business and Consumer Affairs. Industries Assistance Commission
Capital Territory
Defence Education

$

29

34430

974 I 248302

83

164948

305 261 856

14 615 6486
72

8394 821991 11435508 94082

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2475

Total

Total

-D-ep-a-rtm-e-n-to-r-A-ut-h-or-ity---------n-um-b-e-r -e-xp-en-d-it-ur-e

$

Employment and Youth Affairs

251

177 125

Finance

105 108417

Foreign Affairs

41

57507

Australian Development Assist-

ance Bureau

20

86578

Papua New Guinea Government

Supply Office

3

4754

Health

282 337149

Home Affairs

74 181038

Housing and Construction

1773 2888378

Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

31

40031

Industrial Relations

II

6698

Industry and Commerce

8

26583

National Development and Energy

64 107059

Parliamentary Departments

53

66056

Postal and Telecommunications

51

43469

Australian Broadcasting Tribunal

3

776

Primary Industry

914 761 478

Prime Minister and Cabinet

26

19178

Auditor-General's

14

21017

Public Service Board

21

36733

Productivity

1601 2308540

Science and the Environment

109 154868

Social Security

478 430216

Trade and Resources

31

40399

Transport

1025 1213009

Treasury

7

8621

Australian Bureau of Statistics

130 126774

Australian Taxation Office

543 346273

Veterans' Affairs

872 1174912

AUTHORITIES-
ABC
A.CT. Electricity Authority A.CT. Fire Brigade A.CT. Police
A.CT. Schools Authority Albury-Wodonga Development
Commission Anglo-Australian Observatory
Australia Council Australian Atomic Energy
Commission
Australian Film Commission Australi,an Film and Television
School Australian Institute of Aboriginal
Studies
Australian Institute of Criminology Australian Institute of Marine
Science
Australian Maritime College Australian National Gallery Australian National Library Australian National Railways
Commission Australian Postal Commission Australian Service Council for Can-
teens Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Australian Shipping Commission Australian Telecommunications
Commission CSIRO ,Canberra College of Advanced
Education

585 833032

186 144049

50

26319

133

81470

224 192 008

7

1782

6

4138

6

976

177 153553

7

29490

9

2694

3

172

2

312

8

10152

6

1732

4

4791

43

29383

3075 2535142 5580 5207149

55

31450

23

11206

92 109637

I 1065 11998424 606 468484

43

18436

Department or Authority

Total

Total

number expenditure

Capital Territory Health Commission
Commonwealth Banking Corporation
Commonwealth Serum Laboratories
Health Insurance Commission
Housing Loans Insurance Corporation
Industrial Relations Bureau
National Capital Development Commission
National Standards Commission
Overseas Telecommunications Commission
Pipeline Authority
Reserve Bank of Australia
Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation
Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority
Stevedoring Industry Finance Committee
TAA
Trade Union Training Authority

$

200 367279

830 586258

145 177 159 142 109348

2

64

2

7494

13

17806

2

1876

116 134813

13

6657

248 220374

23

22385

84 176171

3

972

861 I 127870

7

3931

NORTHERN TERRITORY DEPARTMENTS-
Chief Minister Office of the Public Service Commissioner
Community Development Education Health Lands and Housing Mines and Energy Primary Production Transport and Works
NORTHERN TERRITORY AUTHORITIES-
Conservation Commission Darwin Community College Electricity Commission Housing Commission Police Force Port Authority

4

6677

2

2410

13

29691

16

3007

98 110530

7

1927

7

10372

6

5246

171

160730

48

10603

2

988

66

46294

9

18529

14

42611

II

7695

Table 6
TOTAL NUMBERS OF CASES AND EXPENDITURE 1980-81

Total

number

Total

of cases expenditure

All departments and authorities All Commonwealth departments
and authorities All Northern Territory departments
and authorities

45 117 44 574
543

$ 61 190020
60 398 585
791 435

2476 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Total

Total

-D-ep-a-rtm-e-n-to-r-au-th-o-ri-ty---------n-um-b-e-r -ex-p-en-d-it-ur-e

$

COMMONWEAL TH

DEPARTMENTS --

Aboriginal Affairs

29

48344

Administrative Services

1268 I 747263

Attorney-General's

91

170366

Australian Security Intelligence

Organisation

18

4726

Business and Consumer Affairs

301

315920

Industries Assistance Commission

6

9533

Prices Justification Tribunal

6

2384

Capital Territory

739 1012788

A.CT. Fire Brigade

61

68317

Communications

37

53909

Special Broadcasting Service

2

137

Australian Broadcasting Tribunal

6

242

Defence

6621 12920565

Education

57

98533

Employment and Youth Affairs

206

181615

Finance

64

113909

Foreign Affairs

17

32518

Australian Development Assist-

ance Bureau

22

62637

Papua New Guinea Office

3

151

Health

269

368 135

Home Affairs and Environment

30

144505

Australian Archives

39

41417

Housing and Construction

2052 3062997

Immigration & Ethnic Affairs

52

100171

Industrial Relations

19

19492

Industry & Commerce

1685 2921985

National Development & Energy

60

103362

Parliamentary Departments

38

84132

Primary Industry

876 1043492

Prime Minister & Cabinet

26

32595

Auditor-General's Office

18

33550

Public Service Board

24

36335

Science and Technology

115 206156

Patent, Trade Marks & Designs

Office

13

2925

Social Security

458

558282

Trade and Resources

33

34239

Transport

I 106 1458223

Treasury

43

45385

Australian Bureau of Statistics

177

183619

Australian Taxation Office

660 468569

Veterans' Affairs

1049 1812364

COMMONWEAL TH AUTHORITIES-
A.B.C A.CT. Electricity Authority A.CT. Schools Authority Albury-Wodonga Development
Corporation Anglo-Australian Observatory Army & Air Force Canteen Service Australia Council Australian Atomic Energy Com-
mission

614 1084067

178

191998

224

244180

3

4444

2

462

59

44 735

3

3456

190 220507

Department or authority

Total

Total

number expenditure

Australian Film Commission Australian Film & Television
School Australian Institute of Aboriginal
Studies Australian Institute of Criminology
Australian Institute of Marine Science
Australian Maritime College
Australian National Gallery Australian National Railways Co-
mmission Australian Postal Commission Australian Shipping Commission
Australian Telecommunications Commission
Australian Tourist Commission Canberra College of Advanced Ed-
ucation Capital Territory Health Com-
mission Commonwealth Banking Corpo-
ration Commonwealth Serum Labora-
tories Commission CS.I.R.O. Export Finance & Insurance
Corporation Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
Authority Health Insurance Commission Housing Loans Insurance Corpo-
ration Industrial Relations Bureau National Capital Development
Commission National Library of Australia National Standards Commission Overseas Telecommunications
Commission Pipeline Authority Reserve Bank of Australia Snowy Mountains Engineering
Corporation Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric
Authority Stevedoring Industry Finance
Committee Trade Union Training Authority Trade Practices Commission
T.A.A.

7
6
4 7 5
3378 5323
113
12464 I
45
246
879
147 567
I 126
I II
9 33
2
110 10
309
39
127
2 9 3 908

$ 3648
17703
5192 68
982 2998
789
3307173 5922051
206822
15236973 21
14769
381214
793431
222206 629768
75
141 122601
2919 6855
9120 58321
220
187354 2205
291 657
58855
245802
I 335 2419
209 I 262753

NORTHERN TERRITORY DEPARTMENTS-
Chief Minister Police Force
Community Development Education Health Lands and Housing Law Mines and Energy Primary Production Transport and Works Treasury

3

\I 444

6

10 893

23

75477

55

62362

145

180931

8

3600

6

904

8

4068

I

399

159 287441

3

798

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2477

Department or authority
NORTHERN TERRITORY AUTHORITlES-
Conservation Commission Darwin Community College Electricity Commission Housing Commission Port Authority

Total

Total

number expenditure

$

35

72 286

3

401

81

62364

2

7373

14

10693

Table 7
MAN/WEEKS INCAPACITY-ALL DEPARTMENTS AND AUTHORITIES, INCLUDING NORTHERN TERRITORY

1979-80

1980-81

Average monthly number of persons to whom the Act applies . . . . . .
Number of total incapacity cases (other than those that received rates equivalent to sick leave only) . . . . . .
Total expenditure
Man/weeks of incapacity
Average number of man/ weeks of incapacity
Average amount paid per man/week
Number of Partial incapacity cases
Total expenditure
Man/weeks of incapacity
Average number of man/ weeks of incapacity
Average amount paid per man/week

515080
4444 $19163208
191 685.6 43.1
$99.97 326
$622395 18 119.2
55.6* $34.35

516821
4816 $24427579
206637.6 42.9
$J 18.21 341
$951929 20743.8
60.8* $45.89

- This average figure is inflated as a result of the inclusion of periods of incapacity prior to I July of the relevant financial year but ill respect of which payments were made after, not during that year.

Social Welfare: Mobility Allowance
(Question No. 5010)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
(I) What are the eligibility criteria the Minister is using to define 'a severely handicapped person' as qualification for the new Mobility Allowance.
(2) Why is the implementation of the scheme being delayed until April 1983.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The detailed conditions of eligibility for the new Mobili~ Allowance are currently under consideration by my department. When these are finalised I will make a further statement on the matter.

(2) Considerable work is involved in setting up the Mobility Allowance assessment and payment mechanisms and procedures. It is anticipated that April 1983 will be the earliest practical target date for implementing the scheme.
Disabled Persons: Attendant Care Scheme
(Question No. 5011)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
Has the Government made provision in 1982-83 for funding an Attendant Care Scheme for disabled persons to enable them to live in private accommodation of their choice, if so:
(a) what is the amount of the grant,
(b) how will the grant be administered,
(c) when will the scheme be implemented,
(d) how many disabled people will be assisted by the scheme,and
(e) have intended recipients been consulted regarding the operation of the scheme.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Provision has been made in 1982-83, for the conduct of a pilot attendant care scheme designed to examine the feasibility of alternative modes of providing attendant care assistance.
(a) A total of $100,000 has been provided to conduct the pilot during 1982-83.
(b) These funds will be administered through the Department of Social Security.
(c) The pilot is expected to commence in March 1983.
(d) My department is currently developing proposals for the conduct of the pilot for my consideration. The number of disabled persons to be included in the pilot will be considered in this context.
(e) Potential participants in the pilot have not yet been identified.
Stockpile of Explosive Power
(Question No. 5022)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 8 September 1982:
(I) Is he able to give estimates of the total explosive power used in (a) military action in Indo-China in the period of involvement of United States of America and Australian Forces, (b) World War land (c) World War II.
(2) Is he able to say what is the estimated explosive power now stockpiled by the permanent members of the (a) United Nations Security Council, (b) Northern Atlantic Treaty Organisationand (c) Warsaw Pact.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) It is not possible to estimate with any degree of certainty the explosive power used in the conflicts listed in the first part of the question; nor is it possible to estimate the explosive power of stockpiles of conventional and nuclear weapons at present held by the countries mentioned. A report on nuclear weapons, which was submitted by the Secretary General of the United Nations to the Thirty-fifth Session of the United Nations General Assembly on 12 September 1980 (UN Document A/35/392), noted that while the exact

2478 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

number of nuclear warheads in the world at that time was unknown, the total was estimated to be in excess of 40,000, with a strength probably equivalent of some 13,000 million tons of TNT.
Cocos (Keeling) and Christmas Islands: Use by Surveillance Aircraft
(Question No. 5025)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 8 September 1982:
(I) How many times in 1980, 1981 and 1982 to date have air facilities on (a) Cocos (Keeling) and (b) Christmas Islands been used by (i) Australian and (ii) United States of America surveillance aircraft.
(2) Have any negotiations regarding the use of either islands by USA forces been commenced or concluded; if so, what is the substance of the negotiations.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The following table, compiled from records held by Air Force office and the Department of Home Affairs and Environment, sets out the information requested. The aircraft are all P3 Orion Long Range Maritime Patrol aircraft.
USE OF FACILITIES ON COCOS AND CHRISTMAS ISLANDS BY AUSTRALIAN AND US. SURVEILLANCE AIRCRAFT

Cocos Island

Christmas Island

Year 1980
1981
19821.9.82

Aust.

US Aust.

US

54

16

nil

nil

66

17

nil

nil

44

15

I

nil

(2) No.
Chemical Defence Experiments
(Question No. 5028)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 8 September 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the allegation by Dr R. Watson, Director, Chemical Defence Experimental Establishment, Porton Down, United Kingdom, that Australia's main contribution to the 1965 Technical Co-operation Program agreement was for the testing of equipment developed in Britain' and the United States of America, as reported in the book A Higher Form of Killing, R. Harris and J. Paxman, published by Chatto and Windus, 1982, page 175.
(2) Can he confirm or deny this allegation.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, but I am uncertain whether these are Dr Watson's words or interpretations made by the authors of the book concerned, based upon their interview with him. The Technical Co-operation Program comprehends exchanges of results of research and development in many subjects in defence science and in maintaining the knowledge of the state-of-art.
The Government would be negligent if it did not take the necessary steps to develop its defences against the threat posed by chemical agents; accordingly exchanges and crosstesting of protective clothing and detection equipment have taken place between Australia and other countries. However I am advised no large-scale field testing of chemical warfare equipment or agents has taken place in Australia since World War II.
(2) The allegation is untrue.

Wheat Sales to The USSR
(Question No. 5039)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(I) What have been Australia's wheat sales to the USSR in each year since 1977.
(2) Is there a potential for sale of canned fruit to the USSR; if so, why has this sale not proceeded.
(3) If it is government policy which has caused this sale not to proceed, is the Government intending to compensate the canned fruit industry.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Shipments of Australian wheat in each year since 1976-77 under sales negotiated with USSR are as follows:

Year

Tonnes

(December-November) 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 (to 18 September 1982)

944,068 446,701 1,253,267 3,270,790 1,735,580 2,047,405

(2) Australia has never exported canned fruit to the USSR and all information gathered by Government sources strongly suggests that future sales prospects are very limited. The value of canned and bottled fruit imports by the USSR has ranged from around $3.1 m t'o $4.7 m per annum over the period 1976 to 1981, and virtually all these imports have come from Bulgaria and Hungary who would have the capacity to substantially expand sales to the USSR if the demand arose in future. Moreover, the USSR's current situation of 'hard' currency shortage would be likely to preclude at this stage the possibility of the USSR seeking to augment supplies from traditional Socialist country sources with purchases from developed Western countries.
(3) The Government's policy towards the USSR provides no impediment to the sale of canned fruit on normal commercial terms.

Visits of Nuclear Powered Warships
(Question No. 5052)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 September 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the 1976 report on environmental considerations of visits of nuclear powered warships to Australia which recommends the establishment of a Naval Nuclear Ship Safety Organisation in each port to be visited by nuclear powered warships.
(2) Have these organisations been established; if so (a) in which ports and (b) in what years were they established.
(3) What steps were taken by the Commonwealth to ensure that such organisations were established.
(4) Do these organisations conform in detail to the structure and functioning laid out in annex C, paragraphs 43-58, and appendix 2 of the annex of the report; if not, where and in what ways do they vary from the guidelines.
(5) What assistance has been sought by, and offered to, State governments in establishing these organisations and

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2479

from which Commonwealth Departments and for what purposes has this assistance come.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes. Port safety organisations were set up in Melbourne, Hobart and Fremantle in 1976, Darwin in 1978 and Brisbane in 1982.
(3) Consultations took place between Commonwealth and State officials and the organisations were set up with the full co-operation of the State Governments concerned.
(4) Yes.
(5) Assistance has mainly consisted of the provision of technical advice, manpower for radiation monitoring programs, and radiation monitoring equipment. In addition the Commonwealth has carried out analysis of environmental samples as part of the routine environmental monitoring program. Commonwealth authorities involved have been Defence, Home Affairs and Environment, Health and the Australian Atomic Energy Commission.
Defence Force Retirement Benefit Pensions
(Question No. 5077)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) What has been the percentage rate of increase of Defence Force Retirement Benefit (DFRB) pensions in each year since I June 1973.
(2) What has been the percentage rate of increase of Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefit (DFRDB) pensions in each year since I June 1973.
(3) What would have been the cash increase for a serviceman who retired in November 1972 under the DFRB scheme with a pension entitlement of $5000 in July of each succeeding year.
(4) What would have been the comparable increases for a serviceman who retired on the same amount on the first day of operation of the DFRDB scheme.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2)-

DFRB

DFRDB

%

%

1973

15.8

15.8

1974

16.2

16.2

1975

24,6

17.6

1976

13.4

13.4

1977

13.6

13.6

1978

8.2

8.2

1979

8.2

8.2

1980

10.5

10.5

1981

9.4

9.4

1982

10.5

10.5

(3) and (4) The last day of operation of the superseded DFRB scheme was 30 September 1972. For the purposes of question (3) I have assumed that you mean September 1972
rather than November 1972.

DFRB

DFRDB

$

$

1973

790.00

790.00

1974

937.98

937.98

1975

1655.08

1184.12

1976

1123.33

1060.22

1977

1292.87

1220.24

1978

885.54

835.79

1979

958.15

904.32

1980

1327.51

1252.93

1981

1313.22

1239.45

1982

1604.79

1514.63

Visits of Nuclear Powered Warships
(Question No. 5096)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to paragraph 13 of the introduction of the Report, 'Environmental Considerations of Visits of Nuclear Powered Warships to Australia'; if so, does the paragraph state that (a) the acceptance of nuclear warships under the proposed conditions is limited to those with reactor power levels less than 100mw (thermal), i.e. the current designs of nuclear powered submarines and the early surface vessels, (b) much larger reactor units are used in the latest nuclear powered aircraft carrier US Nimitz and are planned for use in future US nuclear surface warships and (cl the acceptance of these vessels would need to be assessed ~eparately in the light of available technical information of guarantees of their safety.
(2) Have any US vessels with reactor units larger than 100mw (thermal) visited Australia; if so, which ships and to what ports,
(3) Have the ships been cleared for entry to Australian ports; if so, on what basis has each clearance been given.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The United States does not release informatipQ about the capacity of the reactors on its nuclear powered warships However all United States nuclear powered warships thal have yisited Australia have been assessed by the relevant Australian authorities to have met the limitations on reactc.r capacity.
(3) See answer to (2) above.
Recommendations by the Review of Commonwealth Functions: Department of
Finance
(Question No. 5142)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
(I) What are the details of all recommendations made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions which related specifically to the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the details of the implementation of those recommendations to date.
(3) Where a service formerly provided by the Minister's Department is now provided by private interests, what have been the (a) cost savings and (b) cost penalties incurred to date, in each case.

2480 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) There were two RCF decisions which specifically related to my department:
(a) Elimination of the cash mode of salary paymentswith the exception of certain industrial type payrollsfor Commonwealth employees. Implementation was finalised in December 1981; and
(b) To close the Enemy Subject Trust Account. This has been closed.
(3) There were no services transferred to private interests.
Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 5184)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange line telephones.
(5) What was the cost of (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 95.
(2) (a) Chiefs/Heads of Organisations, 38; (b) Second-incharge of Organisations, 2; (c) Divisional Secretaries and Divisional Administrative Officers, II; (d) State Regional Directors and Regional Administrative Officers, 17; (e) Purchasing and Library staff, 10; (f) Node Liaison Managers, 4; (g) Resident Engineers, Caretakers and Information Officers, 13;
(3) 93Yes; 3-No.
(4) (a) To facilitate ready communication for officers having a high rate of telephone contact, both with the Private and the Public Sectors; (b) Confidentiality; (c) After hours access; (d) Safety, security and emergency backup; (e) To augment the number of lines on small and overloaded switchboards.
(5) (a) $15184.45; (b) $64 861.29; (c) $990.94.
(6) 91-No;4-Yes.
Concord Repatriation Hospital: Operating Theatres
(Question No. 5206)
Mr Maher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) When were the operating theatres at Concord Repatriation Hospital last refurbished and renovated.

(2) What action is taken to minimise the risk of contamination and cross infection due to lack of separate 'clean' and 'dirty' traffic ways in and out of each theatre.
(3) When will the theatres be modernised and refurbished.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Repatriation General Hospital, Concord, has seven operating theatres located in two separate areas of the hospital. Three theatres are located on the seventh floor of the multi-storey building and were constructed in the I 940s. Four theatres are located in the administration building and were built in 1971.
A continuing repairs and maintenance program is undertaken in both areas to ensure the standards appropriate for modern surgical procedures are maintained. The maintenance of sterile conditions is emphasised and a regular replacement program for air-conditioning filters and waste lines leading from the theatres is undertaken. Examples of recent major repairs and maintenance work on the operating theatres include-
1977-78-$15,000 to repair ceiling and walls of the theatre in the administrative building.
1979-80-$16,000 to repair and replace floor coverings in the theatres in the multi-storey building.
1982-83-$35,000 to paint and carry out minor repairs in the theatres in the administrative building.
(2) In the administrative building theatres 'dirty' or used instruments are enclosed on trolleys in protective coverings at the end of each surgical procedure and disposed of by way of a lifej'dumb waiter' connected to the dirty area of the Theatre Sterilising unit. This disposal procedure ensures that dirty material leaves the operating theatres by a route separate from that taken by the patient. All 'dirty' linen is sealed in protective bags prior to leaving the operating room. Disposal of used materials in this manner minimises the risk of cross infection.
In the other theatres, all used equipment and instrumentation are cleaned in a wash steriliser unit before leaving the clean-up area located between the operating rooms. After cleaning, instruments are transferred to the central sterile unit for re-sterilisation.
Regular microbiological tests of the air, water and equipment are conducted in both operating suites, the results of which are monitored by the hospital's infection control committee. The hospital has not experienced any significant instances of cross-infection or contamination in either operating suite.
(3) Plans to upgrade and relocate the operating theatre services at the hospital are presently under review by the Department of Veterans' Affairs with a view to bringing forward a proposal for Government consideration.
Independent Air Fares Committee
(Question No. 4582)
Mr Shack asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) Where is the office of the Independent Air Fares Committee (IAFC) located.
(2) When did the IAFC first occupy this office.
(3) Who owns this office and what rent does the IAFC pay.
(4) What is the total number of staff employed by the IAFC.

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2481

(5) What are the designated positions of each staff member and what are the (a) responsibilities and (b) salary levels of each position.
(6) When was each specific staff member appointed.
(7) What (a) are the qualifications of and (b) was the immediate previous employment of each specific staff member.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) APA Building, 3rd Floor, 51 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne, Vic. 3000.
(2) July 1982. (Between November 1981 and July 1982 the office of the IAFC Secretariat was located temporarily on 7th Floor, National Mutual Centre, Darwin Place, Canberra City, A.C.T. 26(0).
(3) APA Life Assurance Ltd own the building at 51 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne and the IAFC pay $29,998 per annum in rent.
(4) Nine. There are also two officers on temporary secondment from the Department of Aviation.
(5) The formal establishment of the IAFC Secretariat comprises:
Position Number I-Secretary, Level I $38,000Secretary to the IAFC. Control and co-ordinate the activities of the IAFC Secretariat.

2-Steno-secretary, Grade I $1 3260-1 3940-Provide secretarial assistance to Chairman and Secretary.
3 and 4-Clerk, Class II $31650-32950-Responsible for supervision of investigations undertaken on behalf of the Committee in accordance with the IAFC Act 1981.
5-Clerk, Class 9 $27250-28250-Analyse material placed before the Committee, prepare briefing papers, supervise or undertake research investigations.
6-Clerk, Class 8 $25150-26150--Assist in analysis of material placed before the Committee and prepare background briefing papers and submissions.
7-Clerk, Class 6 $20750-22050-Undertake research and investigation tasks.
8-Clerk, Class 8 $25150-26150Provide Secretariat service to the Committee. Supervise and arrange administrate ive support to Committee and Secretariat.
9-Clerk, Class 4 $16600-18100-Provide administrative support.
10-Clerical Assistant, Grade 3 $1231O-13120-Provide administrative support.
II-Word Processing Typist, Grade I $13240-13600.
12-Typist, Grade 2 $121 50-1 2730-Provide stenographic assistance.
(6) and (7) Details in respect of staff currently in the IAFC Secretariat, excluding the two officers temporarily seconded from the Department of Aviation, are:

Position number
I 2 3
7 8 9 10 11 12

Date appointed/commenced Tertiary qualifications

24 May 1982 5 August 1982 24 May 1982
26July 1982 19 August 1982 19Julyl982 28 July 1982 19July 1982 25 June 1982

B.Com.
M.Sc (Transport Studies) B. E. (Civil) M.Ec.

Previous department
Employment and Industrial Relations Industry and Commerce Aviation
Administrative Services Aviation Transport and Construction Aviation Aviation Aviation

Staffing and salary levels are current to 30 September 1982.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Education
(Question No. 4946)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and members, has .the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.

(5) How many of these questions are currently still on

notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each

question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House

for 12 months or more.

.

Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) In the Parliamentary Liaison and Public Relations Branch of my Department a Clerk Class 8 working directly to the Assistant Secretary (Level I) of the Branch examines questions on notice and directs them for the preparation of draft replies to the appropriate functional areas in the Depart-
ment and/or other agencies within the portfolio. The draft replies prepared are cleared by senior officers in the areas and agencies concerned. Before final clearance to my Office, the officer responsible also arranges for the draft reply to be examined by the Assistant Secretary, Parliamentary Liaison and Public Relations Branch and by either the Deputy Secretary or Secretary of the Department.

Once received in my Office the proposed reply is examined by my Senior Private Secretary before submission to me fot
final approval. My Assistant Private Secretary facilitates the formalities oflodgement of the reply.

(2) 229. (71 from senators, 158 from members)

2482 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) 1.9 months
(4) (a) 195. (b) 14. (c) Nil. (d) Nil. (e) Nil.
(5) 20. No questions have been on notice for 12 months or more.
Drought Relief
(Question No. 5026)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 8 September 1982:
( I) Has he announced a drought relief package for primary producers.
(2) Does that include a subsidy on interest rates over 12 per cent.
(3) Will that policy be administered through the trading banks.
(4) How will primary producers who use vendor finance Obtain that subsidy.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. On 31 August 1982 I announced two drought relief initiatives which will be directly funded by the Commonwealth. They are a subsidy on fodder purchased to feed drought affected sheep and cattle and a subsidy on interest payments at rates of interest higher than 12 per cent on debt incurred by drought affected farmers. Details of both schemes were elaborated in information papers I issued with a Media Release on 24 September 1982.
(2) Yes. See answer to (I) above.
(3) No. The interest rate subsidy scheme will be administered by a special administration unit located in the Commonwealth Department of Primary Industry. The fodder subsidy scheme will be administered by the authority in each State responsible for administering the National Drought Relief Arrangements.
(4) Subject to other eligibility criteria all formal debts including vendor finance will qualify for the interest subsidy.
Department of Veterans' Affairs: Reorganisation ofCentral Office
(Question No. 5103)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
(I) What was the reason for the reorganisation of the top structure of the central office of the Department of Veterans' Affairs which 'was approved by the Public Service Board in May 1982.
(2) When was the review commenced which led to this reorganisation.
(3) Who were the (a) Departmental and (b) other Public Service officers who carried out the review.
(4) Who initiated the review, and when.
(5) Who was responsible for submitting the review report and its recommendations to the Public Service Board.
(6) What problems and deficiencies were identified by the review.
(7) Will the Minister present the review report to Parliament; if not. why not.
(8) How many officers at (a) the central office and (b) regional offices, will be attached to the Benefits and Special

Projects Division which has been approved by the Public Service Board.
(9) What is the designation, classification and salary of each of those officers.
(10) How many ofthose officers will be personnel who are currently employed in the Vietnam Special Studies Group.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (10) The top structure of the Department's Central Office had remained basically unchanged since 1964. The main purpose of the review was to examine the current and future roles of the Divisions, analyse any problems and deficiencies with the structure and provide a more efficient, upgraded organisation, better suited to our needs.
The review was initiated by the Permanent Head in November 1981 and preliminary work, fact finding, et cetera, commenced from that time.
The Permanent Head submitted the final report to the Public Service Board.
The review was conducted as an internal, departmental organisation review and was submitted for the Public Service Board to handle under section 29 of the Public Service Act. This is consistent with the approach adopted in such reviews. Information about the re-organisation was provided to Senate Estimates Committee 'G' on 16 September 1982.
So far only the top structure (Second Division) part of the Benefits and Special Projects Division has been approved by the Public Service Board. Three positions are involved in this part of the Division. The remainder of the organisation currently includes 32 positions but this may change when the rest of the organisation review is completed. There are no officers in Branch or Regional Offices attached directly to the Benefits and Special Projects Division. Since the re-organisation has not been completed, information about who will occupy various positions cannot be provided.
Recommendations by the Review of Commonwealth Functions: Department of the
Vice-President of the Executive Council
(Question No. 5141)
Mr Holding asked the Vice-President of the Executive Council, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
( I) What are the details of all recommendations made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions which related specifically to the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the details of the implementation of those recommendations to date.
(3) Where a service formerly provided by the Minister's Department is now provided by private interests, what have been the (a) cost savings and (b) cost penalties incurred to date, in each case.
Sir James Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) None, as the Department of the Vice-President of the Executive Council did not exist at the time the Review of Commonwealth Functions took place.
(2) and (3) See (I).

Answers to Questions

21 October' 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 24&3

Nuclear Accidents: Insurance
(Question No. 450 I)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1982:

(I) Are nuclear exclusion clauses cQI'I\ained in property

and liability insurance policies such that, in the event of any

accident with nuclear materials involving damage or contami-

nation, insured property owners would; be, unable to claim

compensation.

': I;'

(2) If so, what is the attitude of the CIl,lTImOnwealth in the
case of such eventualities with regard tathe acceptance of liability.

(3) By what process can householders residing in close proximity to the Lucas Heights Atomic Research Establish-
ment, NSW, indemnify themselves against the possibility of incurring losses sustained as a result of a mishap at that establishment.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) I understand from inquiries made' of the insurance industry by my officers that it has been established practice for many years for property and liability policies issued by insurance companies in Australia to provide for a number of general exclusions which exclude cover, inter alia, in respect of risks as a consequence of war, invasion; acts of foreign enemies, hostilities (whether war be declared or not) and any loss attributable to nuclear weapons material, nuclear fuel or nuclear waste from nuclear fuel. While an insured person could not claim under his insurance policy in respect of nuclear damage that falls within an exclusion clause, it could be open to such a person to claim compensation under common' law from the person or persons responsible for the damage sustained.

(2) The attitude of the Commonwealth with regard to acceptance of liability would depend largely on whether the Commonwealth itself was responsible for the damage sustained. As indicated in part (2) of my answer to House of Representatives Question No. 3676 (Hansard) of 18 August 1982, page 650), whether the Commonwealth would be liable to meet any loss resulting from nuclear damage would depend on the facts of each particular case. Broadly, where the Commonwealth uses radioactive materials or is directly responsible for their use, any Commonwealth liability would depend on general principles of liability that would apply equally to private persons or corporations.

(3) It is my understanding that insurance is not available from the insurance industry in Australia to cove,r householders against any loss sustained as a result of a mishap at the Australian Atomic Energy Commission establishment at
Lucas Heights and that it would be a matter for a householder to claim compensation at common law. The Commonwealth would, of course, stand by the Commission to ensure its ability to meet any damages awarded against it. However, the Commission maintains the highest standards of safety of its nuclear
facilities and the Government believes that the possibility of accidents arising out of the Commission's operations at L!lcas Heights is highly unlikely. My comments in (2) above are also relevant. As indicated in my answer to Question No. 3676, certain reviews ,are in process in this area as a result of Commonwealth action and consideration is being given, inter alia, to the adequacy 'of the protection afforded under common law, to persons who sustain loss or damage arising from the use of nuclear material.

Defence: Contracts for Army Trucks
(Question No. 4706)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister' for Defence Support, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:

(I) Have two substantial contracts for the provision of

army trucks been signed with the Mercedes and Mack

Companies.

'

(2) What are the val~es of these contracts.

(3) What are the offset agreement details relating to these contracts.

(4) What is the machinery to monitor and police tire achievements of the offsets.

(5) What is the time. frame for the achievement of these offset agreements and how do those time plans compare with the achievement of the main contracts.

(6) What are the penalties for non-complianc~ with the offset arrangments: '

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Yes:

(2) Mercedes-Benz (Australia) Pty Ltd-$57,750,804.- Mack Trucks Pty Ltd--c-$97,IOO,000.

(3) Mercedes-Benz (Australia) Pty Ltd is contracted to achieve a total Australian content and offsets obligation equal to the contract value of $57,750,804: Mack Ttuch Pty Ltd is contracted to achieva ,a total Australian content and offsets
obligation equal to a,minimum of $48,587,698.

(4) Both companies are obliged to maintain adequate

records, to permit verification and to report regularly on,

achievement.

''

(5) Mercedes-Benz (Australia) Pty Ltd is contracted to

complete its Australian content obligations by the scheduled

delivery date of the last vehicle in 1986/87 and its offsets obli-

gation within five Years afterthat clate. Mack Tr:ucks Pty Ltd'

ipsactioonntroabcltiegdattiooncowmipthleinte,siiXts

total years

Australian Industry Particiof the contract date, that is

by 30 June 1987.

(6) Both contract~rS are comrrtitted'to pay 'substantial financial compensation for any shortfall in commitments: '

Aborigines: Fund!! for Acquisition of Land
(Question No. 4750)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Ab, original Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1<)82:
What funds were allocated for the acquisitio~ of r;nd f!Jr
(a) traditional, (b) social and (c) etonomic purposes in each year from the establishment of his Department in 1972 to the establishment of the Aboriginal Uind Fund Commission in 1974.

Mr Wilson~The answer to the honoura.ble member's question is as follows:

In the period between the establishment of the Department

of Aboriginal Affairs in December 1972 and the estaqlis\1ment

of the Aboriginal Land Fimd 'Commissidn in .1975, eleyen

properties were bought at a total cost of $2,693,775'. Funds

were not allocated in, the particular categories of purposes

mentioned.

'

2484 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Aboriginal Affairs

(Question No. 4818)

Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

(1) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government or-
ganisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.

(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

( 120

fI3)

and /02

(2) Payments I nvestigations

were made in 198 I-82 under Division and Research, to the following:

Flinders University, SA University of Adelaide, SA Australian National University, ACT University of Melbourne, Vic. University of Adelaide, SA Australian National University, ACT Creative Dialogue Pty Ltd, Bondi, N.S.W. Australian National University, ACT

$ 22,000
5,550 9,700 14,500 10,000 10,000 19,980 2,000

Total

93,730

Direct Grants-in-Aid payments totalling $50,558,054 were

made to almost 700 non-government organisations for

Aboriginal advancement programs, the details of

which have been supplied direct to the honourable

member.

Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Defence Support
(Question No. 4948)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:

(1) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minis-
ter's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.

(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and
members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.

(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the
answer.

(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months,
(d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.

(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The distribution and co-ordination of questions on notice is the responsibility of the Parliamentary Questions Officer in the Department, who directs each question to that action area of the Department with responsibility for the sub-
ject matter. A suggested response is prepared by the relevant area, endorsed by the appropriate Divisional Head, Deputy Secretary or Secretary of my Department and forwarded through my Senior Private Secretary for my approval.

(2) Since the creation of the Department of Defence Support on 7 May 1982,29 questions have been placed on notice.
(3) 9 weeks.
(4) (a) 11, (b) 5, (c) nil, (e) nil.
(5) 13. No questions have been on the Notice Paper for twelve months or more.
Nutrition and Diet
(Question No. 4971)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a statement by the Australian Association of Dieticians which claimed that the Australian public was being fed misleading and often untrue information on nutrition and diet.
(2) Is that statement correct, if so, what is his Department doing to co-ordinate a nutrition education program in the public and private sectors
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) It is my Department's view that the statement is substantially correct. My Department has undertaken nutrition education activities in both the public and private sectors for many years.
A wide range of nutrition education publications is produced by my Department and by the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC). These publications provide both a reference for the development of nutrition education and an authoritative source of scientifically based information on food and nutrition for the public. They are widely distributed and include booklets and pamphlets such as Eat Better for Less, Dietary Guidelines for Australians, Nutrition Messages for the Ethnic Community, Welcome to Meals on Wheels, Your Health and Your Figure, Tables of Composition of Australian Foods, Simplified Food Composition Tables and Dietary Allowances for Use in Australia, as well as the poster A Food Guide for Good Health.
Officers of my Department co-operate with industry, including primary producer groups and commodity boards and food manufacturers, in the development of nutrition education programs.
In 198 I my Department sponsored a National Nutrition Education Conference, at the recommendation of the NH and MRC which brought together representatives of the State and Territory health authorities and nutrition and educational bodies. At its Ninety-second Session in October 198 I, the NH and MRC acted on one of the Conference recommendations in approving the establishment of a sub-committee of the Council to consider such matters as the co-ordination of nutrition education activities on a national basis. The subcommittee is expected to hold its first meeting later this year.
International Union of Biochemistry Congress: Delegates
(Question No. 4972)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) Is Australia breaching an understanding with the International Council of Scientific Unions by refusing entry to Australia of delegates to the International Union of Biochemistry Congress because of objections to Soviet policies and actions in Afghanistan and Poland.

Answers to Questions

21 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2485

(2) Was the understanding reached after similar Soviet actions and policies in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and the Baltic States, and similar military intervention by other great powers in smaller nations.
(3) Have illegal sanctions, directed at limiting international cooperation with nationals of states which breach international law, succeeded, in the Government's experience, in motivating more conformity with international law or have they had the reverse effect.
(4) On what grounds does the Government expect its breach of international understandings to motivate the Soviet Union to show more respect of international law.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer to you my statement to this House on 9 September 1982 in which I fully explained the Government's present position on the admission of Soviet scientists to attend international conferences held in Australia.
International Union of Biochemistry Congress: Soviet Delegates
(Question No, 4982)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 August 1982:
(I) Is there a clear international understanding with the International Council of Scientific Unions which obliges all nations conducting scientific congresses to admit bona fide scientists to those conferences.
(2) If so, has this understanding been breached by the Government's refusal to allow two Russian scientists to attend the International Union of Biochemistry Congress in Perth.
(3) Have international organisations which exist for the benefit of all nations the right to protection from political interference representing narrow interests.
(4) Is the Minister able to state whether this action of the Government seriously interfered with the conduct of affairs and the high expectations attached to the International Union of Biochemistry.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) I refer to you my statement to this House on 9 September 1982 in which I fully explained the Government's present position on the admission of Soviet scientists to attend international conferences held in Australia.
Defence Capacity: Effect of Closure of Foundries
(Question No. 5004)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to allegations made by companies which constitute part of the Australian foundry industry that a large number of foundries have been closed as a result of the uncontrolled importation, or dumping, of castings into Australia and that such closure of foundries could severely affect the defence capacity of Australia.
(2) Has he caused any inquiries to be made to (a) examine the relationship between the foundry industry and Australia's defence needs and (b) examine the allegations made concerning the problems of the industry; if so, what inquiries, and what conclusions has he reached.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question as follows:

(I) A check has been made of records of dumping complaints received by the Department of Industry and Commerce over the last 12 months. In relation to castings there have been three complaints lodged which are identified as possibly falling within this category. They concern railway wheels from Japan and Korea, manhole covers from India and Singapore, malleable cast iron pipe fittings from Japan.
(2) The general capabilities of the foundry industry are monitored on a continuing basis. Foundries which form part of the defence industry base are reviewed at least annually and departmental records of their defence capabilities are adjusted accordingly.
Although the foundry industry is an important element of the defence industry base, defence requirements, especially in time of peace, represent only a small percentage of the industry's total capacity.
Considerable support has been provided to the foundry industry in recent years in relation to defence work and a number of specialised development tasks have been funded, including valves for naval fire extinguishing systems; submarine snorkel and hull valves; large propellor shaft supports and other ferrous items for the RAN FFG class frigates; aluminium bronze propellors for the FFG frigates; high strength diecastings for sonobuoys.
In summary, although the increased competition and general downturn being experienced by Australian foundries is a matter of concern to the Department of Defence Support, specific recent allegations of dumping do not appear to be directly related to its defence production function. Areas of the industry having special defence significance are closely monitored and are continuing to receive support.
Recommendations by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 5005)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 7 September 1982:
(I) Have he and his Department, over the course of the last 3 years, received representations from community based Aboriginal organisations for an examination of wages and conditions of employees of these organisations.
(2) Have these representations sought increases in salary levels and improvement in conditions.
(3) Is he able to say whether (a) there has been no real adjustment to the salaries or wages of employees of Aboriginal organisations since 1976, as alleged by members of these organisations, and (b) there has been no attempt to implement a superannuation scheme or to guarantee permanency.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) In a number of cases, yes.
("3) (a) In determining the level of grants to Aboriginal organisations, it is my Department's normal practice to relate salary and wage rates for funded positions to existing awards or to similar positions in the public or private sectors where this is possible. Grants have been increased to cover increases in the salaries and wages paid to employees of Aboriginal organisations.

2486 REPRESENTATIVES 21 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(b) Permanency and other conditions of employment are matters for consideration by individual Aboriginal organisations. As a general principle, only contributions to the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme may be funded by the Commonwealth. Community-based Aboriginal organisations do not come within the definition of an 'approved authority' under the Superannuation Act 1976 and their employees are therefore not eligible to contribute to the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme. It is a matter for consideration by individual organisations whether they negotiate superannuation packages for their employees.
Recommendations by the Committee of Review ofCommonweaIth Functions: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 5155)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
(I) What are the details of all recommendations made by the Review of Commonwealth Functions which related specifically to the Minister's Department.
(2) What are the details of the implementation of those recommendations to date.
(3) Where a service formerly provided by the Minister's Department is now provided by private interests, what have been the (a) cost savings and (b) cost penalties incurred to date in each case.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Recommendations relating specifically to the Department of Aboriginal Affairs were:
Function I. Aboriginal Housing
Government Decision States Grants for Aboriginal Housing to be incorporated in
the Commonwealth-States Housing Agreement (and earmarked as an identifiable program component)
Function 2. Applied Ecology Pty Ltd
Government Decision Commonwealth funding to be withdrawn.
Function 3. Sacred Sites Protection Authority
Government Decision Funding be transferred to the Northern Territory
Government.
Function 4. Council for Aboriginal Development and National Abor-
iginal Conference
Government Decision Council for Aboriginal Development to be abolished with
advisory functions and powers transferred to the National Aboriginal Conference.
Function 5. Institute of Aboriginal Studies
Government Decision An external review of the Institute to be conducted (includ-
ing its inter-relationship with the proposed Museum of Australia and the Heritage Commission).
(2) Implementation action on these recommendations to date is:
I. Implemented

2. Wind-down of the operations of Applied Ecology was commenced at once but termination of funding for the crocodile farm at Edward River has been delayed pending the settlement of the land tenure question in Queensland.
3. Implemented
4. Implemented
5. Implemented. Recommendations resulting from the review are being considered.
(3) Not applicable.
Social Security Appeals
(Question No. 5199)
Mr Maher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many appeals are pending in each State before the Social Security Appeals Tribunals.
(2) What new members have been appointed to the New South Wales Tribunals in the past year and what was the date of each appointment.
(3) What additional legal, welfare and medical members will be appointed to the New South Wales Tribunals.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) As at 30 August 1982 the number of appeals pending in each State before the Social Security Appeals Tribunal were as follows: New South Wales-3375; Victoria-I 196; Queensland-1138; South Australia-456; Western Australia-247; Tasmania-I 39; Northern Territory-26; Australian Capital Territory-28;
(2) Since I July 1981 an additional 12 legal, 8 welfare and 7 medical members have been appointed to the New South Wales Social Security Appeals Tribunal. The new appointees and the dates of their appointments are as follows:
Mr M. Flynn, (Legal Member), 17.9.81 Mr K. Smithers, (Legal Member), 17.9.81 Mr W. J. Sinclair, (Legal Member), 17.9.81 Mr R. White, (Legal Member), 3.8.82 Mr D. Castle, (Legal Member), 3.8.82 Mr F. Donohoe, (Legal Member), 3.8.82 Mr P. M. Shanahan, (Legal Member), 1.10.82 Mr H. McLean, (Legal Member), 1.10.82 Mr W. A. G. Enright, (Legal Member), 1.10.82 Mr D. B. Armati, (Legal Member), 1.10.82 Mr 1. W. Kirkwood, (Legal Member), 1.10.82 Professor R. A. Hayes, (Legal Member), 1.10.82 Mrs E. Cliffe, (Welfare Member), 23.2.82 Miss F. McAskill, (Welfare Member), 23.2.82 Mrs M. Nolan, (Welfare Member), 23.2.82 Mrs M. V. Wilson, (Welfare Member), 1.10.82 Mrs M. E. Dilosa, (Welfare Member), 1.10.82 Mrs K. P. Kline, (Welfare Member), 1.10.82 Miss L. Nolan, (Welfare Member), 1.10.82 Ms T. M. Stephens, (Welfare Member), 1.10.82 Dr A. Millar, (Medical Member), 17.9.81 Dr M. Alexander, (Medical Member), 17.9.81 Dr. J. Latham, (Medical Member), 17.9.81 Dr. J. Carman, (Medical Member), 17.9.81 Dr R. G. McEwin, (Medical Member), 1.10.82 Dr. J. N. Sevier, (Medical Member), 1.10.82 Dr. J. A. Paul, (Medical Member), 1.10.82
(3) Additional members will be appointed to the New South Wales Social Security Appeals Tribunal if and when the need arises.


