House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 129, 1982 Wednesday, 13 October 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Privilege

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1917

Wednesday, 13 October 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the House that I have been forewarned that the Leader of the Opposition wishes to raise a matter of privilege which I would normal1y cal1 first. But, in the special circumstances, I will cal1 the Acting Prime Minister first to announce ministerial arrangements.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister)-I inform the House that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) left Australia this morning to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting in Fiji. I will act as Prime Minister until the Prime Minister returns on Monday.
PRIVILEGE
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, I wish to raise with you a matter of privilege. It relates to an article which appeared in the Australian newspaper of today's date under the heading 'ALP attack on tax avoidance suffers setback'. The article is written by Brian Hill, Pam Bornhorst and Wio Joustra. The article states:
Government sources said the public servant's name had been deleted from a sheaf of documents tabled yesterday in the House of Representatives by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Hayden.
That statement is untrue. I would suggest that it is not only deliberately untrue but also maliciously untrue. The facts of this matter were, in fact, given to Mr Brian Hill of the Australian, who was apparently one of the joint authors of this article, when he came to my office.
Yesterday I tabled a number of documents from company records which showed certainly Mr Moore, a solicitor-the person referred to in this article-as a director of those companies at the time of the transaction which led to a process of their being dumped in the bottom of the harbour. Those documents were presented in exactly the way in which they had been photocopied from the official records. In each case there was a covering sheet of some few pages which listed, for the sake of condensation, directors and secretaries at the time of sale to dealer. Those sheets were typed in my office as a matter of convenience for people who wanted to refer to these tabled documents. Those typed sheets did not include the name of Mr Moore. They did not include the name of Mr Moore for this very good reason:

There were other documents which I did not table or refer to yesterday because I did not have sufficient time to attend to many other matters I would have wished to attend to in the course of my address to this House, including this matter; so I did not tender those documents. But other company documents show for the record that Mr Moore, for several of the companies-at least al1 those for which we could obtain relevant documents-had retired as a director of each of those companies on 31 May 1977, that is, before the transaction was put in place. For the benefit of the House, I seek leave to have those relevant copies tabled at this point.
Leave granted.
Mr HAYDEN-The documents subsequently filed at the Companies Office were in error in maintaining the description of Mr Moore as a director at the time of the transactions of 28 June 1977. Those documents, copied exactly, were presented with that error included. The typed covering documents which I referred to, outlining the directors and secretaries at the time of sale to dealer, did not include Mr Moore for the very proper reason that relevant documents showed he had resigned as a director on 31 May and therefore his person was not relevant to the matter before the House. It has been declared by Mr Moore and referred to in a number of newspaper comments this morning that in fact he had retired. He declared that himself.
Mr Brian Hill came to my office after the debate had taken place yesterday, inquiring about this matter, mentioning that it had been drawn to his attention-I presume by sources close to the Government if not of the Government -and the facts were explained as I have just explained them. One must conclude that Mr Hill and/or his col1eagues decided, nonetheless, to embark upon a misleading and, in the circumstances, wilfully misleading statement which has the clear implication that I sought to doctor documents in a quite unethical, dishonest way and therefore to mislead the Parliament. Mr Speaker, in those circumstances, I ask that you take the matter into consideration and determine whether it should be referred to the appropriate committee as a matter of privilege.
Mr SPEAKER--I ask the honourable gentleman to make the papers available to the Clerk. I will have the transcript from Hansard as soon as possible after I leave the chair. I will then consider the matter and see whether there is a prima facie case of breach of privilege.

1918 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Notices ofMotions

COMMONWEALTH GAMES
Notice of Motion
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) expresses its appreciation to all members of the Australian Commonwealth Games Team, the Commonwealth Games Committee and organisers, the Australian Broadcasting Commission, the Australian Sports Institute, Federal and State Governments, and the Brisbane City Council;
(2) highly commends the conduct, personal dedication and performance of all Australian competitors and team members who, by their sportsmanship, have brought great credit to this nation;
(3) pays tribu te to the success of all medallists; and
(4) requests the Speaker to convey the terms of this resolution to those concerned.
DISALLOWED NOTlCE~6F MOTION
Mr John Brown proceeding to give a notice of motion-
Mr SPEAKEl{-Order! The notice of motion is out of order.
Mr John Brown-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. On what grounds is the notice of motion out of order?
Mr SPEAKER-It is out of order in that it introduces argument and is not in a proposition form. If the honourable gentleman wishes to reframe it he may be able to put it into order.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION Mr Jull proceeding to give a notice of motion-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The notice of motion is out of order.
TASMANIA
Notice of Motion Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House is of the opinion that legislation should be enacted which would make it illegal to publish or present a map of Australia without showing the State of Tasmania.
ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS Notice of Motion
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House notes with approval the role of Senator Neville Bonner on the question of Aboriginal land rights in Queensland, and commends his courage in seeking to ensure that Aboriginal protests took place within the law.

ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS
Notice of Motion
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House calls on the Government to exert the utmost influence on the Queensland Government to drop all charges against people arrested at the Aboriginal land rights marches in Brisbane.
1992 OLYMPIC GAMES
Notice of Motion
Mr JULL (Bowman)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House supports moves by Queensland and the Brisbane City Council in any possible bid for Brisbane to host the 1992 Olympics.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL GALLERY: ENTRANCE FEE
Notice of Motion
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) notes that the Australian taxpayer has contributed over $125m to the construction of the National Gallery and the acquisition of the gallery collection;
(2) is appalled by the Government's decision to charge a $2 admission fee to the gallery; and
(3) calls upon the Government to grant free access to this national building to all.
SIBERIAN GAS PIPELINE
Notice of Motion
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) notes with deep concern the mounting evidence from human rights organisations and overseas Vietnamese associations that the Soviet Union is using Soviet political prisoners and Vietnamese slave labour to construct the Siberian gas pipeline, the so-called Gulag pipeline;
(2) welcomes the decision of President Mitterrand of France and of the former West German Chancellor Mr Schmidt to investigate this evidence; and
(3) calls on the Australian Government to join in these investigations.
NOBEL PEACE PRIZE
Notice of Motion
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House joins with other democratic Parliaments and their trade union organisations in supporting the nomination of Mr Lech Walesa, President of the Polish Solidarity Trade Union Organisation, for the Nobel Peace Prize.
Mr Coleman-Mr Speaker, notice of that motion has already been given.

Questions without Notice

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1919

Mr SPEAKER-It may remain on the Notice Paper. There is no proscription that would prevent notice being given.
PHILIPPINES: DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS
Notice of Motion
Mr HOWE (Batman)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(1) notes with concern the recent arrest of Mr Felixberto Olalia and Mr Crispin Beltran, and other trade union leaders in the Philippines, and calls upon the Government of the Philippines to release these political prisoners and to restore the democratic rights of the leaders of the trade union movementin the Philippines, including the right to take peaceful industrial action, and
(2) calls upon the Australian Government to review its trade links with the Philippines to determine the extent to which goods are being imported into Australia which have been manufactured by workers being denied basic democratic rights.
NATIONAL EPILEPSY WEEK
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House, noting that this is National Epilepsy Week, expresses its concern that the National Committee on Epilepsy receives no government funding and calls on the Government to rectify this injustice as a matter of urgency.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAXATION: IMPORTED AIRCRAFT
Mr CUNNINGHAM-In addressing my question to the Treasurer I refer him to a matter I raised in this Parliament on 19 August in regard to the importation of aircraft for taxation purposes. I referred at that time to a company which was headed by a former Minister. Is the Treasurer aware that that former Minister, Mr Staley, has asked the Victoria Police to investigate serious allegations in regard to aircraft and possible fraud against Commonwealth revenue? Is it a fact that the aircraft involved is a 1124 Westwind aircraft imported from Israel? Has the Treasurer, or the Prime Minister, called for a full report on these allegations from the Fraud Squad? Is it a fact that the Government's interest in this matter has been activated by the implication of a prominent businessman who sits on government bodies? Is it also a fact that as a result of information given to police in respect of this tax racket a prominent Liberal, Sir Andrew Grimwade, has resigned from all government appointments?
Mr HOWARD-The honourable gentleman's question makes a number of assumptions and allegations upon which I will not offer any comment.

I can inform the honourable gentleman that I am aware that there has been some contact between the former Minister whom he named and sections of the Victorian police force. I am not aware of the total substance of that contact. If there is a responsibility at a police level in the matter it is a responsibility of the Victorian police force and not a responsibility, as I understand the matter, of the Commonwealth police force. So far as the direct taxation affairs of that company are concerned, I can only confirm what I have told the honourable gentleman earlier, namely, that section 16 would preclude the Commissioner of Taxation from disclosing to me, or indeed anybody else, without the authority of the company, the taxation affairs of that company. Finally, I can inform the honourable gentleman that I have sought from the Australian Taxation Office advice as to whether any areas of the taxation law that might be touched by the circumstances to which the honourable gentleman's earlier question referred might be in need of amendment. In the event of receiving advice from the Taxation Commissioner that it should be amended and if I think it is appropriate to do so-and only if I think it is appropriate to do so-I will recommend to the Government accordingly.
URANIUM ENRICHMENT
Mr GILES-I address my question to the Minister for Trade and Resources. Is it correct that the Government has announced the acceptance of certain recommendations for the enrichment of uranium in Australia? What economic benefits could be expected to flow to the nation from the establishment of an enrichment industry, preferably in South Australia? Are there any significant health or environmental risks associated with such an industry?
Mr ANTHONY-The Government has received a report from the Uranium Enrichment Group of Australia which consists of four Australian companies which have been doing an evaluation on this question. That report made certain recommendations which the Government has accepted. The recommendations are that the Government now accept the Urenco-Centec centrifuge system of enrichment as the basis of further feasibility studies and that the two likely sites for an enrichment plant in Australia, near Brisbane or Adelaide, be further evaluated. The proposal would involve an expenditure of something like $500m in the initial stages, giving employment to about a couple of thousand people during the construction stage and probably permanent employment to about 1,000 people.

1920 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Questions without Notice

Mr Uren-What about your statement about 500,000 jobs?
Mr ANTHONY-I note an interjection about 500,000 people being employed. I think that the House ought to put it on record once again quite clearly that it was the Dunstan Government in South Australia in 1976 which initiated a study of uranium enrichment. In that initial document it was stated that an enrichment industry could provide jobs for about 8,000 people but that if we had a totally integrated uranium industry in Australia it could provide both direct and indirect benefits to something like half a million people. A Labor Premier of South Australia said that. It shows us how contrary the Labor Party is when it will not accept the advice of even one of its principal father figures. The environmental hazards related to an enrichment plant are no greater than the normal environmental problems for light industry. Indeed, an enrichment plant would be no more hazardous than a chemical plant being constructed somewhere in Australia. Of course, there will have to be the necessary safeguard arrangements to ensure that there is protection. But from our knowledge of overseas enrichment plants the problems are small and very few hazards are involved.
Mr Scott-You obviously do not know anything about it.
Mr ANTHONY-We know the attitude of members of the Australian Labor Party. They have this mania about uranium. They are in total conflict with one another as to how to proceed. But the facts are that Australia now has a uranium industry operating successfully, exporting and earning income. Now we are looking at the beneficiation of that uranium so that it can bring to Australia added benefits and a lot more job opportunities. At a time when there are job difficulties, members of the Labor Party who go on in the cantankerous way in which they do deserve to be condemned.
SALES TAX EVASION
Mr WILLlS-I refer the Treasurer to recent publicity given to widespread sales tax evasion through so-called straw company schemes which are similar in operation to the notorious bottomof-the-harbour scheme. Is it a fact that the Commissioner of Taxation repeatedly warned the Government, particularly the Treasurer, of the need to take action against such schemes between 1978 and 1980? Is it also a fact that when the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act was eventually enacted in 1980 against bottom-of-the-harbour schemes it applied equally to schemes to evade sales tax because of the inadequacy of previous

tax legislation to prevent such abuses? Why then has the Government not included in the recoupment taxation legislation currently before the House measures to recoup evaded sales tax to ensure that persons participating in such schemes do not simply walk away with their ill-gotten gains?
Mr HOWARD-I can inform the honourable gentleman that the legislation in respect of sales tax matters that was passed in 1978, together with legislation subsequently passed, is still effective in relation to these matters in the view of the Commissioner of Taxation. I can also inform the honourable gentleman that, as I think I indicated in a statement a couple of weeks ago, certain people have been arrested and charged in respect of sales tax evasion arrangements. I can also say that the advice given to me by the Commissioner of Taxation to enact remedial legislation in respect of sales tax evasion schemes during the time that I have been Treasurer has been acted upon by the Government. It is accepted as being good advice which should be acted upon, and it has been promptly put into legislative form by the Government.
I can only repeat that the honourable gentleman should refer again to the statements that I made after the ill-fated allegations made in the New South Wales Parliament by a Labor member to the effect that the Commissioner of Taxation was of the view that existing law was adequate to deal with the sales tax evasion schemes named by that member and presumably the allegations to which the honourable gentleman refers. The Commissioner of Taxation does not accept that the revenue in question has been lost. The Commissioner of Taxation remains confident in the view that the existing law is adequate to deal with the problem. In that view he is substantially supported by the independent opinions of two Melbourne counsel, including a Queen's Counsel.
SHEEP SLAUGHTER BOUNTY
Mr BOURCHIER-Does the Minister for Primary Industry agree that there is an urgent need to introduce a sheep slaughter bounty in Victoria? Is the Minister aware that the State Government of Victoria will not provide this bounty? In view of this decision, will the Minister now take steps to introduce this bounty as a direct action by the Federal Government? Does the Minister agree that the Federal Government could provide this bounty through local government sources? If the Federal Government provides the bounty direct, will the Minister indicate whether the amount that should be provided by the Victorian Government as its share will be deducted from Federal

Questions without Notice

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1921

Government funds supplied through tax sharing arrangements?
Mr NIXON-Because of the seriousness of the drought throughout Australia, the Commonwealth Government has introduced a number of important measures, including a fodder subsidy, a freight subsidy for the transfer of sheep or cattle from place to place and a later announced slaughter subsidy, to try to alleviate the situation. The fodder subsidy is being directly funded by the Commonwealth. The freight subsidy is one of what we call the core measures that are being shared with the States. What I did was to announce that the Commonwealth was prepared to share with the States a slaughter subsidy of $3 a head as part of the core measures, expecting the States to pick that up as they had done with the other core measures. The whole package is a fairly complete one to try to overcome some very difficult situations that farmers and graziers throughout the nation are facing in terms of looking after their livestock.
Insofar as the slaughter subsidy is concerned, I regret to say that Victoria has not picked it up. It has chosen in some way to assist local government authorities, with the use of bulldozers, to dig pits for the burying of dead sheep. I think it has been prepared to finance one or two aspects of that need in some small way. That, of course, does not help the farmer or the grazier with his losses. I think it is regrettable that the Victorian Government has not picked up the slaughter subsidy. I will try to encourage it to do so. I think it is adopting a bit of a mean attitude on this aspect. There is no help for the farmer or grazier in that respect in the line that it has taken.
The honourable member for Bendigo asked whether the Commonwealth would pick up the subsidy and provide it as a separate measure as we have done with the fodder subsidy and the interest rate subsidy. Because I am dealing with six States in these matters, I would prefer to leave the subsidy as part of the core measures. Other States are prepared to pick these schemes up and I would not, therefore, like to remove this subsidy from the core measures. We would have administrative difficulties and we would have to set up some form of bureaucracy to deal with it, whereas the States have a ready-made system for dealing with it in all its details. I, therefore, would not be attracted to the idea of doing it separately. Rather, I hope that the honourable member will encourage his State colleagues to make representations in Melbourne to try to encourage the Victorian Government to see some sense on the issue.

PECUNIARY INTERESTS OF MINISTERS
Mr DAWKINS-I refer the Acting Prime Minister to my question of 10 September 1980 to the then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, who was at that time just plain Mr Garland, in answer to which the then Minister stated that he had disclosed his business interests to the Prime Minister as he said was required by stated Government policy. I ask the Acting Prime Minister whether he will ascertain when the Prime Minister was informed that the then Minister was a shareholder in Automotive Holdings Ltd, a company which disposed of at least 13 of its subsidiaries to the Maher organisation in March 1976, which subsidiaries finished their lives at the bottom of the harbour with, as their company secretary, a woman named in the Costigan report as a brothel keeper.
Mr ANTHONY-Questions of that nature hardly deserve answering in this House. I would have thought some of the name dropping of the honourable member would have been of sufficient embarrassment to him to encourage him not to keep on this trend. As far as Sir Victor Garland is concerned, no doubt he has revealed his interests to the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister will be in a position to answer the question if he feels he needs to answer it. If people want casually to drop names, as members of the Australian Labor Party are doing, to smear people, certainly the Government will not react every time they drop a name in this Parliament. Honourable members can rest assured of this. If there is some prima facie evidence that action should be taken, the Government will do so, but I am sure that, up to this point, Sir Victor Garland has revealed to the Prime Minister all of his interests.
INTEREST RATES
Dr EDWARDS-Will the Treasurer provide information to the House about recent movements in key interest rates both in Australia and overseas?
Mr HOWARD-I am sure that all members of the House will have noted with some satisfaction movements which have occurred in key official and private sector interest rates around the world over the past few months. To name but some of them, between May 1981 and October 1982 the prime interest rate charged to large borrowers by United States of America banks fell from 20.25 per cent to around 12 per cent or 13 per cent--
Mr Mountford-What about Australia?
Mr HOWARD-I am coming to Australia. I have some good news on that front, too. This morning three of the largest banks in the United

1922 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Questions without Notice

States announced a further fall of one per cent in their prime rate. I think it ought to be remarked that one of the major reasons why these falls in interest rates in the United States have occurred-certainly not the only reason but one of the major reasons-is that there has been a quite spectacular fall in the rate of inflation in the United States. This rather endorses and underlines the importance that ought to continue to be attached to the level of inflation so far as an improvement in economic indicators is concerned. Since August 1982 there has been a fall of about 2t per cent in bond rates in Australia. There have already been the beginnings of some falls in prime overdr:.ft rates charged by Australian banks to large borrowers. They have declined from 17t per cent to 17 per cent between April 1982 and October 1982.
I think I have said before in the House that I believe that the new system of selling Commonwealth Government bonds has made a major contribution to the bond selling task and could in part have played a role in the decline which has occurred in interest rates. Looking around the industrialised world, although the falls in interest rates are not as marked as they have been in the United States, except perhaps in respect of the United Kingdom, where the prime rate went down from 16.5 per cent to 11 per cent between October 1981 and October 1982, there is still a pattern of some declines in interest rates in the case of West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Belgium. It is perhaps not surprising that one of the exceptions to this rule is that, so far as I understand it, there have not been any significant falls in interest rates in France during the same period. Perhaps there is some connection there between budgetary policies and interest rate developments.
Whilst we should not read too much into the developments that have occurred in interest rates and whilst we should recognise that as well as the falls in inflation there has been a significant contribution from the decline in demand for funds through lower corporate sector activity, the development in the United States is, nonetheless, very healthy. As this Government has repeatedly said in the past, the fortunes economically of this country are linked inevitably with the fortunes economically of the rest of the world. As a consequence, it is to be hoped that, as has already occurred, the declines in interest rates in the United States will have some beneficial effects in Australia. They have already been felt. Those that have been experienced ought to be a cause of satisfaction to all members of the House.

TAX EVASION LEGISLATION
Dr JENKINS-I refer the Treasurer to the proposed legislation against bottom-of-theharbour tax evasion schemes. Does this legislation seek to recoup only company and undistributed profits taxes owed by companies which were involved in these schemes? Is it a fact that persons participating in these schemes were able to avoid paying personal income tax in respect of payments for their shares which, had they been distributed as dividends, would have been taxable at the shareholders' marginal tax rate? Is the total revenue lost from this component of bottom-of the-harbour schemes similar in magnitude to that tax which the Government is attempting to recoup? Why has the Government limited the scope of this legislation so that as much as half the total tax loss will remain uncollected?
Mr HOWARD-In answer to the honourable gentleman's question I make three comments: Firstly, the legislation is concerned with the collection of tax which was assessed and remains unpaid, although it is the intention of the Government under the legislation, if it is approved by the Parliament, to collect that tax which remains unpaid from the vendor shareholders of the companies concerned. The second point I make is that the alleged non-payment of personal tax to which the honourable gentleman referred is in respect of a tax that was never actually assessed. In those circumstances, there is a significant difference between the tax which is sought to be collected under this legislation and that which in fact might have been collected having regard to what might have happened to the handling of the companies in question.
Thirdly, the honourable gentleman's question, if I may say so, totally ignores the implications of the judgment of the High Court of Australia in Slutzkin's case, which held that section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act would not operate in those circumstances to impose a taxation liability on the vendor shareholders. I take the opportunity of informing the honourable gentleman that the Government does not propose to widen the reach of the recoupment legislation. There are good and proper reasons why the reach of that recoupment legislation should not be widened and I will have very great pleasure during debate on this legislation to point out in great detail to the honourable gentleman and his colleagues why the reach of that legislation should not be widened.
QANTAS AIRWAYS LTD: FLIGHTS TO ZIMBABWE
Mr TAMBLING-Can the Minister for Aviation provide details of new arrangements

Questions without Notice

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1923

with regard to international flights to Zimbabwe by Qantas Airways Ltd? What commercial negotiations have been finalised between Qantas and South African Airlines to guarantee through travel to South Africa? Is it a fact that as a consequence South African Airlines will upgrade its services between Johannesburg and Harare from using DC9 aircraft to using Airbus aircraft in order to accommodate the additional travellers and will alter timetables and fare costs considerably?
Mr FIFE-For foreign policy reasons which are well understood in this country and particularly in this House, the Commonwealth Government will not grant approval to Qantas to fly direct to South Africa. However, in recent times Qantas has made application to the Government for approval to fly direct to Zimbabwe and it has indicated publicly that it has been in consultation with the Zimbabwean Government with a view to establishing a service from Sydney via Perth to the Zimbabwean capital, commencing on 7 November. Of course, this service requires the approval of both governments. The Australian Government has given approval for that service and Qantas is still awaiting the approval of the Zimbabwean Government. I do not want to anticipate the Zimbabwean Government's attitude but I believe that it probably would favour this air link and probably would provide the necessary approval. But, as I have indicated, this is a matter for both governments. The Australian Government has provided approval and it is now a matter for the Zimbabwean Government to indicate its position.
I am not aware of the details of any commercial negotiations that have been entered into between Qantas and South African Airlines, but I point out that any air service between Zimbabwe and any other country, be it in Africa or elsewhere, is a matter for the Zimbabwean Government. I reiterate that the Australian Government has given approval for Qantas to fly to Zimbabwe. I understand that, subject to the approval of the Zimbabwean Government, the service will commence on 7 November.
MEAT INDUSTRY
Mr KERIN-I refer the Minister for Primary Industry to the 409 pages of notes by Mr Landos, secretary of the Kelly Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems, which were tabled on 23 September and which noted many examples of corruption and malpractice in the meat industry. When did the Minister first learn of the Landos notes? Was

Mr Landos a member of the Department of Primary Industry when secretary of the Kelly Committee? Has Mr Landos been a member of the Department of Primary Industry since the completion of the Kelly Committee's report? If so, in what capacity and in what area of the Department is Mr Landos employed? If the Minister was not aware of the allegations contained in the .Landos notes at the time they were compiled, how was it that crucial information could be available to the Department but not to the Minister in charge of that Department? Did the Bureau of Animal Health take any action on the Landos notes? If not, why not?
Mr NIXON-The honourable member for Werriwa has asked a series of questions. I will try to deal with them one after the other. I first became aware of the Landos notes on 13 July 1982 when I was in attendance at the hearings of the Royal Commission into the Australian Meat Industry as a witness. I think the second question related to what role Mr Landos has in the Department. He was appointed as an officer of the Department as secretary of the Kelly Committee. He returned to the Department in the role that he held previously relating to the export inspection service. I have written down here 'yes' to the third question. I do not remember what the question was, quite frankly.
Mr Kerin-What is he doing now?
Mr NIXON-He is engaged in the same role as he was previously, prior to his appointment as secretary of the Kelly Committee. The Landos notes were not made available to me. I made that clear previously in the House in the debate on the matter. It is a tragedy that they were not made available. Mr Kelly had a copy of the Landos notes. He did not bother to refer them to me as Minister on the day of our meeting in Melbourne, nor did he see that I obtained a copy of the notes afterwards.
Mr Mountford-What is wrong with your departmental head?
Mr NIXON-Mr Speaker, I will do my best to answer this question if honourable members would just be patient for a moment. The relationship between Mr Landos and the Kelly Committee was as it is with all parliamentary committees-I think most members of parliament would recognise this-that is, when an officer is seconded to a committee the work of that committee is done in confidence. The officer does not necessarily report back to the department the activities of the committee. This is a fairly normal procedure, as I understand it. However, in this case Mr Landos did, I understand, because of the seriousness of the allegations made in the notes

1924 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Questions without Notice

that he had compiled during the course of the hearings, seek permission from Mr Kelly to refer those notes to the Director of the Bureau of Animal Health. Mr Kelly approved that, apparently. I understand that those notes were referred to Mr Gee, who is the Director of the Bureau of Animal Health. I understand further that Mr Gee referred those notes further down to Mr Hart, who is in charge of this activity in the Bureau of Animal Health. Regrettably, that is where the matter seems to have rested. I can give no explanation at this point as to why no further action was taken on those notes. Having regard to the number of questions asked by the honourable member, I will look at the detail of the questions to see whether I have provided all the information sought.
TELEGRAM SERVICE
Mr DEAN-Is the Minister for Communications aware of the concern of the Union of Postal Clerks and Telegraphists that the telegraphic service in Australia is being allowed to run down; that is, the service operated both by Telecom Australia and Australia Post? Is that so? Is the Government doing anything to ensure that a telegraphic service does continue and, where possible, will be promoted?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I am aware of that matter of concern mainly because the union keeps sending telegrams to me about it. This is about the first boost of which I am aware in the use of the public telegram service that there has been in recent years. I would like to encourage the union members in that activity-not sending the telegrams to me, of course, but to other people. The situation is that the public telegram service will undoubtedly continue in this country. I can be certain about that. The disturbing area, however, is that in recent years there has been a steady decline in the use of the telegram service. That has been matched by a very substantial increase in the costs of running the service, so much so that this year and in recent years it has been running at a loss of about $20m a year, which is a matter for very great concern. I think the other factor that should be taken into account with respect to this matter is that there are other and similar-in some cases much better-methods of fast communication. Of course, I refer to the telex and developing areas such as electronic mail.
I can say this much to the honourable member and to those who have an interest in this subject: The telegram service will continue. However, we are concerned about the costs and we cannot go on running the system at a loss of those dimensions without either economising or trying to find some other way of reducing the ever-increasing

cost of the service. I should also add that one of the great hopes in this area and with respect to other forms of communication is the report of the Davidson Inquiry into Telecommunications Services in Australia, which I hope I will receive in the course of the next few weeks. I hope that will provide for us a charter for the future on the basis of which we can plan for fast economical communications which will serve the very real needs of the country.
MEAT INDUSTRY
Mrs CHILD-My question, which is addressed to the Minister for Primary Industry, also refers to the Landos notes. Do the Landos notes point out examples of blackmail, bribery, incompetence, non-compliance with inspection standards, the substitution of horse meat for meat for domestic consumption and the substitution of domestic meat for export meat? Was this information available within the Department of Primary Industry at the time it was compiled? If so, why was no action taken by the Department? Was it because, unlike the evidence presented publicly to the Royal Commission into the Australian Meat Industry, the Landos notes were not public documents and therefore not known to us?
Mr NIXON-I made it perfectly plain before that the Landos notes were not public notes. They were notes compiled by the secretary of the Kelly Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems for the purposes of its own activities. So the last part of the honourable member's question is correct. The Landos notes became public towards the end of the hearings of the Royal Commission when, under questioning from the Royal Commissioner, it was disclosed that these notes were in existence. As was pointed out by the honourable member for Werriwa, several hundred pages of notes were compiled containing information relating to the travellings of the Kelly Committee and the information it gathered during the course of its investigations. There is a series of allegations-some specific and some non-specific-in the 400-odd pages. If I recall correctly, I tabled the Landos notes in the Parliament at the time of the earlier debate.
My understanding is that when the Landos allegations were made available to the Department they were referred to the officer in control of that section of the Department which deals with these matters. They were not referred to me, regrettably; but that is the way it was. As I understand it, certain administrative actions were taken to overcome administrative weaknesses and difficulties contained in the administration of the

Questions without Notice

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1925

Bureau of Animal Health. I can offer no more information about the matter at this point other than to say that since then, of course, a lot of steps have been taken to ensure that the sorts of misdemeanours and malpractices that have occurred cannot occur again. We have since set up the export inspection service which is charged very much with the responsibility of carrying out the administration of this area.
EXPORTS
Mr LLOYD-My question is directed to the Acting Prime Minister. What details can he provide on the threatened United States Government action in retaliation against European Economic Community export policies by the introduction of direct subsidies for United States export commodities? What effect will such action have on Australia's exports, particularly agricultural exports? What effect will this United States policy have on the forthcoming General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ministerial meeting and the Australian Government's initiative to prevent further increases in worldwide levels of trade protection?
Mr ANTHONY-I have learnt in the last 24 hours that the United States Congress has moved that a special appropriation be provided to allow United States farm exports to be promoted or subsidised in order to meet, obviously, competition that the United States is facing from subsidised European production. This emerged from Congress; it was not as a result of a request from the Administration. It reflects the growing concern within the United States of the practices of the European Economic Community and its common agricultural policy. We in Australia have been saying for some considerable time that the policies of Europe are leading to surpluses. The subventions that are being paid on exports are totally distorting world trade, are suppressing prices and are making it extremely difficult for efficient producers such as Australia to be able to compete. Australia certainly does not condone this measure by the United States. I think it is unfortunate and regrettable that it has had to do this, but obviously it is due to the utter frustration that it is finding with the EEC and its policies.
If it becomes a practice of the United States Administration to pursue export subsidies, I wonder what the world trading system will come to when two of the largest economies in the world start to fight each other to gain third markets around the world. I only hope that the United States might hold its hand until we have the GATT ministerial meeting in November when the initiatives that Australia has put forward have

gained quite a momentum and there is a recognition of why it is so important now to try to have a moratorium on countries adding to their protection, by way of tariffs, voluntary restraints, nontariff measures or by export subsidies and so forth. Growth in the use of such measures has to come to a standstill, otherwise international trade will collapse. Therefore, whilst I understand the United States measures, I certainly hope that it does not go ahead with them until there is at least a chance of getting some sense through the GATT.
JAPAN: RAW MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
Mr KEATING-Has the Minister for Trade and Resources approached the Japanese Government and Japanese business about what one can perceive to be an almost permanent downward shift in Australia's share of raw materials being imported into Japan? Has he indicated to Japan the seriousness with which Australia views this shift and has he sought assurances that our traditional market shares will be maintained? Additionally, did he indicate to Japan that, if it is to be that Australia is to be treated so unfairly in a recession, when indeed our industries have been built in service of the Japanese raw material requirements, in a time when Australia and the world are back in a period of buoyancy, the most favoured nation status in respect of energy investment will not obtain in respect of Japan unless the treatment is reciprocated?
Mr ANTHONY-I have taken a lively interest in this aspect of trade between Australia and Japan. Indeed it was one of the main features of discussion at the joint ministerial meeting held here in Canberra in July. Apart from that, I have had a number of discussions with the Japanese Ambassador to emphasise our concern at any shift in the proportions of trade that we have with Japan. I think it is fair enough to say that Australia has to be realistic and recognise that there is a downturn in the world's steel industry. Japan is feeling the consequences as are other countries. Indeed, for the first time since 1972, Japan is forecasting a production ofless than 100 million tonnes of steel. That has always been considered the magic figure. We have always hoped that it would never go below 100 million tonnes but at the moment it appears that, because of a lack of demand for steel within Japan and, in particular, because its export trade does not have a market, Japan cannot purchase the same quantities of coking coal and iron ore.
We are very concerned to ensure that if there is to be a cutback it will be a proportional cutback

1926 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Questions without Notice

and Australia will maintain its traditional export proportions, which are approximately 48 per cent for iron ore and an equitable share is around 50 per cent for coking coal. On the most recent figures available to me there seems to have been a lift in iron ore exports to Japan. The figure did slip back in the earlier part of this year to about 43 per cent, but it seems to be moving nearer the fi~ure of 48 per cent. I certainly hope that is achieved and I will be most appreciative of the Japanese if they maintain the figure at that level. I share the honourable member's concern in this area. The main thing is that Japan recognises us as a traditional long term supplier of great value. The growth of the Japanese steel industry has paralleled the growth of Australia's development of the great resources involved in it. I think it is intrinsic that there be a sound relationship between the two industries. That can best be maintained if Japan keeps up its traditional practices.
1992 OLYMPIC GAMES
Mr JULL-The Acting Prime Minister will be aware of the tremendous interest that has been displayed by the Queensland Government and the Brisbane City Council in the possibility of making a bid for the 1992 Olympic Games. Can he indicate whether the Federal Government will support those initial investigations and, should all things be equal, whether the Federal Government will support such a bid?
Mr ANTHONy-it is a bit early for me to be pre-emptive on this question, but I think the whole of Australia will agree that Brisbane put up a most commendable performance and proved that it has the capacity to conduct an international games competition. I for one would very much like to be able to experience in 1992 the enjoyment that I experienced in Queensland last week. It was really a great occasion. I think it did an enormous amount to lift the pride not only of Queenslanders but also of the whole of Australia. It was an occasion to be noted. I think that a good deal of the credit, apart from that due to all the performers and organisers, must go to the Australian Broadcasting Commission, which did a great job, even including Norman May.
STEEL INDUSTRY
Mr WALLIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Industry and Commerce. It is motivated by my concern for the future of the steel industry of Australia and, in particular, of Whyalla where another firm involved in the steel industry has been forced to retrench staff. Will not the Government's decision to allow steel imports into Australia in 1982-83 at the same level as

that for the current year place the Australian steel industry at a disadvantage, because if imports remain at the same level in a market in which there is a large drop in demand a much smaller share of the depressed market will be available to the Australian industry?
Mr PEACOCK-I appreciate the fact that the honourable member did not ask me why I had not done something about it in the last 48 hours. I simply say to him that I well understand the complications of the matters to which he has referred. He will also understand that, considering the time that has elapsed-namely, 48t hours-since I was sworn in, I do not wish to add any individual imprimatur at this stage to what my predecessor and the Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce have indicated publicly. If he bears with me in the days ahead, I will be able to provide him with further information.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Ian Cameron proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Administrative Services-
Mr SPEAKER-The question is out of order.
BOUNTIES: AUSTRALIAN MADE TRACTORS
Mr SCHOLES-I ask the Minister for Industry and Commerce whether it is a fact that bounties payable on Australian made tractors were reduced earlier this year and that since that time significant unemployment has resulted in this industry. What action is the Minister planning or what action is planned by his Department in order to maintain and recover employment opportunities in Australian industries related to farm machinery which are currently in a desperate situation?
Mr PEACOCK-If the honourable member can contain himself I will be able to give him a detailed answer in the course of the next few days.
TAXATION: IMPORTED AIRCRAFT
Mr ANTHONY-I wish to give a supplementary answer to that given by the Treasun;:r to a question asked about Mr Andrew Grimwade. I have a letter from Mr Andrew Grimwade received this morning by the Prime Minister-
Mr Barry Jones-Sir Andrew, actually.
Mr ANTHONY-The honourable member is absolutely right. The letter is signed Andrew Grimwade. I will read the letter to the House. It states:

General

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1927

Dear Prime Minister,
You are aware that, for some months, I have been considering reducing my outside commitments and, in fact, have already reduced some of my business activities. This is because of an increasing workload for the next year or so in my primary business interest and because of my involvement in a major public company reorganisation.
I regret to advise you that it is therefore no longer possible for me to give the time and application necessary to continue my membership of the Official Establishments Trust, the Remuneration Tribunal and the Council of the Order of Australia.
In the case of the former, I have served the Official Establishments since 1976 and the basis has now been laid for their proper future operations. In the case of the Remuneration Tribunal and the Order of Australia, my appointments date from the time of the Whitlam Government, 1974 and 1975 respectively, and it is now time to make way for others with more time available.
Please accept my retirement from these bodies forthwith particularly because of my likely departure overseas in the ?ea.r future. This should enable my successors to be appointed In time for the next busy period.
It has been a privilege to have had the opportunity to have served on these bodies.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely, Andrew Grimwade
I also would like to join with the remarks that the Prime Minister made just before his departure overseas, in thanking Sir Andrew Grimwade--
Mr Hayden-For his distinctive services to trade.
Mr ANTHONY-What is so funny about thanking Sir Andrew Grimwade for his contribution to these bodies and for his service to a previous government which appointed him? He has given a great deal of dedication, service and time to these bodies and the Government is appreciative of the contribution he has made. I am sure the Leader of the Opposition's predecessor would have been appreciative too.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Mr SPEAKER-I understand that the honourable member for Canberra intends to lodge a request for detailed information relating to the Joint House Department.
Mrs Kelly-Yes. I seek information in relation to the operations of the Joint House Department.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable member to give her question to the Clerk. If it is in order, it will appear in Hansard. In due course I will reply and the reply will appear in Hansard.
REPORT OF AUDITOR-GENERAL
Mr SPEAKER-I present, pursuant to statute, the report of the Auditor-General, accompanied

by the financial statements prepared by the Minister for Finance for the year 1981-82 and upon other accounts.
Motion (by Sir James Killen)-by leaveagreed to:
(I) That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of the report of the Auditor-General for the year 1981-82, and
(2) That the paper be printed..
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Department of the Treasury for 1981-82.
ADVANCE TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information for honourable members. I present a statement on expenditure from the Advance to the Minister for Finance for August 1982.
AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members. I present an interim annual report of the Australian Wool Corporation for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN WHEAT BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report of a conference convened by the Australian Wheat Board on 16 April 1982. The conference was held following a recommendation by the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations in its report on certain annual reports tabled on 26 November 1981.
COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO EDUCATION AND TRAINING
Mr MACPHEE (Balac1ava-Minister for Employment and Industdal Relations)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report on follow-up during 1981 of the report of the Committee of Inquiry into Education and Training.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-Acting
Attorney-General)-For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Attorney-General's Department for 1981-82.

1928 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Unemployment

FILM CENSORSHIP BOARD
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-Acting Attorney-General)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Film Censorship Board report on activities, 1981.
INSTITUTE OF FAMILY STUDIES
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-Acting Attorney-General)-For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Institute of Family Studies for 1981-82.
DEPARTMENT OF' HOME AFFAIRS AND ENVIRONMENT
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Department of Home Affairs and Environment for 1981-82.
ASSENT TO BILLS
Assent to the following Bills reported:
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Bill 1982.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Bill 1982.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Bill 1982.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Bill (No.2) 1982.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos I to 9) 1982.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Bill 1982.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)--Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to correct a name I mentioned in the House on 23 September 1982 as shown in Hansard on page 1880.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr McVEIGH-The name I used on 23 September was Mr McDonald. It should have been Mr McCormick. I ask that this correction be recorded.
Mr SPEAKER-I will direct Hansard to make the correction in the weekly production so that people will not have to turn to a new page to find the correction.
UNEMPLOYMENT
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:

The tragedy of high and rising unemployment and the refusal of the Government to concede any responsibility for this threat to the economic and social welfare of Australia.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number of members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (2.54)-Official unemployment has burst through the half million mark in this country. Last month the official figures were 504,800. The tragedy is that this Government does not give a damn about these figures. Worse than that, this Government has consistently lied to the Australian community about both the dimensions--
Mr SPEAKER-I interrupt the honourable gentleman. It is not unparliamentary to talk about government lying, but it is not good practice of parliamentary words. I ask him to cease using such words.
Mr HAWKE-Well, the Government has consistently misrepresented to the Australian community both the dimensions and the causes of unemployment in this country. For this growing legion of unemployed the immediate personal devastation of their predicament must be bitter enough. I refer to the loss of income, the loss of capacity to satisfy their aspirations and the needs of those dependent upon them, the loss of status in the eyes of family, neighbours and friends and, worst of all, in many cases the erosion of their own self-esteem. It is difficult-indeed, I suggest that it is impossible-for any honourable member to comprehend fully what this experience is now doing to hundreds of thousands of our fellow Australians but there is one thing that we all ought to be able to understand-whatever the feelings of hurt, humiliation, anger and depression amongst the unemployed, these emotions will be intensified by the perceptions of the attitude of this Government to their plight.
Before talking about the despicable attitude of this Government towards the plight of the unemployed, let me first of all outline the factual dimensions of this unemployment tragedy in this country. Whilst acknowledging straightforwardly and immediately that the work force at the time was only about one-third of the size of that of the present day, we may start to get some idea of the enormity of the current crisis in absolute terms if we go back to the 1933 census which was taken in the midst of the Great Depression. That showed that total unemployment at 30 June 1933 was 481,000, a figure which was surpassed last month. Even if at this stage we have not already passed

Unemployment

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1929

the peak absolute unemployment levels achieved during the Great Depression we will undoubtedly do so within the next few months.
In 1975 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) promised jobs for all wanting work. I will go into that in more detail in a moment. Seven years later he and his Government have produced the same absolute unemployment levels that existed in 1933. The fact is that not only has unemployment reached record post-war proportions but also the deterioration in the employment situation is accelerating. Over the past 12 months unemployment in Australia rose by a massive 113,700 people. In other words, there was a 29 per cent increase in unemployment in this country in the last 12 months. There is an awesome risk of another unemployment rise of this magnitude or more by early next year. The Government has obviously lost control of the situation. The impact of unemployment in this country is totally inequitable. It is magnifying enormously the inequities already present in Australian society. The unemployment rate last month was 7.4 per cent-as I have said, a post-war record-but that rate was inequitably distributed. Amongst women it was 8.4 per cent and amongst youth it was 19 per cent. in other words, about one in five of our young people are unemployed. Of course, the rate was very much higher still amongst Aboriginals.
The Government has created a lost generation-thousands and thousands of young Australians reach their mid-twenties with little or no work experience.
Over the past 12 months the unemployment crisis has taken another disturbing twist. Most of last year's unemployment rise of 100,000 plus was concentrated among adult breadwinners. Adult male unemployment alone rose by 60,500 people. The rise for adult women was smaller only because they are dropping out of the labour market on a massive scale into the hidden unemployed. So unemployment is now striking at the heart of the nuclear family for which this Government professes to have such a high regard. The chief victims of hidden unemployment are women. If all these hidden unemployment figures were properly accounted for the statistics would show that the true unemployment rate in Australia was at the very least 10 per cent to 11 per cent.
I refer not only to the numbers of unemployed but also to the fact that the average periods of unemployment are rising disturbingly. In August, 157,700 people wanting full time employment had been unemployed for six months or more. Of the total unemployed 178,200 had been unemployed for six months or more. Indeed, in August

the average length of unemployment for teenagers was 24 weeks, or just under six months, and for the total unemployed the average was 32.8 weeks, an incredible eight months. For older workersthe forgotten unemployed, I suggest-the figure was even higher. For those in the age bracket 55 to 59, the average unemployment period was 46.9 weeks. For those in the latter span of employment possibilities, those in the age group 60 to 64, the average duration of unemployment was 57.5 weeks or more than one year. Necessarily briefly, those are the facts, the cold statistics, that mask the human tragedy-a tragedy which, as I have said, is being made more bitter by the disgraceful attitudes and excuses of this Government.
What have been those attitudes and excuses which this Government has adopted in regard to unemployment in this country? All honourable members will recall that, in 1975 when we had seen the beginning of serious unemployment in this country, the Prime Minister, who was then the Leader of the Opposition, unequivocally ridiculed any suggestion that external economic events could be used in mitigation of responsibility by the Australian Government. I have had cause to refer to this matter before, but I remind the House again of what the Prime Minister, the then Leader of the Opposition, had to say on 22 January 1975 because these words need to be met by the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) who will answer in this debate. This is what his leader, the then Leader of the Opposition, had to say on 22 January about external factors:
When political leaders say the present situation cannot be helped, it is part of a world situation, they are expressing the futility of their own leadership.
That is what the present Prime Minister said in 1975. When this Government says that, in respect of unemployment, it is part of a world situation, it is expressing the futility of its own leadership.
The unequivocal promise was made in this context by the then Leader of the Opposition before he became Prime Minister: If his Government came to power at the end of 1975, it would restore full employment. In making that unequivocal promise there was not a mention or a word that that promise would in any way be impeded by external considerations. I ask the Minister to note and to recall that when his leader made the promise in 1975 that he would restore full employment not a word or a mention was made that the wages policy of the Australian trade union movement would prevent the achievement of that promise. There was not a word in 1975 that external forces or wage movements in this country would prevent this Government restoring full employment. The

1930 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Unemployment

promise was unequivocal and unqualified: Elect a Fraser Government and unemployment will be banished. There will be jobs for all who want to work.
As that promise was miserably and inevitably broken and as unemployment increased under the contractionary economic policies of this Government, what has it had to say? Of course, at first the line was that there really was not a problem. Members of this Government used and encouraged in others the dole bludger syndrome. Their argument was that there was plenty of work for those who really wanted to work. That was never accurate and it was always obscenely objectionable. As the obscenity became more and more apparent as the ranks of the unemployed continued to grow, the Government has changed its tack. Having blamed the Whitlam Government and the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, the Government's line now is to blame the two factors that it did not mention in 1975 that is, the international economic scene and excessive wage movements. The Government has now blamed everyone, including the unemployed. It has blamed every factor but it has not blamed itself and its own economic policies. Not one word has ever been uttered by the Prime Minister or by any of the Ministers in this Government that they and their economic policies have one skerrick of responsibility for unemployment in this country. It is always someone or something else. Now it has blamed the two factors that it did not mention in 1975 as constituting any possible bar to bringing back full employment in this country.
I intend to look at those two factors which were used by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his Budget Speech as the reasons for the level of unemployment. I challenge the Minister in his reply to address himself to these issues. He should not simply get up and say that it is due to external factors or wage movements; he should analyse what is said about it. Before going to those factors I want to give some idea of what credence honourable members can give to the Government's budgetary explanations and analysis of the problem of unemployment by just looking at the blatant and deliberate misrepresentation that was undertaken in the Budget Papers about the cause of unemployment during the financial year. I remind honourable members of what was stated at page 61 of Budget Paper No.1:
Consistent with this assessment, and the assumed effect of Government manpower policies, the Budget estimates allow for the average number of unemployment benefits recipients to rise from an average of 332 000 in 1981-82 to an average of 395 000 in 1982-83.

That was simply a blatant and deliberate lie. No other use of language is appropriate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!
Mr HAWKE-Well, it is a blatant misrepresentation, Mr Deputy Speaker. When that figure of 395,000 was used in the Budget Papers the figure for July was already 405,000 and the figure for the succeeding month of August was 422,000. Honourable members will recall that the Minister ran away from those figures as soon as I faced him with them.
In the light of the Government's deliberate misrepresentation of the dimension of unemployment, what weight can one give to its analysis of the causes? First of all, the Government says now that the problem has international causes. We have pointed out what the Prime Minister said about this in 1975. Let us simply have on the table the truth about this factor. It is true now, as it was in 1975, that Australia cannot escape the impact of what is happening overseas. It was true to say in 1975 that we were affected and it is true to say that we in Australia are affected now by what happens overseas; but that is no excuse for what is happening in Australia. If there is no engine of growth or there are no employment opportunities within this country as a result of what is happening overseas, it is all the more important that we should adopt stimulatory policies to try to countervail the impact of what is happening overseas.
In respect of the second factor-that is, that excessive wages growth in this country is causing unemployment-let me simply remind the House that this Government is responsible for what has happened to wages in this country in the last 12 months or more. It was this Government which helped to destroy indexation in 1981. It was this Government which said to the unions: 'Use the same power as business has got to get what you will'. The unions inevitably, as I have pointed out before, responded to this attitude of the Government. One cannot blame wages in that sense. We on this side of the House accept that wages are a significant factor, but there must be a positive policy, such as the policy of the Australian Labor Party; that is, one of mild stimulatory expansion under the cover of a prices and incomes policy with job generation programs, which my colleague will speak about, which will match this tragedy that exists in this country. The Government can no longer bleat about the cost of job generation when it is faced with the costs of massive social dimensions in this country; those of crime, hard drugs, homelessness, desperation and suicide. The Government has to face up to those

Unemployment

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1931

costs and undertake now programs which will match the tragedy of unemployment in this country.
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations) (3.9)-The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) has quoted in a selective way from statements made by the then Leader of the Opposition in a particular speech. The honourable member would do well to look at the Hansard record of the time when this Government was in opposition. Honourable members, including me, continually analysed the state of the economy at that time with reference to external factors. Indeed, I recall saying ad nauseam, as did others, that there were external factors and it was a great fortune for Australia that we had a ready supply of low cost Bass Strait oil which largely insulated us from the worst aspects of the economic downturn overseas. So we acknowledged that there were external factors. We also acknowledged the wages explosion as, to his credit, did the honourable member for Wills when he was leader of the trade union movement-or he did so shortly afterwards when the wages explosion clearly got out of hand.
I do not see the point in spending much time on the past, except to the extent that we might learn something from it. But we are confronted now with a similar situation to that which prevailed in 1974-75 in that we have just recovered from a comparable wages explosion. We are experiencing much the same international economic pressures which existed at that time. We certainly have provided, as we are bound to provide, information through the Australian Bureau of Statistics and elsewhere on the State of the labour market. Those are the figures cited in this debate. I do not disagree with the analysis of the labour market as it now stands but I do resent very strongly a statement by the honourable member to the effect that this Government does not give a damn about the unemployed and has misrepresented the position to the Australian people. We have done nothing of the kind. We have said over and over again that we are concerned about the state of unemployed persons. We have a range of welfare and other policies as well as the array of manpower and training programs designed to assist those people. But in dealing with the twin problems of inflation and unemployment we must be careful to act within the bounds of responsible economic management which must, therefore, have some regard to the deficit in order not to worsen the position of persons on fixed incomes or those whose jobs are marginally held. That would be the situation if we had a greater Budget deficit than we have at the moment. It would be the situation if we put

further pressure on interest rates and on inflation. This is a matter of judgment for the government oftheday.
Looking at the programs put forward by the Australian Labor Party one sees fragmentary programs-one by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in his so-called shadow Budget and one by the honourable member for Wills, a much more conservative and, in my view, a much more responsible approach in terms of so-called job creation. In terms of the kind of unemployment problem drawn it is not a great advance on the number of people catered for and, in my view, in terms of longer term job creation, more permanent job creation, it is not an advance at all. It is one thing to talk of 150,000 people or 70,000 people placed in a job as a result of some job subsidy program which blows out the Budget and another thing to look at the consequences of displacement of other persons who currently are in employment as a result of that kind of initiative. I believe that the Labor Party has not itself got its house in order. If we are going to be talking in some of these extravagant terms let me refer the Labor Party to the fact that it, in dealing with its policies for the forthcoming election, met in July and overlooked dealing with the question of UrIemployment. In the last of these debates-this is at least the third in recent weeks on this subject by the honourable member for Wills-the honourable member spent a lot of his debating time quoting editorials from newspapers. Let me in part return the compliment by quoting a report from the National Times edition No. 595 of 27 June to 3 July. The report was not challenged or rebutted by the ALP, as far as I can ascertain. That report stated:
With unemployment at record levels and increasing. the Labor Party has given the drafting of a new policy on employment its last priority.
The critical employment policy is the only section of the draft platform policy to be presented to the party's federal conference next week, which has not been completed.
The party spokesman on industrial relations and employment, Bob Hawke, is hastily preparing a revised draft policy which will be considered by the industrial relations platform committee on Wednesday.
The revised draft policy being prepared by Hawke was requested by the Federal Secretariat of the party two weeks ago, when it was first noticed that the employment policy had not been changed since 1979.
Mr Hawke-Like most things in the National Times it is totally incorrect.
Mr MACPHEE-Well, it was never rebutted. The article goes on. Let me quote-

1932 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Unemployment

Mr Hawke-Who worries about the National Times? If you rebutted every lie in that journal you would be going every day.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I caution honourable gentlemen on my left against interjecting. The honourable member for Wi1ls was heard in silence; the Minister has an equal entitlement. I ask honourable members on my left to remain silent.
Mr MACPHEE-This clearly is of some discomfort to the Labor Party so I will continue with the quotation. The article stated:
There is confusion in the Labor Party as to who was responsible for the oversight on this crucial policy issue.
The industrial relations committee has traditionally been responsible for preparing the employment policy.
But this time there seemed to be some confusion over just which committee was responsible for employment.
Some people in the party believed it was the responsibility of the Industrial Relations Committee which is chaired by Mick Young, the former shadow minister for employment and industrial relations, while others thought it was the responsibility of the Economic Committee chaired by Hawke.
Young told the National Times the Industrial Relations Committee had spent so much time on the industrial relations policy that it had simply not had enough time to consider employment.
Young said that there was 'no great valid excuse' for the employment policy not being revised. He said he would have to concede that it was 'sloppy'.
Hawke told the National Times that he could not understand what the fuss was about because 'the whole thing is under control'.
He pointed out that he had not had responsibility for running the Industrial Relations Committee: 'I was responsible for the Economics Committee, so I wasn't operating in my portfolio area '.
Hawke's view is not shared by some other members of the party, who regard the oversight as an embarrassment to both Hawke and the party. A member of the Economic Committee told the National Times, 'I think it's absolutely outrageous'.
Mr Giles-Who said it was outrageous?
Mr MACPHEE-A prominent member of the Economic Committee of the Labor Party. I do not really wish to take up the time of the House with that kind of trivia, but in light of some of the extravagant statements which have been made by the Opposition in this and the preceding two debates on this very important subject even my patience is taxed a little. Let us look at the unemployment figures of comparable industrial economies.
Dr Theophanous-Oh!
Mr MACPHEE-There is a sigh, but let us have a look at the state of the world economy, which we acknowledge is a major factor in any industrialised economy.

Dr Theophanous-Look, you have not said a single thing about the unemployed.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Burke will remain silent.
Dr Theophanous-This is the most disgraceful speech I have heard from you.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I warn the honourable member for Burke that if he persists with his interjections I shall deal with him.
lYlr MACPHEE-Unemployment in the United Kingdom is 13 per cent and above; in the United States it is 9.8 per cent; in West Germany, 7.7 per cent; and in France, 9.1 per cent. The fact is that each of those countries has done its best to grapple with the problems of unemployment and inflation. The socialist Government in France, as the Treasurer (Mr Howard) pointed out in this House a few weeks ago, has adopted policies akin to those recommended by the Opposition, and we can see the result there. West Germany and other countries with social democrat governments have fared no better. This is an extremely difficult problem which this Government has acknowledged in the most practical ways. It has done so year after year and in this Budget in particular. It has not sought to make the wage increases of the past 12 months a major scapegoat for our difficulties. But we have pointed out that in the next 12 months we cannot afford any real wage increases or, indeed, the maintenance of real wages over that time. We have sought to increase the real disposable income of people. We have done that very effectively in this Budget as the Treasurer, I and others have pointed out on many occasions. It would require more than a 10 per cent increase in the fitter's wage to match the increases in family allowances and the tax threshold and reductions in the rates of taxation which prevail in this Budget. There are a number of job creating aspects to this Budget through the upgrading of airports, the road program and welfare housing construction. Also, in the training programs there is an increase of $44m. We have been through this before. It is a recognition of the growing unemployment that the state of the world economy, coupled with the wages explosion of the past 12 months, has helped to create.
Mr Hawke-Do you believe the Budget figure of 395,000? Do you believe that?
Mr MACPHEE-The 395,000 to which the honourable member has referred several times is an average annual figure of unemployment benefit recipients, not a record of the number of persons unemployed or disemployed at a particular time.

Unemployment

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1933

Mr Hawke-Do you believe that?
Mr MACPHEE-It is a Treasury estimate which is a matter-
Mr Kent-Is is correct?
Mr MACPHEE-I am not aware of the precise way in which that estimate is formulated, but I have never run away from my estimate that at the beginning of next year we will be looking at 8 per cent or more as the level of unemployment. It might suit the pessimists on the Opposition side to forecast more unemployment but on the information available to the Government at the moment we are not in a position to forecast that. Indeed, I would say that if members of the industrial wing of the Labor Party were prepared to listen to the wise counsel of a number of economists of Labor Party persuasion as well as those of our persuasion, they would exercise wage moderation, take the money that is given in this Budget, be grateful to have that and the job they now have, and exercise restraint over the next 12 months as a means of retaining the jobs now held and as a means of helping our e~onomic recovery so that more jobs can be created.
I am tired of hearing members of the Opposition talk with the luxury of opposition-no responsibility. Members of the Opposition talk in terms of social unrest, revolt and hopelessness when the problems facing this Government are no different from the problems facing other governments. They are total community responsibilities with which we as a country are grappling as well or as badly as most other communities. It is not a matter of saying that it is something for the Government alone to tackle as though we can do it alone. We require the co-operation of the trade unions in their wage claims and of the employers in resisting industrial muscle and unreasonable demands. They should not do deals to keep the cash registers ticking over by retaining some people and retrenching others. We require the cooperation of our trading partners and our major investors in new capital equipment and in new research and development projects so that we can become again more competitive. An entire range of policies is needed to enable people to respond.
We. have provided that leadership. This budget contams a package of measures for industry to use and for the trade unions and State governments to respond to. Having done that, we have provided as much as we can reasonably provide. It is now up to other people in the community, including t~e Opposition, to respond with something positive. We are prepared to hear and consider any sensible job creation program or other training

program put to us which can be seen to be cost-
effective, humane and practical. We believe that what we have done and what we are doing, especially in this Budget, will do more to assist people to gain permanent jobs and to upgrade their levels of skill than anything that has been
proposed so far by the Opposition.
When the present Victorian Government was in Opposition it made lavish promises of the kind the Leader of the Opposition has made in the Budget debate. I am pleased to say that in the interests of responsibility the Victorian Government has recanted on those promises. Whilst it has introduced a new program, it is a considerably refined one compared with that which it proposed. The Victorian Government has broken an election promise. Breaking that promise was
m~re responsible than compounding the error by gomg ahead with something which would be not cost-effective and more inflationary. I hope the Opposition in this Parliament will cease to make these wild promises and will seriously consider what it should be doing and proposing to the Australian people to get us out of this present economic difficulty.
Mr COHEN (Robertson) (3.24)-Frankly, when I was listening to the Minister for Employ-
ment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) speak I thought for a moment that I was in fantasy land. This is a good Minister fighting a hopeless brief. The Minister knows that. He had no heart in the debate at all. When I heard him devote one-third of his total 15 minutes to talking about an internal, petty squabble in the Australian Labor Party I knew the Minister knew that he was on shaky ground and that he had nothing to talk about. When it was announced last week that unemployment had reached 504,000 after an increase in just one month of 46,000 my mind went back to 1975 when the same people who are now in Government were in Opposition. From the moment they became the Opposition in
Dec~mber 1972 they devoted their energies to talkmg down the economy of Australia. By 1975 they had managed to create a climate of hysteria unmatched since the Great Depression. They should go back to read their speeches. At that stage unemployment stood at 278,000 or 4.6 per cent. Week after week, month after month, they used. the Parliament as a forum to scare the living daylights out of every businessman, farmer, investor and worker in the nation to the point where they had them believing that Armageddon was just around the corner. They stumped the country from one end to another in an attempt to build up hatred against the Labor Government which, like every other government in the world at that time,

1934 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Unemployment

was facing difficult economic times created by the October war and the subsequent rise in oil prices. Their apocalyptic view was transferred to the people of this country in a desperate bid to return them to the Treasury benches where they had ruled for 23 years. They cared not one whit for the carnage they were inflicting on the economy or the confidence of the people of Australia. The smell of power and their absence from it acted like an aphrodisiac on a randy bull. Who will ever forget the contemptuous statement of the present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that the downturn in the economy was a worldwide phenomenon? The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) quoted that statement. I will repeat it because it has to be heard again. The Prime Minister said:
When political leaders say the present situation cannot be helped, it is part of a world situation, they are expressing the futility of their own leadership.
Never let us forget who said that. Having created the right climate, all that was needed was the 'reprehensible circumstance' for the then Opposition to force a second election on a Labor government in three years. The Prime Minister, in his 1975 election policy speech, trumpeted:
There will be a job for all those who want to work.
Seven years later, almost to the day, a sad and sorry Australia now faces an economy in tatters, shattered business confidence, record bankruptcy levels and the highest level of unemployment since the Depression. Let us look at the situation and see' how it has deteriorated during the past seven years. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a document showing the unemployment figures for the last II years.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARY
Statistics Group
Unemployment, Australia

Year

August

September

'000

%

'000

%

1972

144.0

2.5

n.a,

n.a.

1973

105.8

1.8

n.a.

n,a.

1974

140,9

2.4

n,a.

n.a,

1975

278.4

4.6

n.a,

n,a.

1976

292.7

4,7

n.a.

n,a,

1977
wi8

359,3

5,7

n.a.

n.a,

395.7

6.2

384.5

6.0

1979

373.8

5.8

396.5

6.1

1980

392,3

5,9

405,5

6.0

1981

377.1

5.6

391.1

5,7

1982

458.5

6.7

504.8

7.4

n.a, Not available, collected quarterly only,

Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service from information contained in issues of the Australian Bureau of Statistics' publications The Labour Force and Unemployment, Preliminary Estimates.
Mr COHEN-The most damning indictment of the Government is its total refusal to take any action to alleviate unemployment. All we have heard since 1975 is that the way to provide employment is to strengthen the private sector and to wait for an upturn in the world economy. For seven years the Australian people have waited and waited, and the result is still more and more unemployment. Even the most conservative estimates suggest that unemployment will rise to over 600,000 when the schoolleavers go on to the employment market early next year. Some estimates suggest 700,000. One wonders how a government with such an appalling record of economic mismanagement and which promised to restore full employment has the gall to remain in office. When one adds its economic record to the scandals that have wracked it-tax evasion, Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd, the Australian Dairy Corporation, and the meat industry-one would think that if it had one ounce of decency left it would have resigned by now. If not, the least it could do would be to recant, admit its failures and to show some feeling for the unemployed by providing some job creation schemes in an attempt to lift the economy out of the deep hole into which it is presently sliding.
The Government and the Prime Minister have a deep philosophical commitment to the monetarist theories of Milton Friedman. Mr Friedman has amongst his admirers President Reagan, Mrs Thatcher and the Prime Minister. The economies of the countries of two of those leaders are almost basket cases, and the Australian economy is going the same way. What a great record the advice of Milton Friedman has! I noticed that the Minister, when quoting economies that were not picking up, did not mention countries which tried a different approach such as Japan and Austria. He chose West Germany and France. This one man, Milton Friedman, plus those who follow the simplistic nonsense that public sector expenditure is bad and private sector expenditure is good, have done more damage to the world economy than any others in recent times; yet people still cling to his ravings in the belief that one day-some day; any day-they will fall into place. It is the sadomasochistic school of economics; if one suffers so much pain it really must eventually do some good.
The opposition to public sector expenditure is the main reason why the Government cannot bring itself to admit that it was wrong and provide

Unemployment

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1935

funds for job creation schemes. It is so hooked on its past decade of rhetoric attacking public sector expenditure that it would rather go down the gurgler and take the rest of Australia with it than admit that it was wrong and reverse its policies. When most people talk of job creation schemes they think of the Labor Government's Regional Employment Development Scheme introduced by Clyde Cameron. Few recall the fact that the McMahon Government, facing a minimal increase in unemployment, provided $27m in 1971-72 and $103.8m in 1972-73 to create employment in rural areas with its Rural Unemployment Relief Scheme. At its peak there were some 15,000 people employed throughout the nation under the RUR scheme at a cost of some $6m per month. The problem with the RUR scheme was that 75 per cent pf the funds had to be spent on labour. The result was that only labour-intensified projects could be undertaken-painting, chipping weeds and mowing lawns. When the $130m had been spent there was nothing to show for the expenditure except nice clean, tidy communities.
When the Labor Government came to office Clyde Cameron determined that if ever it was necessary to provide funds for unemployment relief, the money expended would leave the community with something of value. This was found to be necessary in August 1974, and the Regional Employment Development scheme-the RED scheme-was introduced, and the amount of funds required to be spent on labour was reduced to 50 per cent. This meant that slightly fewer jobs would be provided but that projects of a much more substantial nature-a socially useful nature-could be provided and that the communities which benefited from RED funds would be left with something of value when the scheme was over. In 1974-75 some $160.4m was expended on the RED scheme. A total of $184.3m was expended during the course of the RED scheme. At the peak of the scheme in July 1975 some 32,000 people were employed directly on RED projects. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table indicating RED scheme employment.

Leave granted. The table read as follows-

~ED EMPLOYMENT AND THE LABOUR MARKET

Month

(I) Number of persons under red

(2) Registered unemployed
(seasonally adjusted)

(3) As percent
of (2)

1974October
November

430 1,532

189,246

0.23

206,667

0.74

Month

(I) Number
of persons under red

(2) Registered unemployed
(seasonally adjusted)

(3) As
per cent of (2)

December
1975January
February March April May June July
August September
October November
December 1976-
January February March April May

2,432
5,929 9,889 14,983 20,750 27,053 29,829 31,969 26,621 20,603 13,596 8,703 5,188
3,078 2,681
n.a. n.a. n.a.

234,953
236,040 251,973 267,817 281,050 270,011 270,189 287,666 299,897 303,715 315,780 281,848 278,396
257,663 252,282 268,900 281,816 286,203

1.04
2.51 3.92 5.59 7.38 10.02 11.04 11.11 8.88 6.78 4.31 3.09 1.86
1.19 1.06 n.a. n.a. n.a.

n.a. = not available, no figures collected by the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations after February 1976.
Mr COHEN-That table does not take into account the number of jobs created by indirect expenditure. Some 32,000 fully employed workers on award wages created thousands of jobs by their expenditure, and the 50 per cent of RED money spent on materials created thousands of jobs in the private sector. In my own area of the Central Coast, one of the worst hit areas in 1974-75, over 2,500 people were employed and, at the scheme's peak, 850 were employed. Incidentally, I have learned that in my own electorate the level of unemployment has risen from 4,000 to 8,500 in the last 18 months.
Let me make it clear that no one in the Australian Labor Party believes that any job creation scheme is a total panacea for full employment. Obviously the strength of the economy is the major factor. We are firmly of the view that a job creation scheme is still the best measure to alleviate short term unemployment. It is the only way of providing depressed areas with some relief. It is the only way of providing work experience for some young people who have never known what it is to have a job. It is the only way of giving dignity to the unemployed; even if they get only three months' work a year it is a far better way of utilising taxation revenue than paying people unemployment benefits. A proper job creation scheme will leave, as the RED scheme did, hundreds of useful public works projects which will benefit present and future generations of Australians. The Government has a responsibility to the vast army of unemployed-

1936 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Unemployment

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo) (3.33)-Before directly addressing this matter of public importance I shall respond to some of the comments made by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen). The honourable member for Wills mentioned that the Government is apparently not concerned about unemployment, which will be seen, of course, to be totally untrue when he and all other Australians take into account the measures introduced in the recent Budget. The honourable member has, of course, taken the usual stance that all the blame should fall on the Government. Coming from a person who was the leader of the trade union movement in this country, that comment would have to be treated as a joke if this were not such a serious matter. The unions must share the blame as must governments, employers and everybody else. In fact I and, I think, most people in this country have come to believe that the unions have to shoulder more than their fair share of the blame because of their actions in constantly pressing for wage demands at the risk of jobs. The honourable member for Wills knows quite well, even though he raises his eyebrows as usual, that the demand by unions to press up wages is constantly causing Australian production to be priced out of the market. There is no way that Australian manufacturers have been able to produce goods to compete. As a result, the only way they can compete is to reduce their costs. Material costs are very difficult to prune but labour costs are not. Employers have to look at that factor. Unfortunately and regrettably, in many cases they have to retrench people in order to reduce their overhead costs so that they can remain in business.
One has only to look at the Tasmanian experience not long ago. A Tasmanian firm decided, in discussion with its employees, that it had two choices to make. Firstly, it could close down and everybody would be retrenched or, secondly, employees could take a reduction in salary, not the standard salary but the overaward payment which would bring salaries to a standard level. Of course, the bulk of employees accepted the second proposal and were prepared to work for a reduced salary but they had no choice in the matter. The trade union movement stepped in and said: 'It is a matter of principle. We do not care if every member loses his job as long as we uphold the principle.' What a great principle! The trade union movement wants to demand high wages

and put everybody out of work. That is exactly what it did in that case.
There is another factor for which the unions must take the blame. Possibly there are arguments in some areas why this should have happened. I refer to the increase in salaries that has been demanded for juniors. The wage of juniors in proportion to the adult wage has markedly increased over the years. As a result, many employers have been reluctant to take on young inexperienced people in preference to experienced adults. They know full well that, even though they will pay slightly more, they will have a productivity gain for the simple reason that a young person has to be trained. The first 12 months at least of his employment is a total loss of production. These factors have led to the serious problem we have today. It is fair to say that employers would rather put on young people if they had the incentive to do so.
The honourable member for Wills mentioned figures for 1933. Apart from the increase in population since that time, I suggest that he ought also to take into consideration that two of the factors that have affected employment today are the employment of married women and equal pay for women. I am not objecting to those factors at all. I do not think that anybody is opposed to the principle. I am merely pointing out that they are factors that have increased the job opportunities for married women. I say that in fairness if one is looking at figures-that is what the honourable member for Wills was doing when he referred to 1933-one ought to consider that there are far more married women in the work force today than there were in 1933. I am merely pointing out that factor. People should not say in this House that this matter is of concern and it is the Government's fault. We ought to be looking at what we can all do to try to overcome the problem.
Mr Hawke-But you will not accept any responsibility.
Mr BOURCHIER-The member for Wills says that the Government will not accept responsibility. It has accepted responsibility.
Mr Hawke-Have you made any mistakes?
Mr BOURCHIER-Of course governments make mistakes but the honourable member for Wills made many mistakes when he was leader of the trade union movement. Instead of trying to be as smart as the honourable member for Wills in blaming all and sundry and not accepting some responsibility let me suggest to him that it might not be a bad idea if we looked at the matter as it should be looked at. It is an Australian problem, not a government problem.

Unemployment

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1937

Mr Hawke-Did you say that in 1975?
Mr BOURCHIER-The honourable member should be patient. The same problem has occurred since 1974-75. I have said before and I say it again that it is not a matter for government. Governments will not fix the situation by just pouring in money. If money is the answer, we should look at the increase in funds that the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) has supplied for manpower and training programs. That will not create permanent jobs although it will be far better than the Regional Employment Development Scheme. It will at least provide job training for permanent jobs. It will create the opportunity for people to learn trades and be involved whereas the RED scheme was proven to be a failure by the Australian Labor Party which introduced it. The honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) made his only comment that was any different from what the honourable member for Wills said when he mentioned the RED scheme. The favourite platform of the Labor Party socialists is that if they spend money all the problems will go away. It is not true. They found that the cost of trying to prop up temporary jobs made the RED scheme a total failure. As a result, they withdrew the scheme. I wonder whether it is possible to find out how many of those people who obtained temporary jobs are in fact still employed in those jobs today. I suggest that very few are.
There is no doubt, as the honourable member for Robertson correctly said, that the scheme probably helped the morale of unemployed people. That is a good thing on a temporary basis but surely it is better for us, as a community, a government and a people, to look at ways of providing long term effective employment? In this category I suggest that the unions, for example, could call for a removal of penalty rates and create jobs in the service industries such as restaurants, theatres and places where people are employed after hours, at night time or weekends. Many of these places are forced to close because they have to pay double time on Sundays, time and a half on Saturdays and so on. If there were no penalty rates they would stay open seven days a week to provide services to the public and jobs to the people who need them. If the unions were to do away with the 17t per cent loading on holiday pay and the same amount of money were spent on labor, how many extra jobs would that create in factories such as General MotorsHolden's Ltd in Melbourne? Productivity would increase and the cost of cars would come down. Jobs would be created.

I call on the Federal Government, as a starter, to ask the Public Service-then, of course, it would flow on to other employers--to introduce a job sharing program on a voluntary basis, not as a compulsory measure. Many people in the work force today would be glad to work for, say, two or three days a week and create jobs. Those jobs could be taken up by young people who could be trained so that at the appropriate time they could take over the jobs full time when the other people retired or resigned. There are opportunities for us as a community to be involved and to do something. These are the measures we should all be undertaking. We should not just sit on the other side as the Opposition loves to do and blame the Government without putting forward any positive measures. I am putting forward a couple of positive measures. I suggest to the honourable member for Wills who used to so keenly support the trade union movement-I assume he still does, if it will have him-that he might like to support what I am saying. Let him for once stand up and be counted and say that members of the Labor Party, the socialists of this country, want to see jobs, that they are prepared to do away with overtime rates and penalty clauses. I see the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), the rough red from Richmond, shaking his head as usual but of course I know his stance. Let us get down to the facts. He can also stand up and say these things. He can also stand up and support the people of this country. He should ask members of the work force whether they would like the unions to do that. Of course they would. How many people would be prepared to take on part time and shared work provided they would not be penalised? To do that State governments would need to become involved with workers compensation adjustments. Of course they could do it.
Mr Holding-You are now trying to blame State governments for unemployment. You unmitigated hypocrite!
Mr BOURCHIER-There is an interjection from the honourable member for Melbourne Ports. He has said nothing to this House about this matter since he came here. He is not a bit interested in what is happening to young people in this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Melbourne Ports will withdraw the reflection.
Mr Holding-I withdraw.
Mr BOURCHIER-The Victorian Government tried to introduce another type of RED

1938 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Petitions

scheme which paid $70 a week to local government to employ people. If any local government takes on a person, it has to pay $170 to $200 a week to supplement his wage. How many extra jobs do honourable members honestly believe that any local government can afford, irrespective of how much they want to employ people? How much could they afford to spend of the ratepayers' money to create extra jobs?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Acting Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned that the taxes of all Australians will be used to finance a dam that would flood the Lower Gordon and Franklin Rivers in South-West Tasmania.
Your petitioners declare that the intrinsic values of this area, and the provision of funds from the taxes of all Australians , for the destruction of this area of the National Estate and of world heritage value, does make this a national issue.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government take all possible steps, including financial and legal steps and fulfil its responsibilities under the Australian Heritage Act to prevent the destruction of this area of the National Estate.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr N. A. Brown and Mr Cunningham.
Petitions received.
Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
I. that Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. that the Australian postal service meets the needs of all Australians.
3. that any reduction in Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward will destroy the concept of the national postal service and result in:
increased rates for mail carried outside the capital cities;
a reduction in mail delivery and collection frequencies in non-profitable areas;
the closure of post offices.
Your petitioners therefore pray: that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
by Mrs Child.

Petition received.
Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens undersigned respectfully showeth:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian Postal Service truly meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any proposal that Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward be diminished will destroy the concept of the national postal service.
Your petitioners therefore pray: That the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
by Mr Tuckey.
Petition received.
National Estate Areas
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the lack of effective Federal environmental protection legislation and urge that suitable legislation be enacted immediately.
Your petitioners are concerned that National Estate areas such as South West Tasmania, the Great Barrier Reef and the Western Australian Jarrah Forests cannot be fully protected until adequate legislation exists and is enforced. Your humble petitioners therefore call upon the House of Representatives to ensure that all provisions of the Heritage Act and the Environment Impact of Proposals Act are fully complied with in respect of National Estate Areas. In particular your petitioners call upon you to adopt the recommendations of the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment on South West Tasmania. Your petitioners believe that this is a national issue and must be resolved by the action of the Federal Parliament.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKellar and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth objection to the Metric system and request the Government to restore the Imperial system.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Millar and Mr Thomson. Petitions received.
Retirement Benefits: Private Enterprise
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth our concern that:
I. The Income Tax Assessment Act (the Act) and its administration is inadequate in providing retirement benefits for employees in private enterprise;

Petitions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1939

2. The Commissioner of Taxation (Commissioner) denies deductions necessary to index retirement pensions;
3. Deductions for the self-employed and employed are inadequate;
4. The Commissioner has exercised his discretion improperly by negating a choice the Act allows on investment in Government Securities;
5. The Commissioner's constant alterations to guidelines and lack of communication has created great uncertainty.
6. The Commissioner is acting arbitrarily, and without proper notice in restricting trustee's investments with employers;
7. The Commissioner seeks to apply new actuarial guidelines -retrospectively to July 1981.
Your Petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, take action to remedy these inadequacies and in particular we pray that action be taken:
(i) To ensure that the Commissioner exercises his discretion only with proper regard to legal principles;
(ii) To ensure that the Commissioner does not delegate to auditors part of his function of administering the Act;
(iii) To enact legislation allowing proper levels of retirement benefits to be provided;
(iv) To ensure that retirement benefits are regulated by a Department with a primarily social welfare function.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr N. A. Brown.
Petition received.
Broadcasting Licences
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Family Radio Ltd represents the largest single interest group in the community-i.e., christians-who do not have a voice in public broadcasting commensurate with their representation. That prime time access to existing broadcasts by christian groups is virtually non-existent, and access at other times is fast disappearing.
That, by comparison with other capitals, Brisbane is entitled to at least one more category 'S' FM broadcasting licence.
That there appears to be no prospect of the release of further category 'S' FM licences in the near future for Brisbane.
That satisfactory fulfilment of the aims of Family Radio and its expansion can only be achieved by broadcasting in its own right under licence.
That Family Radio has a responsibility to the large support groups which have contributed substantially to its development, to achieve the aims in broadcasting and community work for which it was established.
That there is an urgent need for the kind of service and support that Family Radio can provide to other community groups through the particular type of integrated programming proposed by the company under a full-time licence.
And that pruned Government resources are obviously insufficient to advance the development of public broadcasting as originally intended.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will suport Family Radio's application for a broadcasting licence and will enable more category 'S' FM licences to be made available in Brisbane.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Department of Social Security
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectively showeth:
That citizens of Queensland view with great alarm the removal of the Director of the Office of Child Care and fear for the future of that office and the children's services programme which it administers.
We believe the Office of Child Care to be inappropriately placed within the Department of Socia! Security, where children's services are in competition with welfare services for the aged, disabled, and other such groups.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should take every step as necessary to obtain immediate withdrawal of the Office of Child Care from the Department of Social Security and the establishment of a Children's Commission.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Vietnam Veterans
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) that US., Australian and allied forces used huge amounts of toxic chemicals for military purposes, such as Agents Orange, Blue and White, in Vietnam during the war there;
(2) many of these chemicals were, and are, known to be highly dangerous to human health;
(3) Australia's Vietnam veterans and their families are suffering many severe problems which may be due to their exposure to these chemicals; and
(4) the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia has been seeking a Royal Commission for well over two years to ensure an independent investigation of these matters.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Parliament of Australia will (a) express its support for the Royal Commission; and (b) urge the Federal Government to establish the Royal Commission immediately.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

1940 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Petitions

I. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been increased since then, yet over the same period living costs have increased by nearly 60 per cent.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament should act to restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them for future price rises.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howal'd.
Petition received.
Assistance for Disabled People
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows the need for the immediate introduction of an Attendant Care Allowance for Disabled people who need assistance with aspects of daily living. This allowance will enable disabled people to live in the community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Government immediately introduce an Attendant Care Allowance in the form of a benefit paid directly to the disabled person enabling him/her to employ and train the attendant of his/her own choice.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd.
Petition received.
Funding for Laurel Tree House, University of Sydney
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That a Federal government subsidy for the recurrent funding of Laurel Tree House, a child care centre at the University of Sydney so far denied Federal funding, should be granted immediately to make use of the centre more possible for those on low and moderate incomes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.
Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respecfully showeth:
I. The failure of the Federal Government to seek information from the census re disabled people-i.e. partial or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and for, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public Service-note the small number currently employed within the Service.
3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpetuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people on their Boards and little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.
4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop 'normalised' support systems--attendant care.

5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide 'noninstitutionalised' specialised accommodation for those people who would not be able to b~nefit from, or cope with attendant care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a 'disability' allowance means test free for all disabled people-this would assist with necessary equipment and mobility costs.
7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event of a disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g. Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of Federal l.Y.D.P. funds-e.g. nonreceipt of some States of funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recognise that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:
Ensure that the Government takes immediate action to restore the lost value of Family Allowances and to index them to cover future price rises, help single-income families by increasing the dependent spouse rebate to $1392.
And your petitioners as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Peacock.
Petition received.
Electricity Generating Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That salaries of technical and supervisory employees of the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority should be aligned with the salaries of counterpart employees in the electricity generating industry in the State of New South Wales.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sainsbury.
Petition received.

Petitions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1941

South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The Petition of the citizens of Australia. Respectfully pray that the Federal Government intervene to halt the proposed damming of the Franklin River in Tasmania.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair.
Petition received.
Fretilin Representatives: Ban on Entering Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
That we strongly condemn the ban on Fretilin representatives entering Australia. We point out that this ban is preventing Jose Ramos Horta, Fretilin's spokesperson on Foreign Affairs and speaker at the United Nations, from giving evidence in the current Senate investigation into East Timor.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Commonwealth Government take immediate action to lift its ban on Fretilin representatives entering Australia.
by Mr West.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Macarthur respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrBaume.
Petition received.

Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Bendigo respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Hunter respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown.

1942 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Petitions

Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Indi respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Wakefield respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Giles.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Melbourne Ports respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of ?n efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Lalor respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measureS to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of

Petitions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1943

the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Blaxland respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. Planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin.
2. Closing country telegraph offices.
3. Increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
4. Withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices.
5. Generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Keating.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Werriwa respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. Planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canbera and Darwin.
2. Closing country telegraph offices.
3. Increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
4. Withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices.
5. Generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKerin.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Grayndler respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. Planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin.
2. Closing country telegraph offices.
3. Increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
4. Withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices.
5. Generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff.
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Leo McLeay.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Gippsland respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia

1944 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Petitions

to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrNixon.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Paterson respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr O'Keefe.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Dundas respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,

will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Eden-Monaro respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sainsbury.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of O'Connor respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,

Petitions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1945

5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff.
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Tuckey.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Cunningham respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the
service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff.
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrWest.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of McPherson respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,

3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices.
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff.
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrWhite.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Port Adelaide respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrYoung.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of St Marys respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:

1946 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Petitions

1. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFree.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Broken Hill respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHicks.
Petition received.
Advertising of Alcohol
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the citizens of Queensland respectfully showeth:
Last year, over 3,300 people died on Australian roads;

alcohol is a factor in 50 per cent of road deaths;
alcohol advertisements do not show the perils of driving after drinking alcohol;
alcohol advertisements are glamorous and increase their effect on teenagers, indicating drinking alcohol as the social pastime;
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will legislate to ban the advertising of alcohol from commercial television and radio.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann, Mr Braithwaite, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Hodges, Mr McVeigh, Mr Moore, Mr Thomson and Mr White.
Petitions received.
National Highway, North Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of North Queensland respectfully showeth:
That the National Highway is the responsibility of the Federal Government,
The Bruce Highway in North Queensland is of inferior standard for a National Highway,
Queensland has suffered a 15 per cent disadvantage over other states during the past ten years in road funding,
And the state of the Highway is deteriorating as maintenance expenditure is insufficient to maintain even the present standard.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will allocate sufficient expenditure, to raise the standard of the National Highway in North Queensland to Department of Transport standards, in conjunction with the Queensland Government, within ten years.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite.
Petition received.
Children's Library, Curtin, Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Australian Capital Territory respectfully showeth:
1. That we oppose the closure of the Curtin Children's Library.
2. That the closure would discriminate against those who cannot independently travel to other libraries, viz the physically handicapped, the visually handicapped, and children.
3. That the closure would remove the major children's facility in Curtin, a suburb which has almost no other facilities for children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government NOT allow the closure of the Childrens Library, Curtin, A.C.T.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.

Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1947

SOCIAL SECURITY LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 23 September, on motion by Mr Wilson:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (3.49)-Today we are debating the social welfare largesse extended to the disadvantaged in our community in a Budget which was conceived as an early election Budget. It is as a result of that early election impetus that for once a Budget of this Government contains some advances in the social welfare field and some improvements in benefits. However, as these changes come after seven years of neglect in this field, the provisions can be summed up as too little, too late. The Opposition will not be opposing the Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill because of the improvements that do occur but it will be making one major general criticism of the measure and three specific criticisms. I wish to devote what I am going to say this afternoon to a consideration of those points.
First of all, we deplore the Government's failure to protect the real value of social security pensions, benefits and payments generally. Throughout my speech, I will illustrate the failure of this Government over seven years to maintain the real value of benefits and pensions. We would make three specific criticisms of the Government's social welfare legislation as embodied in this measure. First of all, the Government continues to discriminate against the unemployed as compared with other groups of social welfare beneficiaries despite the increasing catastrophic proportions of unemployed in our community. Secondly, clearly there is a need to improve the situation of the unemployed under 18 years of age. Their needs remain. Thirdly, we want to look particularly at maintaining the real value of payments made through the social welfare fund to children in our community. I will deal with those three specific points: The discrimination issue; the issue of the unemployed under 18 years of age; and the issue of benefits for children. Throughout the debate we will be able to illustrate the more general criticism we are making, which is the undermining in seven years of the real value of the social welfare provision in this country.
I will begin with the discrimination issue. I think we can divide the welfare beneficiaries in this community into various classes of citizens as defined by this Government. I will begin with the pensioners. The six-monthly indexed pension increase in November which is authorised in the Budget will increase the single pension to $77.25 a

week and the family pension to $128.80 a week. However, despite this indexation, the standard pension rate has fallen from 24.5 per cent of average weekly earnings in 1975 to the current 22 per cent of average weekly earnings, and will go on declining in the months ahead unless there is an additional boost to the standard rate of pension. Indeed, at the rate the pattern is moving we will return to the position we had under the McMahon Government where, at the end of that Government, the pension rate as a proportion of average weekly earnings was 18.6 per cent. I think it is important to make this contrast now.
In three years the Whitlam Labor Government, despite the economic difficulties faced by it, was able to raise the rate of pension as a proportion of average weekly earnings from 18.6 per cent to 24.5 per cent. We did not quite get to our goal of 25 per cent. In the seven years of this Government there has been a gradual and slow erosion from the 24.5 per cent figure of 1975 to the present 22 per cent figure. Contrast the achievement of Labor in this field and the failures of this Government in this field. One other increase for the pensioner in this Budget is a $2 a week increase in the supplementary rental assistance. That increase will cost a total of $24m in a full year, which is very much a pittance compared to the $415m given in aid to first home buyers. I think one can easily see with such a comparison the sort of priority the Government really gives to the aged. Age pensioners in the eyes of this Government are very much second class citizens.
If the pensioner is treated as a second class citizen by this Government, there are other citizens far lower in the Government's pecking order. Consider, for instance, a family whose breadwinner is thrown out of a job, being retrenched after 20 years of service to a firm. That is increasingly common in this society. Certainly that man will receive a basic benefit at the same rate as the family age pension. But, unlike the pensioners, the allowance the unemployed person will receive for his spouse and children is subject to tax. This is quite distinct from the situation applying to the pensioner. Even with no outside income, an unemployed person has to pay income tax if he has more than three children. Pensioners do not have to pay taxes on these allowances. This discrimination suggests that this Government wants in some way to punish those half a million Australians who dare to be unemployed and to treat them differently from other welfare beneficiaries. This seems to me a petty and outrageous discrimination. It would be relatively simple for the Government to end it and end it quickly.

1948 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982 Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill

The unemployed families do not receive the rental assistance given to pensioners. Apart from the health care card, they do not receive the attached fringe benefits on public transport, rates, car registration, et cetra, which are extended to pensioners by the States. The unemployed have to pay $2 on each prescription for their medicines. That is certainly an improvement on the past situation, but it is trumpeted by this Government as a great social achievement. Yet the unemployed families do not receive pharmaceuticals free of charge, as do other welfare beneficiaries, as do the pensioners. Is this because the family on the unemployment benefit is less needy than pensioners? No. It just seems to me that the Government considers them less worthy than pensioners and provides simply a concessional rather than a free pharmaceutical allowance. So, we may classify this second group, that is, the unemployed with families, as Fraser's third rate citizens.
However, if the unemployed person is single and over 18 without dependants he or she will be paid from November a benefit that is $12.85 a week less than the single rate of pension. When pensioners receive their May indexation increase-the single unemployed without dependants will receive nothing-the single unemployed will fall even further behind because their rates are not indexed. The single unemployed receive a benefit increase only at the whim of the Government. Should this unemployed person decide to exercise some of the enterprise that is much praised by this Government, he or she can earn only $10 a week before the benefit starts to be reduced. So there is little scope for these people to supplement their meagre benefits. Even the pensioners, the second-class citizens of this Government, can earn $30 a week without having the payments reduced. The single unemployed have these additional disadvantages on top of all those that the family unemployed suffer. They are Fraser's fourth-rate citizens.
We in the Labor Party believe that there is a strong case for making the rates and conditions applying to pensions and benefits as similar as possible. Not only are the needs of pensioners and unemployed beneficiaries likely to be very much the same, but also it can often be a matter of chance which benefit a person with marginal work force status receives. Such a lottery ought not to produce the harsh results that now apply. One thinks of the constant problems of the movement between invalid pensioner and unemployed status and the difficulties that that occasions for families. That is why we will be moving a specific amendment to end the discrimination against the

unemployed that now exists. But we have not finished the classes of Fraser's lower level citizens.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Chair cannot accept the term used by the honourable member.
Dr BLEWETT-Now we come to the fifthclass citizens of the present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). I suppose that we could call these the untouchables, that is, the unemployed near-adults of 16 or 17 years. This group, after seven years of no change in their unemployment benefit, will be receiving from this generous Government a $4 a week increase. They will now get $40 a week as their benefit. This is the first increase that this group has received in seven years. The value of the dollar has nearly halved in that time under this Government. A 17-year-old is expected to be able to live on $24.40 a week less than the 18-year-old receives. His or her paltry benefit is less than half the poverty line figure.
The social tensions that Fraserism has built up are causing massive dislocations in family life in our society. Given the poverty and unemployment in Australian society today, many families have difficulty in coping with the problems of near-adults. In many cases these young people simply have to leave the family home to escape the conflicts that arise. To cite a situation closer to the Government's heart-I see that at least one member of the National Country Party is here, so let me address the problems to him-we all know the catastrophic state of unemployment amongst young people in country towns and country areas. What about the 16-year-olds and 17-year-olds who are forced to move out of these areas to the city to look for work and to attend interviews? We know that with the best will in the world it is a long grind for these young adults to get any kind of job. In the weeks and months they are looking for work they have to live away from home, paying for food and board or rent on $40 a week, $5 a day. One suggests that perhaps the Ministers should undergo a period trying to survive under those conditions. Even if one wants to argue that there should be some distinction between 16-yearolds and 17-year-olds and the adult groups in their benefit payments, at least I think there is a glaring need for rental assistance for any unemployed young person living away from home. There is indeed an argument that any unemployed person should receive some form of rental assistance where required. But there is a very strong case indeed for the young unemployed living away from home to receive some rental support. Thus, while the total unemployment benefit situation needs an overhaul, the 16-year-olds and 17-yearolds are a special case because they have been the

Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1949

most harshly treated under the seven years of this Government's neglect. That is why in our second reading amendment we will be proposing that the Bill be redrafted to provide for greater increases in payments to the under 18 years unemployed.
Before leaving the unemployment benefit, we should notice that the Budget estimates on unemployment for 1982-83 seem to have a distinct rubberiness about them, to use a word made famous by the former and lamented Minister for Industry and Commerce. The farcical level of these estimates becomes more apparent each month as the catastrophic increases in the level of unemployment in this country are announced. The estimated expenditure on the unemployment benefit for 1982-83 is supposedly $1,567m. But this was based on an average number of beneficiaries of 395,000. The latest available figure on the number of beneficiaries is 420,000 in August, and we have all read of the massive leap in unemployment since that date as revealed in the Australian Bureau of Statistics figures in September. It is the Government's own mismanagement of the economy which is plunging Australia deeper and deeper into recession. This will blow out the payment on the unemployment benefit by, I would calculate, approximately $300m. Of course, all this was done because the Government believed it could rush this Budget to the country and have an early election before the shabby nature of its calculations were revealed to the Australian public.
Finally, I want to look at the Government's much-vaunted policies on the importance of the family. In 1976 the Prime Minister called the family allowance changes the single most important reform in the Australian welfare system since Federation. He really will have to stop making these kinds of moralistic pronouncements because so many of them are now coming back to haunt him. Even with the increases that this Bill provides for the first and second children, the real value of family allowances has declined by 15 per cent in the intervening six years. A family with five children today is $33.20 a month worse off than under the 1976 family allowance level. Had the 1976 family allowance level been indexed for inflation, a family with five children would today be $33.20 a week better off. Despite the increases of this year, the real value of family allowances has declined since 1976.
Mr Fisher-There weren't any at all before then.
Dr BLEWETT-Of course, we welcomed the family income supplement. But as the honourable member knows this was simply a Budget change;

this was a shift from one form to another in family support, which we supported at that time as probably more effective. Under the honourable member's Government it has become less effective. We all welcome the other side of the Government's family initiatives, that is, the family income supplement provision, but are worried by the very narrow base. The Government has used that extremely narrow base of the health care card to structure its family income supplement program and, therefore, it is most certainly missing out many very needy families in the community. The Labor Party places real importance on the value of the family and on providing it, in these extremely difficult times, with forms of support in the welfare area. That is why we will move in our amendment to the motion for the second reading that there should be increases in payments for children so that at least family allowances maintain their real value. In conclusion, I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House-
(I) deplores the Government's failure to protect the value of social security pensions, benefits and payments generally, and
(2) is of the opinion that the Bill should aIsoprovide for- (a) an end to the discrimination against the unemployed;
(b) greater increases in payments to the under-I 8 unemployed, and
(c) increases in payments for children to maintain their real value.'
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Is the amendment seconded?
Mrs Child-I second the amendment
Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (4.6)-The purpose of the Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill is to implement the many worthwhile announcements made in the Budget in support of the needy and those most important groups in the community to whom we ought to give support. There are many new initiatives which will be of real help to large numbers in the community. The Budget recognises these needs. It also recognises the views widely held by many Government members. In particular I am very pleased to see the help provided in the Budget for families and for pensioners.
This Bill increases by 50 per cent the family allowance for the first two children. This Government is committed to the family. It is an area we must support. It is a vital part of our community which I hope we would all agree must be given every support and encouragement. The family is worth supporting not just as a worthwhile and,

1950 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982 Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill

indeed, vital institution but also as the best and often the most effective means of dealing with many of the problems which this community faces. The family allowance is a payment of great significance. It recognises the value of the family. It is said that it assists those who have means as well as those without means. I suppose that that is true but insofar as it is a direct cash payment it unquestionably supports and helps most those
who need it most. It is in fact a transfer from those who do not have children to those who do. It recognises the greater obligation and cost of maintaining children. I have on other occasions spoken in favour of weighting family allowance payments in favour of the first child. Although the amount payable for the first child is still less than for others this substantial increase, 50 per cent, is welcome. I hope that in succeeding years further increases will be weighted in favour of the first child, as that child has in most cases the greatest cost impact on the family.
In addition to the increases in family allowance
payments, from May 1983 an income tested nontaxable family income supplement will be introduced for low income families with children. The maximum rate of allowance will be $10 a week for each eligible child, which is equal to the additional pension or benefit paid in respect of children. The allowance will be income tested on the joint income of both parents. Payment of the supplement will be closely aligned to the disadvantaged persons health scheme for low income earners. Persons with an income below the threshold, currently equal to $184 a week, will be eligible to receive the maximum rate for each child. The threshold is the point at which a married couple without children will cease to be eligible for assistance under the disadvantaged persons health scheme as from November 1982.
In determining the eligibility for the family income supplement the maximum rate of assistance will be reduced by half of any income in excess of the threshold. Thus if the scheme were in operation in November 1982 a family with three children and an income of $200 a week would be eligible for a maximum payment of $30 a week less half the income in excess of $184 a week; that is, $8. So the family income supplement payable to that family would be $22 a week. Payment of the family income supplement will generally continue for a six-month period. As with the disadvantaged persons health scheme, there will be no reduction in the rate of the income supplement throughout that period if income during any four-week period does not exceed by more than 25 per cent the income at the time of determination. Entitlement will be redetermined at the end of a six-month

period. If a person's income falls at any time during the period he can seek an increase in the supplement. The legislation allows a three-month period of grace in which claims for the supplement can be made. Thus if a person is initially unaware of the availability of the new benefit he may get full payment from the date of introduction of the supplement provided he claims by 1 August next.
One cannot discuss the help given to families by
this legislation without taking into account the changes made in taxation arrangements. The spouse rebate has been increased by $200, which is of significant help to single income families. There are other measures. The income tax exemption limit has been raised by $400. The standard rate of tax has been reduced from 32c in the dollar to 30c in the dollar. These measures will have significant benefit for the average family. For example, the
family of a single income earner earning about the average income of $320 a week with two dependent children will be $15 or so a week better off. Such a family earning $200 a week will be $24 a week better off. Such a family earning $184 a week will be $32 a week better off. That represents an 18.5 per cent increase in disposable income for such a family. These figures indicate the value and the benefit of this Budget to families and also the weighting given to those who have family responsibilities and those who have average and lower incomes. Of course, all this is before taking into account the new tax rebate of 30 per cent on payments of home loan interest at rates above 10 per cent on loans up to $60,000. Interest rates, it is true, are too high. Many average families have had to pay significant interest bills and this rebate will be of great benefit to them.
The second area in which real help is provided is that of pensioners, especially age pensioners. I remind the House that decisions announced in the Budget complement the important measures first adopted by the Government in the 1976 Budget to protect and automatically cover against inflation most pensioners and beneficiaries who receive the basic rate of pension by making twice-yearly adjustments to pension rates linked to the consumer price index. It should be noted that this commitment is expensive. The November 1982 and May 1983 increases will cost about $770m in a full year. These regular adjustments are necessary for pensioners to meet inflation but involve large sums of money. It should be remembered, too, that as time goes on the number of people receiving the age pension will increase. However, several worthwhile additional measures, which I believe are of real benefit to pensioners, have been announced in this Budget. The allowable income

Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1951

limit has been increased from $20 a week to $30 a we~k for single pensioners, which is a 50 per cent increase, and from $34.50 a week to $50 a week for couples. The fringe benefit income limit has also been increased from $40 a week to $54 a week for a single pensioner and from $68 a week to $90 a week for a couple. There can be little doubt that each of these measures is timely. The effect of inflation has eroded the value of the previous income limits.
It is sometimes said that affluent people are receiving pensions. If this is so it is not the result of the income limits. People who are well off and who receive the pension have achieved this by having their means in a form which does not attract the income test or, to put it another way, to which the income test cannot apply. Regardless of whether there are large numbers of these people, there are people who are entitled to greater assistance to whom these changes in the means test will apply. People who until now have been receiving, say, $40 a week in private income in addition to the pension have had difficulties. There can be no doubt of that. I am very glad that, by these measures, we have done something to improve their lot significantly. These measures will also give recognition to those who have made a contribution to their retirement and represent some incentive to them to continue to do so. They assist those pensioners who have part time work or some small superannuation policy. These initiatives will also encourage pensioners to use their resources to best advantage and to reduce the incidence of pensioners placing their assets in non-income producing forms so as not to lose their entitlement to fringe benefits.
I would like to give some examples of how these measures assist pensioners. A single pensioner under 70 years of age, that is the most numerous group, earning $54 a week private incomeincome additional to the pension-will in November be $11.53 a week better off and will also be entitled to fringe benefits. In November somebody with $40 a week private or additional income will be $12.26 a week better off, again gaining fringe benefits. Somebody receiving or earning $30 a week in addition to the pension will be $12.79 a week better off. That last person, of course, already has the pensioner health benefit card. Anybody can see from these examples that there have b~en significant advances for the aged and pensioners.
I mention the position of the married aged pensioner couples under 70 for they too will benefit significantly from the changes introduced in this

Budget. A couple who receive $90 a week additional income will in November be approximately $13 a week better off. Of course, they will also receive the fringe benefit of a health card. A couple with $50 a week additional income will be $14.36 a week better off and will receive the fringe benefit health card. A couple who are presently receiving $40 a week in additional income will be $15.81 a week better off in November. Of course, they would already be receiving a health card.
There are, of course, other benefits in the Budget for the pensioner. A new tax rebate for pensioners has been introduced. This will be $167 this year and $250 next year. This year the rebate will be reduced by 12.5c for each dollar earned above $5,007 per annum. This step, combined with a $400 increase in the tax free threshold, will ensure that pensioners with a pension and no other income will pay no tax at all. The effect of these measures is that a pensioner can have a total income, including a pension, of $5,429 a yearover $100 a week-without having to pay any tax. As I have said, the rebate reduces at the rate of 12.5c in the dollar but it does not cut out until income of around $7,000 a year is reached. As with the easing of the means test on pensions and on fringe benefits these steps represent a real improvement for pensioners. They also represent both an incentive and a reward for people to provide, to the extent that they are able, for their own retirement.
Further help for the pensioner is also provided in a new, three-tiered arrangement for pharmaceutical benefits. Those pensioners who have the health benefit card will continue to receive medicines on the same basis. Of course, following the relaxation of the income test, more pensioners will be entitled to that card. In addition, other pensioners without the card will no longer pay the $3.20 a prescription; the fee will be reduced to $2 a prescription. This is a real help to the pensioner, particularly the age pensioner, who so frequently calls on medical assistance. The personal care subsidy paid to organisations caring for frail aged people in approved hostels will be increased to $30 a week for each eligible person from 6 July this year. This is an increase of 50 per cent on the present level or 100 per cent since October 1980 when the rate was last increased from $15 to $20. It will help to ensure that a high standard of care continues to be provided. This subsidy helps to meet the costs of employing staff to provide additional services for frail aged residents, such as assistance with bathing or dressing, cleaning, personal laundry, supervision of medicine and the like. At the end of June 1982 a total of 780 hostels was receiving the subsidy which was helping to

1952 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982 Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill

meet the costs of additional services for approximately 21,700 frail aged. In 1982-83, $35m will be spent on this subsidy compared with an expenditure of $22.24m in 1981-82-an increase of 57 per cent.
The Commonwealth currently assists the maintenance of Meals on Wheels services by providing a subsidy of 45c for every meal with an approved vitamin C supplement and 40c for every other meal. These rates will be increased to 55c and 50c respectively from October 1982-an increase of 22 per cent and 25 per cent respectively. At the end of June 1982, 738 organisations were receiving the Commonwealth subsidy. In 1981-82 some 9,650,000 meals were delivered compared with 8,905,000 in 1980-81. A final matter to mention with regard to help for the aged is the increase in funds available for aged persons accommodation and elderly citizens centres. These, too, have been significantly increased. All of these measures which I have outlined clearly indicate the concern and the determination of this Government to give assistance to our aged and our pensioners.
Other initiatives in this Bill will be of benefit to the community. A mobility allowance has been introduced. This is payable to a substantially disabled person who is permanently or, in the long term, unable to use public transport by reason of his or her disabilities and who is engaged in gainful employment or undertaking vocational training. The allowance is expected to provide a positive incentive to severely disabled persons seeking to enter, re-enter or maintain themselves in the work force. It is payable at the rate of $10 a week. 'Gainful employment' will be taken to mean employment for 20 hours or more a week and will include sheltered and home-based employment. 'Vocational training' wi1l be taken to mean training for 20 hours or more a week in preparation for finding paid work, carrying on a profession, trade or business. It will include tertiary education and training at an adult training centre or activity therapy centre. Payment will be made to an individual or his or her agent. Such payments will not be regarded as assessable income for income tax or pension purposes. These payments can continue to be paid for up to three months after loss of employment or cessation of vocational training.
I refer now to transitional employment arrangements for invalid pensioners. To reduce disincentives which face those invalid pensioners and recipients of the sheltered employment allowance who contemplate the possibility of returning to the full time work force certain administrative and other initiatives are to be instituted. Those who are manifestly permanently incapacitated for work and lose their pension through employment

will be guaranteed reinstatement of pension without further medical examination if they are forced to give up work within 12 months. Those who are not manifestly incapacitated but lose their pension through their earnings will receive priority in assessment and determination of any claim for invalid pension or sheltered employment allowance if they are forced to cease work within 12 months. Such persons will also qualify for a health care card under the disadvanaged persons health scheme for a period of 12 months free of any income test. It is anticipated that these measures will prove to be of particular value to those recipients of the sheltered employment allowance who find that they are unable to continue in open employment and again seek to contribute to society through their employment in a sheltered situation.
I turn now to unemployment and sickness benefits. The rate of unemployment and sickness benefits for a single person under the age of 18 and the rate of the unemployment benefit for older persons without dependants are not indexed, as has been mentioned by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett). In the case of the person under the age of 18 the maximum rate has been increased by $4-from $36 to $40 a week. The rate of the unemployment benefit for people over 18 years of age without dependants was increased last year, making it equal to half the rate payable to a married couple. To maintain the situation, the rate will be increased from $58.10 a week to $64.40 a week. It is estimated that approximately 248,000 beneficiaries will receive increased payments through those changes.
In November 1980, a partially tapered income test was introduced for the unemployment and sickness benefits. That important initiative has enabled beneficiaries to supplement their incomes by casual employment and has given unemployed youth in particular an opportunity to gain some work experience. To cement the advantages gained by that initiative, the upper tapered limit will be increased to $60 a week for people under or over 18 years of age. In addition, the permissable income limits in the free areas will be raised from the existing $3 a week for a single person aged under 18 years and from $6 a week for the others to a standard $10 a week for all beneficiaries. Thus, a beneficiary can, by earning $60 a week, have an income equal to the maximum rate of benefit plus $35.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.

Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1953

Mrs CHILD (Henty) (4.26)-It is with pleasure that I second the amendment moved by my colleague, the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett). I was interested to hear the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris) speaking on this Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill. He devoted two minutes of his 20 minutes to speaking about unemployment and the unemployment benefit. At a time when this country is hit by half a million people unemployed and that number increasing, and probably half a million hidden unemployed, I do not really think that two minutes in a speech is quite enough to devote to such a massive problem facing the Australian people. He talked about young people being able to gain work experience and to earn a bit more to add to their pitiful income. I would like to know where those jobs are because they certainly are not available in my electorate. If they are available in his electorate I would be very surprised. Part time work disappeared a long time ago.
I wish to speak a little about the fact that pensioners do not pay tax on their spouse and children's allowances but people in receipt of the sickness benefit, special benefits and the unemployment benefit are doubly discriminated against by this Government in that they receive lower incomes and they are taxed as well. I find it a tremendous burden to put on to people that if they have more than three children they are taxed, only because they are paid additional amounts for their children. All the talk from the Government about families does not really apply to those living in poverty because we tax them for having kids. Those on the sickness benefit are also called on to pay tax on their supplementary allowance as well as their income.
Those on the unemployment benefit do not receive the supplementary rent assistance. They face the same costs as pensioners in private rent accommodation, but are given no rent relief either by the Department of Social Security or by State housing authorities. With rents as high as they are, if these people are getting this massive $64.40 a week, I will be damned if I know how they are paying their rent. Of course, they are not; they are being evicted all over the country because they cannot pay their rent. It is not because they do not want to, but the income they are receiving will not keep pace with the private rents of $80 a week to $95 a week. One cannot do this, particularly if one is a supporting parent. It appears that the Government is insistent that those on or below the poverty level must pay tax, but over the years it has allowed the big operators to get away with

murder. It is a petty and outrageous discrimination against those on the sickness benefit and the unemployment benefit and pressures should be brought to bear on the Government to remove this discrimination.
This is a government which has presided over consistently high unemployment for both sexes and all age groups. The labour market has collapsed and the unemployment figures are devastating. The latest available figures indicate over half a million unemployed. Hidden unemployed would account for hundreds of thousands more. Of course, in those hundreds of thousands more women predominate. The average duration of unemployment these days, after seven years of a Liberal-National Country Party Government is 30 weeks, and still the Government will not grant supplementary assistance or fringe benefits to the unemployed. They have only the health care card which entitles them to free medical and hospital care in standard wards. Out of their miserable income they have to pay $2 for each prescription. For those who have chronic illness it becomes a nightmare. It is useless to tell people they can go to the doctor if they cannot afford then to go to the chemist and have their prescriptions made up. Considering the below poverty incomes, I believe it is particularly mean not to give the army of unemployed a pensioner health benefit card on the same basis as they are given to pensioners.
I support totally the amendment to increase the unemployment benefit to the 16 to 17 years age group. The 16 to 17 year old unemployed benefit has been increased by a paltry $4. I suppose we should welcome even that increase. It is due to be swallowed up swiftly by inflation and the new sales taxes. The amount of $40 represents a figure $37.25 a week below the single rate and is less than halfthe amount regarded as the poverty line. There is no recognition that many young people must live away from home for family reasons or, as my colleague pointed out earlier, the country kids come down to town to look for non-existent work. Nothing in the Budget explains how a 16 or 17-year-old can live on $5 a day. I am sure there are many people in the community who would be delighted if the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) could explain to them how to eke out their $5 a day so that they eat as well as have a roof over their heads. Who was it who said: 'We will be generous to those who want to work and who can't get a job'?
I wish to speak also about the emergency relief provided in this Bill. Again, as in the previous two Budgets, it has been frozen at $500,000. This is in spite of overwhelming evidence that more than double the number of poor people are seeking

1954 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982 Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill

help at times of crisis, while the voluntary agencies have fewer resources with which to help them. Because this Budget has given little help to the poorest pensioners and beneficiaries who are the most frequent clients of aid agencies, the need for emergency relief is unlikely to diminish. Most members of this House-certainly, members on this side of the House-are aware of people who must have recourse to the poor boxes in our electorates on a daily basis now in order to pay for the gas that is being cut off, the electricity that is being cut off and in order to try to help buy food. As a party, we have made a firm commitment to increase by $2m this emergency relief allocation when we take office either later this year or next year.
I wish to read an article from the Melbourne Age of Friday, 16 April 1982, headed 'Pleas by destitute for emergency relief almost treble'. The article states:
A report financed by the Federal Government shows that the demand for emergency relief from people in Victoria without food and money almost trebled last year.
In the first six months of 1981 there were 13,335 requests for cash or food compared with 5,013 during the same period in 1980.
The report, prepared by the Victorian Council of Social Service . . . shows that about 80 per cent of people seeking emergency relief did so while receiving Federal Government pensions and benefits.
What a disgrace that is in what is supposed to be an affluent country. The article continued:
It found that the main groups seeking help were people on unemployment benefits~
Of course they would be; who can live on that amount of money-
. . . single parents with children~
These people again have been discriminated against in this Budget-
. . . and invalid pensioners .
The amount of emergency relief given out in Victoria doubled from $1.9m in 1978 to an estimated $3.7m to $4.6m in 1980, the report says . . .
The report says that where emergency relief once was regarded as a one-off payment to meet a financial crisis, voluntary agencies were now being required to supplement income permanently for an increasing number of people who were living in a continuous and chronic state of poverty, punctuated by periodic crises.
I stress the words 'continuous and chronic state of poverty'. That is what is handed out to the pensioners of this country. Between one million and two million of them are living in poverty. Everyone on the unemployment benefit is living in abject poverty. The article continued:
The president of the Society cf St Vincent de Paul, Mr Vin Thomas, said that last September 90 per cent of people seeking help from the society were on government benefits and

pensions. The society distributed cash and goods worth $800,000 in 1980-81.
Again, all that has been given to aid all these people is half a million dollars this year. This is a Government which is taking no note of the fact that we are in the middle of what is probably the worst crisis that this country has struck since the Depression. As one of the speakers on the other side of the House pointed out this morning, we should be pulling together to try to do something about the tragedy that has hit us. Pulling together means we have to work together; but, if this Budget contains the amount of care and compassion those on the other side of the House are prepared to hand out to the unemployed, all I can say is: The quicker we take over government and maintain a decent payment so that people may maintain their families and live together under a shelter, the better. Most of these people are getting pushed out. Would honourable members believe that these days 2 per cent of the population are without a roof over their heads? What does the Government think this Budget will do about that? 1 condemn the paucity of the provisions, although we on this side of the House are prepared to give the Bill a second reading.
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (4.35)-1 support the Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill, which brings together the social security and welfare initiatives contained in the Budget, which I think has done and will do much more for the average family and for pensioners than any other Budget in my memory. 1 think the Budget is less than perfect in an economic sense, but its social direction is sound inasmuch as it gives much needed support to the family unit, and it has tackled positively the major problems which pensioners have been bringing to my electorate office over a number of years.
1 have advocated in this Parliament for many years the provision of assistance to families in a way which would ensure that families, particularly single income families, do not suffer undue financial hardship as a result of having more children. 1have suggested that this needs to be done in a systematic, co-ordinated and professional manner by the use of sophisticated data-based family impact statements rather than ad hoc measures, as occurs at the present time. Certainly, I prefer ad hoc action to no action at all, but if we genuinely believe the family unit to be the natural and fundamental group unit in society, as I do, we really need to have a continuing assessment of its well-being. At the present time many Commonwealth Government departments have a direct effect financially and legally on family circumstances-the Department of the Treasury

Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1955

through its taxation, fiscal and monetary policies and interest rates; the Department of Social Security through its various income support programs; the Department of Education through its responsibility to maintain freedom of choice in education; the Department of Veterans' Affairs; the Attorney-General's Department and others. The activities of these departments, together with the actions of State and local governments, all have an impact, for better or worse, on the capacity of families to manage their affairs.
At the present time government departments and different levels of government act independently of each other when it comes to something as specific as the family unit. I believe that family impact statements of the kind I have referred to previously in this place are necessary to provide a data standard from which decisions are taken in Commonwealth, State and local government budgets. The information is already available; it simply needs to be brought together from each level of government in each State. The data provided need not prove to be an imperative for action at any given time. It should simply be available as a standard against which well-informed and co-ordinated policy action could take place when it is possible for governments to do so. I again urge the Treasurer (Mr Howard) at least to examine the possibility of implementing this proposa\.
Although no such data was available for the preparation of the 1982-83 Budget there is no doubt that the variety of measures contained in it will greatly benefit the average family in Australia. Family allowances for the first and second child in a family rose by 50 per cent following the 50 per cent increase for third and subsequent children in the 1981-82 Budget. Given, as my colleague the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris) has said, that the first child is the one who requires the most substantial capital outlay for a family, I regard this as a most sensible initiative by the Government. This means that over the past two Budgets a family of three children has seen family allowances rise by $31.45 a month and a family of four children has seen family allowances rise by $44.45 a month-very substantial increases and very necessary increases given the economic difficulties confronting most family units, particularly those with one income and a relatively new and large mortgage. The spouse rebate, which is not the subject of this legislation but which is an important companion to the thrust of this legislation, has been increased by $200 to $830 per annum.

The combination of the Budget measures incorporating the family allowance increases, the income tax reductions, the spouse rebate increases and the housing loan interest rate rebate means that the average family, consisting of a taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two dependent children and with a mortgage of $25,000 paying interest at 13t per cent and receiving an income of some $300 a week, is to receive an additional $19.84 a week. Even after the imposition of the indirect taxes announced in the Budget, that family will still benefit by some $16.84 a week-again a very substantial improvement. In my opinion it is a boost to the status of the family in Australia not only in a financial sense but also in terms of the recognition that this Government has accorded the family by giving it top priority for social welfare and taxation intitiatives. This is a priority with which I totally agree, although I again say that the family unit is in need not only of one-off adjustments of the kind which occurred for pensioners before automatic indexation but also of continuing assessment and remedial action of the kind which can be obtained only from authoritative ongoing family impact statements.
While on the subject of the family unit I state again that, although income support is important, the taxation system should give due recognition to the single income family by allowing such units to split their income for income tax purposes. I know that the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security (Mr Wilson), who is at the table, has long been an advocate of this policy. These days we hear a lot about the morality of tax avoiders. If we are talking about morality rather than legalities, I must say that I see no morality in a situation where a family is able to split its income if the mother or father is engaged in a certain industry or profession while other families are denied such simple and substantial taxation benefits. No amount of change to the social security system in favour of average single income families will compensate for the bias which presently exists in the taxation system against the average wage and salary earning family. I have raised this issue also in this House over a long period. I will continue to do so until this discrimination against the family is removed from the taxation system.
The other aspect of this legislation which I support relates to the suppor;: given in the Budget to pensioners. Any honourable member of this House who seeks to keep himself or herself informed as to the problems of his or her constituents would agree that this Budget has successfully tackled the major problems confronting a great

1956 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982 Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill

number of pensioners. We all know that the income limits which determine eligibility for the maximum pension had not been increased since 1972. This has affected all pensioners. The lack of adjustment has basically proved to be an increasing disincentive for people approaching retiring age to make some provision from their own resources for their retirement. For example, a person with an indexed superannuation benefit would find that a cost of living adjustment to his superannuation would lead to some reduction in his pension. He would therefore suffer overall a real decrease in his combined income.
Clause 36 of the Bill will increase the income levels determining pension entitlement for aged and invalid pensioners by 50 per cent to $30 a week for single pensioners and by 45 per cent to $50 a week for pensioner couples. This measure means that some 430,000 pensioners throughout Australia with private incomes above the existing free areas will receive substantially higher pensions in the near future. I congratulate the Government for this much needed adjustment, which has certainly been long overdue. Certainly, this is not a measure which concentrates welfare expenditure on the neediest pensioners-those with no private income-although all pensions will be increased in November with indexation. Rental assistance will also be increased.
With a limit on available resources inevitably a choice had to be made by the Government between two conflicting principles, both reasonable and both requiring attention-one principle being the principle of concentrating resources on the neediest pensioners and the other being the principle of maintaining an official pension scheme which does not discourage people from making some provision for their own retirement. In my view an anti-poverty approach to welfare in some other areas and some reductions in lower priority Government expenditure could have provided the funds necessary to satisfy both of those principles in this Budget. Nevertheless, a matter of long standing and reasonable complaint by pensioners has been properly tackled by the Government. Although problems still remain in the pensions area few people would realise that a married couple in receipt of an age pension will be able to receive a total gross income of $178.80 a week before their pension is diminished on the basis of SOc for each dollar of non-pension income in excess of $50 a week. Their pension will not be totally withdrawn until their gross income reaches $307.60 a week. For single pensioners the comparable figures are $107.25 and $184.50 a week.

This legislation-in clause 59 of the Bill-also increases the income limits which determine pensioner entitlement to health benefits. These limits will be increased by 35 per cent to $54 a week for single pensioners and by 32 per cent to $90 a week for pensioner couples. Unlike the limits determining entitlement to the pension, these limits were previously adjusted only three years ago. Nevertheless, this action by the Government to increase the limits was necessary because pensioners with indexed private incomes were being placed in a position in which a small cost of living adjustment in their private incomes was causing a very large financial loss by removing them from entitlement to pensioner health benefits. These measures, combined with the Government's decision to lift the tax free threshold, which means that about 300,000 pensioners and low income earners who would otherwise pay tax in 1982-83 will not now do so, have substantially improved the lot of many pensioners throughout Australia.
Before making some general comments on the welfare area I want to refer briefly to the Delivered Meals Subsidy Act which basically keeps the Meals on Wheels operations going. Clause 22 of this Bill will increase the subsidy available from October 1982 from 45c to 55c per meal, where a vitamin C supplement is provided, and from 40c to SOc per meal in other cases. These increases are vitally important. In my electorate of Perth there are a number of organisations including the League of Home Help for Sick and Aged and various senior citizens' centres which provide a highly efficient meals on wheels service. The cost of producing these meals in relation to the price charged for them makes this kind of subsidy adjustment absolutely necessary if these organisations are to remain viable. This voluntary service is without equal anywhere in the world as far as I am aware. If eligible organisations are to retain their voluntary, private spirit we must ensure that they can provide their basic service at a good quality and at a reasonable price.
Without these periodic subsidy adjustments this important and underrated social service would collapse within its present structure and might have to be administered by government authorities which most organisers within these organisations feel would destroy the whole spirit and concept of the meals on wheels service. This program is important in meeting the requirements of so many aged people who prefer to stay in their own homes, in familiar surroundings, for as long as possible before having to move into institutional accommodation. This unique, decentralised, voluntary service involves in excess of 700 organisations throughout the country, providing some

Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1957

9,650,000 meals in 1981-82. The magnitude and the nature of the service can be sustained only by governments ensuring the viability of these approved organisations through the kinds of subsidy adjustments contained in this legislation.
One could outline the many other initiatives undertaken by the Government in the area of increased benefits for disabled people and veterans and with respect to the improved funding of accommodation for the aged and the frail aged, but that is well documented. I simply make the point that those who suggest that this Government does not give due consideration to welfare matters would do well to examine the Budget aggregates. For 1982-83 the Government has committed $13.2 billion to social security and welfare. That is just for this coming financial year. That represents an increase of over 15 per cent on the previous finanial year. But more importantly it constitutes more than 28 per cent of total Budget outlays compared with 23 per cent in the last Australian Labor Party Budget. I think those figures provide a proper basis of comparison regarding the priorities the respective parties give to social welfare.
Under this Government Commonwealth Budget expenditure on social security and welfare has risen from $5 billion in the 1975-76 Labor Budget to in excess of $13 billion in the 1982-83 Budget. For a country of 15 million people, with one of the highest standards of living in the world, Australia still has a poverty problem, notwithstanding the scale of its expenditure on social security and welfare. It seems to me that the extent to which poverty exists in Australia is not so much a consequence of the level of funds directed to the social security area in successive Budgets. Rather it is related to the fact that so much of that expenditure is allocated on a universal basis with people receiving benefits according to the occurrence of some specified contingency-for example, having children-rather than relating those contingencies to levels of well-being amongst the prospective recipients. This Budget again reflected that trend, notwithstanding the fact that the universal approach inevitably, although accidentally, helps many classes oflow income people.
This Budget, through the family income supplement, increased rental assistance and increased meal and accommodation subsidies paid under the Homeless Persons Assistance Act did have some anti-poverty initiatives. But, overall, the universal approach to welfare has remained dominant. This has meant a less than optimum use of welfare funds if we make the elimination of poverty our top priority policy. I do not pretend that it is easy to change the emphasis or direction

of welfare spending. I am aware of the realities of this world. But the fact remains that with much of the welfare area automatically indexed and with the aging of the population it will not be possible on economic grounds, nor will it be justifiable on social justice grounds, to continue on the present course of ever-expanding universal welfare payments. A greater proportion of the nation's resources available for welfare expenditure will have to be allocated on a needs basis. If this does not occur the poor will remain relatively poor and all pensioners and welfare recipients will suffer as the nation's capacity to develop its living standards will be impeded. In the absence of a change in the funding emphasis higher expenditures will be accommodated only by ever-increasing taxation or by higher interest rates, if Budget deficits expand, and lower levels of economic growth will result.
On economic grounds and on social justice grounds this change of emphasis in welfare spending will have to occur if we are going to be able to confront successfully the poverty that exists in this nation. If we are to increase the standard rate of pension to, say, 25 per cent of average weekly earnings at a cost of something like $460m per annum; if we are to increase assistance to the poorest families and to the unemployed; if we are to elevate the funding status of the Homeless Persons Assistance Act, which takes only $6.7m this year out of a total welfare commitment of $13,272m; and if we are to do more in these and other anti-poverty areas, obviously in the future some other universal welfare programs will have to be modified on a needs basis. It is only in this way that social justice will be provided in the longer term. In the short term and in the context of the 1982 Budget. I congratulate the Government for this legislation which has certainly helped overcome many of the pressing welfare problems experienced in recent years by Australia's families and pensioners.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (4.56)-I rise to speak to the Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 1982. 1 support the amendment moved so ably by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) and seconded by my colleague the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child). First, 1 shall comment on some of the points made by my colleague, the honourable member for Perth (Mr McLean), who philosophised as to why we have such a great amount of poverty in Australia today and surmised that it does not stem from any lack of welfare payments. Certainly, it is not just the lack of welfare payments that is causing the great extent of poverty. The sad thing is that an increase in social welfare payments has been

1958 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982 Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill

necessitated by the fact that bad management by the Government has caused more and more Australians to find it absolutely impossible to meet the increased costs that have come from extra sales tax, income tax, doctors' bills, education bills and all those necessities that should be their right. The situation is particularly difficult for those thrown out of work. The increases are necessary. After all, who wants handouts? No one would wish to live in this manner. People would rather have dignity and be able to afford all these
necessities.
Honourable members on the other side of the House spoke about family support and the top priority which it should receive from governments. I entirely agree with this proposition. But they and the Government they represent have made a glaring error in terms of human suffering. They have apparently neglected to realise that unemployed people are not alien creatures roaming a society in which they have no part and in which they have no rights. The most notable increase in the numbers receiving unemployment benefits is in the 25 to 44 years age group; that is, generally people with young families-the last people who would walk away from jobs. They are in the unemployed group because they are the victims of factory shutdowns and mine closures. These people are in the same situation as any pensioner couple but the Government refuses to allow them any fringe benefits apart from the health card, and most particularly will not give them a penny towards the rents they have to pay. It is part of the Fraser Government's philosophy of punishing the unemployed, no matter how undeserved.
The extent of the desperate plight of the unemployed has been outlined time and again in this chamber by members of the Opposition-it has been stressed today by my colleagues-but the Government has not responded. Its outdated and inadequate policies from a past age are unchanged. We still have no government-sponsored job creation scheme. We still, in the midst of climbing unemployment numbers-the worst since the Great Depression-are sadly stuck with a government which coined the term 'dole bludgers' yet refuses to give Australians seeking work anything other than a benefit which does not cover their needs. So the story of the unemployed must be told again and again, and it will be told until the Government's policies change or, even better, until there is a change of government.
At the height of the Great Depression a famous observer of the human condition wrote a book about the plight of London's thousands of homeless people or tramps, as he described them. The book describes his experiences and feelings as he

wandered the streets and stood in queues, dressed as a tramp dresses and living as tramps then lived. The book provided the average citizen of those times with an opportunity to learn of the fantastically disagreeable life, as the author described it, of an entire subculture of societal rejects. The name of the book is Down and Out in Paris and London and its author is George Orwell, arguably the greatest social reporter of this century.
Whilst the book makes fascinating reading, one would have thought that 50 years later the opportunities for this sort of reportage would have disappeared. I commented on Orwell's book because in a recent feature story in Brisbane's Courier Mail reporter Alan Fewster managed to paint a chilling Orwellian picture of that same subculture as it exists today in the sunshine State of our own lucky country. Entitled 'The Young and the Hopeless', the article outlines Mr Fewster's first hand observations of the lifestyles of the inhabitants of Brisbane's hostels for the homeless as he spent three depressing days moving among them. His impressions provide a stark warning that 1984 could ultimately resemble the picture Orwell painted of his own times rather than the authoritarian, one-dimensional society he prophesied in another famous book, 1984. I shall quote Mr Fewster's article because it is pertinent. Time and again we hear the plight of the unemployed and the plight of people living in poverty brushed aside as though they were part of some emotive picture conjured up by people who do not have the facts in their hands. The picture is indeed factual and very sad. Mr Fewster wrote:
As one who for some years has been used to earning a living wage, I found it impossible to exist without charity. My budget was just over $5 a day. Clearly I could not afford to rent a place or eat on that. The alternatives were the shelters or the streets.
Despite the knowledge that mine was only a sojourn among the unemployed, I had to make a more serious mental adjustment in order to deal with the psychological aspects of life on the dole. Depression was something I confronted. Faced with so much desperation, I became desperate myself. How was I going to get through my time? On occasions, it seemed a little like a jail sentence and on a practical level, what to do through the day?
Unemployment, I found is about loneliness and boredom. On $4 a day, you cannot go to the pictures or the pub. Many youngsters, however, can stretch their dole cheque to include a tube of aeroplane glue.
Unemployment is also about intellectual and emotional poverty. The IS year old who runs away from home and school and ends up in a hostel full of derelict alcoholics is starting life with little going for him. Virtually all his relationships are confined to the limits of his immediate environment.
This then is the picture of homeless youth in Brisbane today as it was confronted by one reporter. As the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare's report on homeless youth in Australia

Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1959

noted, Brisbane has around 2,000 homeless kids roaming its streets while the number for Australia as a whole is over 12,000. The need for shelter for these people is desperate. Why has the need not been addressed in this Budget?
The Brisbane Telegraph of 17 August reported that the number of homeless young people seeking help in Melbourne has jumped 30 per cent in the past few months, and the situation will get worse when more young people come on to the job market this Christmas. Most of these were under 18 years and unemployed. According to the Courier-Mail of 21 August, records kept by the Salvation Army showed that the number of homeless and unemployed people in Brisbane under the age of 25 has increased 10 per cent since the beginning of the year. Forty two per cent of all admissions at the Salvation Army hostel for men and women are aged 18 or under. Forty two per cent of the people whom the Salvation Army is mopping up are young people-our young people in Australia-coming from decent homes with decent families. And nothing has been done in this Budget to look to their needs.

down and out. In real terms, the $400,000 rise represents around a 40 per cent cut-back on the previous year's allocation. This fact is simply stagger-
ing. It is also disgusting. The Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare described the grow-
ing numbers of homeless youth as Australia's hidden problem. This Government's attitude to
homeless youth could quite obviously be described as one of hiding from the problem. This Government has, however, allocated $1.7m this
financial year for a one-year extension to the three-year pilot youth service scheme. The
Scheme supports emergency accommodation and
counselling services for homeless young people
and its cost is shared on a dollar for dollar basis by the Commonwealth and the States. This grant is a $500,000 increase on last year's allocation but it
has to cover the rising growth in the demand for
youth crisis accommodation throughout Australia. If it were to go only towards helping shelter the 2,000 homeless young people in Bris-
bane I am sure that it would not do more than cover the increased operational costs of the present overworked shelters. But what about the
homeless young people in the rest of Australia?

One third of those who stay at the Brisbane St Vincent de Paul shelter for homeless men are under 25-it would make me speechless except the words have to be said-and one-sixth are under 18. Ten years ago the average age of those living at the Society's shelter was 48; today is it 32. Yet while the demand for crisis accommodation for homeless persons is soaring the supply is sadly lacking. The Brisbane Telegraph reported on 16 August that up to 40 poverty stricken people a week were being turned away from the Gold Coast's only hostel for the homeless. Most were aged between 16 and 25.
If these stories are any indication, the situation is clearly critical. A simple sense of humanity tells us that homeless young people should be at the top of any government's list of priorities. Yet when we look at this government's list of priorities in the Budget we find that Liberal-National Country Party concern for the plight of homeless unemployed people, whether young or old, is, like the success of the Government's economic policies, negligible.
Total outlays by way of subsidies to voluntary welfare organisations for the construction, purchase or maintenance of night shelters, reception centres and hostels for homeless persons will rise this year by a grand total of $400,000. This is the Federal Government's main form of financial support for homeless unemployed people who are

As my colleague the honourable member for
Wills (Mr Hawke) has pointed out, this Govern-
ment has totally ignored the problem of unem-
ployment in this country. Similarly, the Budget in-
dicates that the accommodation needs of unemployed people have also been ignored. The only sign that it recognises their plight was the de-
cision to increase the under-18 rate of unemploy-
ment benefit from $36 to $40 per week and the single adult rate of benefit from $58.10 to $64.40 a
week. Neither figure is indexed and, in any case,
the increases will be swallowed up by high indirect taxes. The higher junior rate of benefit is $37.25 a
week below the single standard pension rate and
less than half the amount set for the poverty line. As has been pointed out, this applies in the ma-
jority of cases to young people, many of them
from the country, who do not have family support and others who have families who have turned
them loose. The higher adult rate was literally
forced out of the Government because the single rate of $58.10 was so far below half the married
rate of unemployment benefit that it was paying single people to claim de facto relationships so
that they could benefit from the higher rate and the indexation rises. This is a disgusting situation to force young people into. The only response that we get from this Government is: 'Tut tut! They
should not be doing such immoral things.' They certainly should not be put into this situation but it is very poor when they are forced, by lack of
money, into situations like that. They are only

1960 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982 Social Security Legis/ation Amendment Bill

kids. The adults who put through the legislation turn their backs on them. Since the Government has still not chosen to index the new rate in line with the married rate of unemployment benefit the same situation will recur in May 1983. This practice is also increasing amongst 18-year olds, something the paltry increase to $40 in the junior rate of benefit will do nothing to prevent.
Perhaps the heaviest burden carried by unemployed people with a permanent roof of sorts over their heads is rent. But as has already been spelt out in this chamber, they will not get rent relief, so the homelessness must go on. Perhaps the masterpiece of confused priorities concerning the unemployed in this Budget is the 21 per cent increase in the allocation for job training programs. As the honourable member for Wills has pointed out in the lifetime of this Government, between 1975-76 and 1982-83, there has been a 38 per cent drop in real terms in expenditure. The irony in the 21 per cent increase this year, however, lies in the fact that with there being no projected growth in employment in 1982-83 this money will be used to train young people to go absolutely nowhere. There are job training schemes but no jobs-the ultimate irony. This Government should do what the Age newspaper did recently and survey experts in the field of employment for their views on the efficacy of these schemes. On 12 August the Age stated:
There is widespread agreement among the authorities contacted by the Age that the schemes run by the Federal Government to ease unemployment are inadequate, out of date and, in some cases, misdirected. There is no programme which creates jobs: schemes are all directed towards training unemployed workers.
Herein lies the tragedy with the schemes and the new guidelines to the Community Youth Support Scheme. I have dwelt on the very real and still growing plight of the homeless unemployed to focus on a relatively unpublicised area in which this Government has literally deserted people in physical need. However, there is another group in society which is also being kicked in the teeth by the Fraser Government. That group comprises the pensioners of this country who receive little or no private income. I acknowledge the extent to which this Budget has a last gone towards relieving certain aspects of the bad conditions. with which the pensioners have been burdened. But the needy pensioner without extra income has been given no relief and, in fact, has been put into a worse situation. When we consider the nature of the Budget decisions affecting pensioners we can see how this is so. Mr Fraser, in his 1975 policy speech said--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-The honourable member will refer to the Prime Minister as such.
Mrs DARLING-The Prime Minister, in his 1975 policy speech, said:
The real value of pensions will be preserved.
This has not happened. Under the Labor Government, between 1972 and 1975, pensions rose almost twice as fast as the consumer price index. Under the Liberals they have been indexed in line with the consumer price index but several months later, in spite of the promise the Prime Minister made that there would be no lag, the pension has now declined to less than 22 per cent of average weekly earnings. Unless there is an additional boost to the standard rate pension it will go back to the 18.6 per cent which it was in Mr McMahon's day before the Labor Government gave substantial rises twice-yearly. The drop in the pension compared with community living standards demonstrates that this Government has no commitment to giving pensioners an adequate income. The increase still only covers pensioners for the higher prices they paid between January and June 1982. From the point of view of the average pensioner who has received less private income than was allowable under the old income test, the extensions to these limits are meaningless, particularly if these people are of an age or possess a degree of invalidity which renders them in-
capable of work. In other words, pensioners and beneficiaries who are too frail or incapacitated to work, who are too poor to have substantial private investments or who are fully tied up at home caring for their children will receive absolutely no benefit from the decisions.
It does not stop there. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) also made much in his speech about the benefits for pensioners of the higher tax threshold
and pensioner tax rebate. Yet it should be immediately obvious to most members of this chamber that neither of these measures would be of any assistance at all to pensioners who do not pay tax. As luck would have it, many of the pensioners not yet liable for tax are the same pensioners I spoke of earlier who will not receive any benefits from the easing of the pensioner income tests. The simple fact is that pensioners having to subsist solely, or almost solely, on the basic pension receive an annual income well below the present tax threshold. For the financial year just ended, a single pensioner could have received extra income up to an average of $11.30 a week for the entire year before becoming liable for tax. These people, living in utter poverty, can receive no joy from the news of higher tax thresholds and special tax rebates and most certainly will get

Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1961

nothing out of the raising of the pension income test limits. This is the giant hoax perpetrated on our pensioners. This is the kick in the teeth which down and outers have been delivered by this Budget and which was also delivered to our homeless unemployed youth. Yet not content with delivering these body blows the Government, in its infinite wisdom, also decided to put up indirect taxes and slap on a bank transactions tax. As these people purchase goods with their few coins and go to cash their cheques at the bank they will also feel the sting of this neat uppercut; and this Government dares to use the word 'compassion' in its political lexicon.
The plain fact is that while total expenditure on social welfare in this Budget is estimated to rise in real terms the major part of the increase will be taken up by the automatic six-monthly rises already in place and by the huge increase in unemployment beneficiaries caused by a government-induced recession. The people who benefit from the belated largesse of this Government are certainly deserving of the relief that they are to receive. I am worried about our neediest citizens who have been trampled on by this Government in its rush to win votes. Their only crime is that they have not been identified in Liberal Party opinion polls as swinging voters.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (5.15)-The Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill has some cross-connection with a number of other Bills such as the Aged or Disabled Persons Homes Act, the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act, Delivered Meals Subsidy Act and of course the Social Security Legislation Act itself. This legislation is the vehicle by which the Government gives effect to its budgetary commitments in the social security area. It is a piece of legislation that affects a vast number of people. I suppose it is for that reason that the Government has allowed some latitude in this debate particularly taking into account the fact that it concerns some of the most needy people in the Australian community. The honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) has drawn attention in a very philosophical and detailed way to the problems of the times--
Mr Kent-And in a very able way.
Mr LES JOHNSON-Of course, and in a very able way. She has also referred to the achievements of the Whitlam Government. From 1972 to 1975, it was frequently said that the Whitlam Government was going too fast on too many things. I do not suppose many of us on this side of the House have much embarrassment when, with hindsight and in retrospect, we realise that the

greatest progress was made then in the area of social security and that we went close to doubling pensions. The people who had been deprived of updated pensions for such a long time did not by any means regard that as going too fast.
We know that there is a limit to social security expenditure. We know that every time we find a prospective beneficiary that will aggravate a taxpayer who will have to payout more. We know there is some limit to what can be paid in tax and that there has to be enough money left over to give people an incentive to work. The Australian Labor Party has that kind of matter in good perspective-just as our opponents claim to have. I have not checked this figure out but we are told, for example, that for every 100 people in the work force there are 28 beneficiaries under social security legislation. If we add the people who are beneficiaries under veterans affairs legislation, I think the figure reaches 39. Of course, those veteran beneficiaries in many instances would receive only very small supplementary disability pensions. There is a limit to all that. It is unquestionably the case that $11,47Im expenditure on the traditional social security issues out of a total budget of $47,DOOm is a very large amount by world standards.
Nobody is in the business of harbouring parasites in dealing with these matters. Nor should we be giving funds to people who do not need them. I think all parties have been guilty-that is the word to use I suppose-of harbouring ideas and concepts to that effect. I suppose we have all contended, particularly in the pre-election period, that it is a good thing to do away with any means test restrictions which means, in effect, a preparedness sometimes to give pensions to people who do not need them. Of course the more we indulge in that kind of extravagance the less we have available to redress the needs of the very deprived people in our community.
I deplore the uncertainty that prevails in the whole social security area. There is a hotchpotch approach on the part of this Government. Why can we not get down to a really credible formula about needs that applies across the board to all categories of people instead of indulging in the old thimble-and-pea trick and robbing people here and there by not adjusting benefits but then increasing pensions and the like in a pre-Budget period? Why cannot we get down to a properly indexed arrangement? Why cannot we allow people in our society-ordinary, decent run-of the-mill people-to set out with some objective in regard to their lives so that they can plan and know that whatever befalls them and whatever eventuality besets them, whether it is retirement

1962 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982 Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill

in old age, in invalidity or widowhood. The Minister at the table (Mr Hodgman) is looking a bit facetious and silly about this matter or is that just his natural expression?
Mr Hodgman-I agree with you for the first time in 7 years and you criticise me.
Mr LES JOHNSON-I thank the Minister very much and say that I am sorry. I make the point that I think the Australian community has the right to know where each person would stand in any unforseen eventuality. People cannot know today because the ground is shifting from underneath them all the time. Moreover, when it suits the Government it indulges from time to time in intimidatory practices. We have had lots of evidence of that in the last 12 months. I suppose the worst intimidatory tactic we have seen is in respect of the Greek conspiracy case where millions of dollars have been spent to bring so-called offenders under the social security legislation to heel only to the end effect, of course, that no one was apprehended or charged. I mention also the incessant sniffing around to see whether people are living in de facto relationships and whether the people who are recipients of unemployment benefit have their hair cut short enough or are living in the right place near job locations. The legislation displays such heavy handedness that I think it is out of character with Australianism.
As well there have been many other threats to the pensioner community. The worst we have experienced through the year was the proposal that the Government might consider putting a notional income factor against people who receive a golden handshake on retirement. We all know what has happened. We know about the sequence of events here. Under the Whitlam Government, the means test was lifted first of all for people over 75 years of age and then in 1975 lifted for the people over 70 years of age. Later, the whole means test arrangements were changed so that we disregarded the process of taking into account the value of a person's assets. In the end we took into account only the value of income. This has resulted in a change in superannuation arrangements so that people are receiving what we call the golden handshake or a lump sum payment instead of periodical payments. This has the effect of increasing the pension bill. I suppose that is a proper thing to consider in the proper context. To come out in such an intimidatory way as one of the Ministers of this Government did last year and cause pensioners all over Australia to take fright I think is something that has to be deplored.
Of course, in this Budget and in the legislation before us we have a range of benefits which are

thinly spread and which obviously have, in terms of their implementation date, some association with the optional election dates that are before the Government. Some benefits took effect from Budget day; some are to take effect from 1 November and, in case we do not get an election then, we will have another go at it in April. We will space these things out so that we will have a Father Christmas in the form of Malcolm Fraser-if I can depart from the traditional form of address--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-1 think perhaps you should not.
Mr LES JOHNSON-Mr Deputy Speaker, I will do whatever you think is a fair thing. You know what I am putting to you. There has been a bit of skulduggery indulged in in respect of these matters for the purpose of maximising the vote earning potential of these budgetary measures.
The honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), who led for the Opposition in this debate, pointed out that, despite the increase in the pension rates which is to take place from I November, there is no effective increase in the living standards of Australia's pensioners. Here we engage in another bit of skulduggery or trickery. We talk about the pension being a proportion of average weekly earnings, but the people receiving average weekly earnings are themselves subject to periodical conning. They are deprived of wage indexation. They are deprived of taxation indexation. Their living standards are shot down because of changes in the health scheme and matters of that kind. After they have all been tricked and humbugged, we then relate pensions to that false level of earnings. Even in that situation it is interesting to note that the standard rate of pension, which was 24.5 per cent of average weekly earnings in 1975, is at present only 21.9 per cent of average weekly earnings and after the November increase will rise to 22 per cent. So no effective progress is being achieved in this respect.
The very fact that the adjustments are made on a twice-yearly basis in itself represents a serious loss to pensioners because the consumer price index is moving up steadfastly. It would be a considerable improvement-the Opposition is considering making this proposal an aspect of its social security policy-to index pensions quarterly rather than half-yearly. The loss to the pensioner community runs to many millions of dollars and to a very significant figure for each individual pensioner. I see that we now call permissible income 'the free .area limit', a new bit of terminology about which the pensioner community is confused. The amount of permissible earnings a

Social Security Legislation Amendment Bill 13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1963

pensioner can have before the pension is reduced has been increased for the first time since 1972. We welcome, as do the pensioners, the increase in permissible income or free area income for single pensioners from $20 to $30 a week and for a married pensioner couple from $34.50 to $50 a week. But this does not go anywhere near redressing the reduction in real terms and there is no proposal to index this free area income or these permissable earnings. The limits may not be increased again for quite some time, so it seems apparent that pensioners will suffer a further decline in the not too distant future because of the inadequacy of the Government's approach to this matter by not providing indexation.
There is a similar problem in respect of fringe benefits. Not everybody knows that two means tests are applied to pensioners under the social security laws-one to determine how much pension one gets and one to determine whether one is eligible for free benefits. There has been an increase also under this free benefits means test. It has gone up in respect of a single pensioner from $40 to $56 a week and for married people from $68 to $90. But once again there is no indexation and pensioners will be granted fringe benefits only to find them cancelled out because of a cost of living increase in their superannuation benefits. One moment they have it and they feel very secure in that they can go to hospital and get medical care, free pharmaceutical benefits and the benefit of all the other things which go with the pensioner medical card, and suddenly simply because of a consumer price index increase in their superannuation or some other increase they lose out. Every honourable member who acts diligently in his or her electorate would experience from time to time the anxiety of those people. I think that matter should be looked at so that in the future it is put on a more secure basis than it has been in the past.
I notice that there has been an increase from $8 to $10 a week-not a large amount-in the supplementary assistance, the rent assistance, to apply from 1 November. The whole area of supplementary assistance will cost $24m. I think we could have provided a more substantial increase in that respect. When we look at that $24m against the $87m given for home savings grants, the $60m for the home deposit assistance scheme and the $285m for the home loan interest rebate scheme, we can see that people who are in possession of a house are being assisted much more generously than the most deprived people in our community who have no real estate and who have to live in rented rooms or in a rented house. All they will get is $10 a week instead of $8 a week supplementary pension or rent assistance. I do not

think that is good enough. I am told that, while they are to be given this $2 a week extra, rentals at the bottom of the market are rising annually by more than $10 a week. The increase should have been at least $15 a week if it is to take account of current rent levels. I notice that no supplementary assistance or rent pension assistance is given to the unemployed. I deplore that. Because I am the last speaker on this side I will read the amendment that we have moved to contrast our attitude with that of the Government. It reads:
. . . whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House-
(I) deplores the Government's failure to protect the value of social security pensions, benefits and payments generally . . .
That is the first matter I was talking about-the deterioration of pensions. I continue:
The House-
(2) is of the opinion that the Bill should also provide for-
(a) an end to the discrimination against the unemployed;
(b) greater increases in payments to the under-18 unemployed, and
(c) increases in payments for children to maintain their real value.
Let me say one thing about the unemployed. They have no access to fringe benefits. That is unfortunate. This Government does not seem to be contemplating changing that inadequate provision. They have only the health care card under the disadvantaged persons health care system, but when we take into account that these people are below the poverty line it seems to be important, if not imperative, that they should have the better style of health benefit card that pensioners get because with that card come all sorts of other things, sometimes through local government and sometimes through State government. That means eligibility for hearing aids, for local government rate rebates, for concessional transport, for motor registration assistance, sometimes for assistance with fuel bills and for matters of that kind. So our amendment is very pertinent. We are not talking about an open-ended slather or about mad and wild expenditure on social security. We are talking about humanising this country and about considering people who are in most difficult circumstances. That obviously involves the unemployed who unfortunately have increased in numbers to a record extent. We believe it is a terrible thing that at present the under-18s get a lousy $40 a week, some of them physically as big as a man, eating and dressing the same. Even some young girls are receiving that amount. The frustration of this undignified approach that the Government has

1964 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill

taken to these people can no longer be endured in this country.
So many matters of this kind need consideration. I think the amendment moved by the honourable member for Bonython is a succinct representation of our antithesis, our alternative emphasis. It is a humane one, not one of mad and wild spending. I ask honourable members opposite to consider it. I know that because of the numbers game they will not switch their votes to us today. I do not know whether honourable members opposite will get an opportunity to indulge in the luxury of determining how the most unfortunate people of Australia will live in the future. I hope to God that they do not. I hope that they are swept out lock, stock and barrel at the next Federal election because of their failure to gather up the tax money of this country and to give the deprived and the underprivileged a fair go. If they do, I ask them to take account of the amendment moved by the Opposition.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.
REPATRIATION LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 23 September, on motion by Mr Thomson:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (5.36)-The Opposition welcomes most of the features of this Bill. Indeed, it is the most flattering repatriation legislation which has been brought down in a long time in that it mirrors so clearly key aspects of the Australian Labor Party's platform. Indeed, it embodies the policies for which we have argued strongly in this House and in the other place. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the Australian Labor Party's recently determined platform on veterans' affairs policy which was put through at the July conference and in which honourable members will recognise most of the measures introduced in the Government's August Budget.
Leave granted.

The document read as follows-
AUSTRALIAN LABOR PARTY 1982 BIENNIAL CONFERENCE-CANBERRA-5-9 JULY
Veterans' Affairs Policy
A Labor Government will:
extend liberal treatment to all ex-service personnel disabled as a result of war service and to their dependants;
review recent changes to the repatriation system which reduce long-standing benefits; overhaul the appeals system to overcome long delays in hearing and determinations and restore the role of the Repatriation Review Tribunal to hear and make determinations on new evidence;
reduce the waiting period for current applicants for Defence Service Home Loans; widen the eligibility provisions of such loans so as to ensure justice for ex-servicewomen and maintain the level of loans in line with increasing costs of home ownership;
provide for at least half yearly indexation of all repatriation benefit payments;
exclude war pensions, including the general and special rate, and family allowances, from consideration as income for the payment of Service pensions or corresponding Social Service pensions; to be implemented within three years with substantial relief being granted in the first year;
grant to Allied ex-service personnel who fought with Allied forces during the Second World War entitlement to pension and treatment rights on the same basis as British ex-service personnel and extend fringe benefits (such as medical and hospital treatment and transport and telephone concessions) to both British and Allied ex-service personnel;
extend to Allied ex-merchant mariners the same entitlements as those received by Australian ex-merchant mariners;
recognise the special needs of Vietnam veterans and their families and extend counselling services for them;
introduce legislation relating to overseas service so as to provide equality of repatriation entitlements for veterans of all wars, designated campaigns, or peacekeeping duties, at least equivalent to those now enjoyed by World War Two veterans;
provide relief and treatment, where appropriate, for wives of TPI veterans; and
institute an independent judicial enquiry into the effects of herbicides and pesticides on Vietnam veterans.
Mr Thomson-We decided well before that.
Dr BLEWETT-The Minister now tells me that he had decided long before that. Let us just deal with that argument. I remind him and the House that 12 months ago the Opposition moved with reference to the Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill 1981, that is, the Bill introduced last year which was comparable to this Bill, that the Bill be redrafted, inter alia, to:
Provide repatriation benefits to those who served in peacekeeping forces before 1 November 1981.
This was rejected by the Government in 1981. Only 12 months ago it refused to incorporate it. We are very glad to see today in this Bill that the Opposition's policy has now been adopted. Again we moved last year that the Bill be redrafted to:

Repatriation Legis/ation Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1965

Provide eligibility for service pensions for all Allied exmerchant mariners as is provided for Allied ex-servicemen.
Again a year ago our amendment was rejected by the Government. Again the Government in this Bill has adopted Labor policy. Of course, the Government is saying that it made its decision some months ago. Let us go back only a few months to March 1982. Again in March 1982, at the instance of my colleague the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), the Opposition moved that the Repatriation Acts be amended to extend the broad eligibility criterion for disability pension included in the World War II provisions, that is, the 'arisen out of or attributable to' provision, to veterans from World War I and the Malaysian and Vietnam campaigns. In March this year-that was not many months ago-the Opposition's amendment was again rejected by the Government. Now, six months later, we find that this part of Labor's policy is included in this year's Bill although, as I shall point out, I am not very clear as to whether the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson), given what was said in the second reading speech, understands the provision. I must say that while imitation is the subtlest form of flattery I am amazed at the unblushing way in which the Government is now touting as reforms those principles that it rejected summarily 12 months or even six months ago.
Let us now look at each of these Labor reforms which the Government has decided to embody in this Bill. First of all I refer to the peacekeeping forces provision. I think there will be universal acceptance of the Government's decision to extend eligibility for repatriation benefits to members of peacekeeping forces who served as representatives of Australia prior to 2 November 1981. I can certainly say on behalf of the Labor Party and I think on behalf of most thinking Australians that once the Government decided to extend such eligibility to members of the Sinai peacekeeping force the logic of extending it to members of prior peacekeeping forces was recognised. It is true that as usual the Government took some time to recognise this logic but we now welcome its belated acknowledgment. There is, of course, in the Minister's second reading speech no confession of this lack of logic. Indeed, it is interesting to see that there is no explanation whatsoever as to why what is now possible was.not possible six months or a year ago.
Again in the Minister's second reading speech there is no praise for the quiet herosim of those long forgotten and now suddenly remembered Australians who served Australia in peacekeeping

and monitoring operations over the last generation. No sympathetic understanding is reflected anywhere in the speeches of either the Minister in this House or the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) in the other place of the unreported hazards of peacekeeping operations.
There is no apology for the years in which those who served in peacekeeping forces have been kept in limbo and no listing of the places in which they served out of sight and, to all intents and purposes, out of mind. The Opposition wishes to remedy that defect and let this Parliament record Australia's debt to those who served in peacekeeping and monitoring operations. I wish to present a list of those operations. I am not sure that it is complete but it is the best that we have been able to put together and as the Government has not offered this Parliament or the nation any such list at all, at least it is a first attempt.
First of all there was Australia's participation in the United Nations Truce Supervisory Organisation in the Middle East from 1956 to the present day. There was our participation in the United Nations Emergency Force II in the Suez Canal area from 1973 to 1980, our participation in the
Kashmir peacekeeping force 1949, I think again to the present day, and Australia's participation in 1963-64 in the observer mission that was sent to the Yemen as a result of the United Nations intervention there. In Cyprus, Australia has participated through its police forces in the United Nations Civilian Police Force from 1964 to the present day. In Zimbabwe, as I saw at first hand, the Australians played a particularly useful role in the peacekeeping operation during the election in 1980. From 1947 to 1951 Australia participated in the peacekeeping groups in Greece following the civil war. Similarly there was Australian participation in the peacekeeping force in Indonesia from 1947 to 1951 following the war against the Dutch. There is, of course, the present Sinai force. I believe we sent a small contingent to the peacekeeping operations in the Lebanon in 1958 and, as I am informed at the moment, we also sent a small contingent to the United Nations forces during the time of troubles in the Congo between 1960 and 1964. I think this is a record of which this country can be very proud. We welcome very much the establishment in this legislation of the eligibility of the participants in those forces.
The second issue to which I wish to draw attention is that of the amendments relating to the 'arisen out of' provisions which, of course, the Labor Party supports as it advocated them in this House six months ago. It is implied in the second reading speech that only Vietnam veterans are not presently covered by the more generous 'arisen

1966 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill

out of' or 'attributable to' provisions for disability
pension eligibility but at the moment it is only World War II veterans who are so covered. All other veterans-veterans of World War I and of the wars in Korea, Malaysia and Vietnam-are covered only by the more limiting occurrence provision. The Labor Party supports this extension because we believe not only that all veterans should be treated fairly but also that they should be treated compassionately, that men who have served their country in war should be given the benefit of the doubt.
The Minister tended to disparage the need for this amendment, alleging that very few instances were involved which would not be covered by the already existing occurrence provision. My reply to that is as follows: Firstly, even if there are very few instances, each of those instances are important and count and the discrimination should be remedied. Secondly, if the Minister examines the appeal cases in particular he will discover that sufficient tragic cases have occurred to justify providing the broader category, that is, the 'arisen out of' provision, to all veterans and not just to World War II veterans. Thirdly, interestingly enough, the Government has never produced any argument as to why the 'arisen out of' or 'attributable to' provision was limited to World War II veterans. When this was raised with the Minister in this House in March he seemed to have no answer. Perhaps because he had no answer then he decided something should be done about it now. Therefore, the Australian Labor Party welcomes very much the correction of this anomaly.
Furthermore, it is good at last to have an acknowledgment from the Government, particularly from a Liberal government whose predecessors have involved us in practically every war we have ever fought-though usually we have had to get them out of them-that, as the Minister said, the Government considers that the same principles of eligibility should apply to all veterans for all conflicts. We accept that. We believe that that is a desirable statement. We hope that the rider that was added by the Minister was added in good faith. I quote the rider: 'unless there is good reason to introduce specific principles and provisions for particular conflicts or for particular groups of veterans'. We trust that that rider will be interpreted only in a compassionate direction and not in a limiting direction.
This legislation also resolves at long last the long battle of merchant mariners who served in theatres of war during World War II. They can now be covered by this legislation. It has been a pretty tough struggle for those merchant mariners but it has been finally brought to a successful, if

somewhat belated, conclusion. It is now, of course, nearly 40 years since that conflict ceased. I cannot for the life of me understand why when the Government last year finally decided to cover Australian merchant mariners it did not then cover Commonwealth and allied merchant mariners. It had previously established that principle for covering Commonwealth and allied soldiers. When it caught up belatedly last year by providing cover for Australian merchant mariners it seemed to me to be an utterly simple task to cover Commonwealth mariners. Indeed, when one looks at the amendments in this Bill one sees that it was afl utterly simple task to include Commonwealth and allied merchant mariners. Certainly the lame answers provided by the Minister last year were just so much poppycock. I am reminded here of the words of John Curtin, recalled by a merchant mariner's wife during the debate on this matter. Curtin said:
They wear no uniform but just a badge with the letters M.N. When you see it raise your hat to the wearer.
At least those who wore that badge, whatever language it was in, will now have a tangible reminder of the gratitude of all of us.
Finally, I refer to two items about which the Labor Party is critical as not having been included in repatriation legislation-two matters which again we have raised frequently in this House. We believe ultimately-although I suppose there is no ultimately now for this Government-that the neglect of the wives of the totally and permanently incapacitated ex-servicemen will be corrected. I admit that this issue was not raised by the Returned Services League in its pre-Budget submissions though that I do not think is an excuse for not considering it. Certainly the issue was not dealt with in what, in many ways, is a generous Bill. Yet I think there is a need for recognising the role played by TPI wives and the great demands often placed upon them to the detriment of their own health and well-being in caring for their husbands. I think there is a need for some precise and specific responses from the Government to alleviate this position and to provide support for these wives. I know that the various organisations concerned have prepared proposals and I think we need to look at the responses to those requestsresponses which certainly are not yet apparent in the Government's repatriation legislation.
The other feature of the second reading amendment which the Opposition will move relates of course to the judicial inquiry into the effect of herbicides and pesticides on veterans who served in Vietnam. We make no apology for raising this issue again in the Parliament. The need is now overwhelming to cut through the procrastinations

Repatriation Legis/ation Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1967

and delays on this matter that have characterised government responses to Vietnam veterans. What is required is not further, prolonged research but a proper and prompt judicial assessment of the available evidence. A motion to this effect was actually passed in the Senate last year only to be cynically ignored by this Government. The demand for a judicial inquiry is the now all but unanimous policy of the Conference of ExService Organisations, although perhaps the RSL could be a little more resolute on this matter. It seems to me extraordinary that a government which can have inquiries into everything under the sun-into dubious meat carcasses, possible electoral rigging and the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union-refuses to open the Pandora's box which contains this legacy of the Vietnam war. If the Government can respond to its many troubles with all sorts of judicial inquiries why cannot it respond in the same way to the demands of those who served in Vietnam? Therefore, on behalf of the Opposition, I move the following amendment:
That all words after That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading. the House is of the opinion that the Bill should provide for--
(I) increased benefits for the wives of totally and permanently incapacitated veterans, and
(2) an immediate independent judicial inquiry into the effect on Vietnam veterans of their exposure to herbicides and pesticides.'
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-ls the amendment seconded?
Mr Holding-Mr Deputy Speaker, I second the amendment.
Mr WHITE (McPherson) (5.53)-1 am very pleased that the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), generally speaking, supports the thrust of the Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill, which deserves the support of honourable members on both sides of this House. I would not disagree-I do not think many honourable members would-that many of the provisions in this Bill are perhaps somewhat overdue. Nevertheless, they are before us and they are most welcome. A whole range of measures in this Bill are to be applauded. I so applaud the Government and congratulate the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) for bringing them forward.
We have a repatriation system in this country of which I believe we should be very proud. That does not mean that it does not have some anomalies, nor does it mean that as time moves on and circumstances change we should let it fall into disrepair. The fact is that the responsibilities of

the Department of Veterans' Affairs are increasing and not decreasing as more and more veterans come within its area of responsibility and as veterans get older and need more care. I particularly applaud the main provisions of the Bill. The honourable member for Bonython has covered most of them and I do not intend to deal with them in any detail. I welcome the provision of repatriation benefits to members of peacekeeping forces prior to November 1981. As the honourable member for Bonython has said, Australia has been engaged in considerable peacekeeping forces over the years. I expect that this provision might cover up to 4,000 members of peacekeeping forces although I hope that not all of them are in such dire need that they will come forward to make claims.
We welcome the extension of the pension eligibility to merchant mariners of Commonwealth and allied countries. The House will remember that last year this provision was extended to Australian merchant mariners. There have been arguments over the years-I think it is a great pity that it has taken nearly 40 years to resolve this issuethat the merchant mariners did not bear the same brunt as people in the Services. To an extent some of those arguments are valid. It is true that the merchant mariners were not in uniform as such; they were not servicemen. Generally speaking, they were free to come and go as they were paid off. In some cases their pay was better. Nevertheless, many of them suffered great hardships and the dangers that all servicemen suffered in war theatres. Of course, some suffered a great deal more. Some were taken as prisoners of war. The great majority of these merchant mariners did their jobs as was expected of them. I am very pleased to see-I believe it is high time-the recognition that we are paying not only to Australian merchant mariners but also to those who served in Commonwealth and allied navies. Many Australians served in Commonwealth and allied merchant marine services.
The disability pension, 100 per cent of which will now be discounted for Service pension purposes, is a step forward. It is a disability pension, paid for the disability that someone has suffered. I do not think that a person who is in receipt of that pension should be taxed twice on it, so to speak. For some time tuberculosis pensioners have fought a hard and very astute fight to get their pensions restored. I fully support that measure. Most of them, prior to 1978, suffered great disability with that disease, with long cures, low insurance and hardship in getting employment. In some cases they were virtually outcasts from the society in which they lived. It is different now,

1968 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill

thank God. The treatment is quicker and more successful. But I think the Government was remiss in freezing that pension as it did in 1978.
The level of extra allowable income has moved up in line with social security movements; that is, from $20 to $30 for a single man and the same rate for married people. Again, that was overdue, not only for veterans but I believe also for people in receipt of social security benefits. The fact is, of course, that these days most benefits are indexed. It has been most unfair to freeze the level of extra allowable income. The 'arisen out of or 'attributable to' provisions will now be evened out across the board. That is most welcome. There should now be no difference in the treatment of veterans of different wars. I hope that proves to be the case.
I think some criticism is justified of the time it has taken the Government to move on the matter of Vietnam veterans. Of course, unfortunately, that matter has not yet been brought to a successful conclusion. Nevertheless, I think it is fair to say that the Australian Government is in the forefront in the treatment of Vietnam veterans now. Of all the countries I know that have undertaken projects to assist veterans of the Vietnam war Australia must be in the lead in its treatment of those people. The counselling centres that have been set up have been most successful. Studies are still going on. It could be argued that they should have been completed a long time ago. Perhaps that is right, but the fact is that they were not. They have now been undertaken. The report of the Senate inquiry should be presented by the end of November.
Mr Holding-You would support a judicial inquiry, wouldn't you?
Mr WHITE-I would not. One departmental study-the one into birth defects among children-should be completed by the end of this year. The study into the mortality of veterans should be completed next year. I think it would be very sensible to wait until we see the results of those studies instead of rushing into another judicial inquiry which, in my view, would be only cosmetic.
Mr Holding-You are a great disappointment.
Mr WHITE-lam glad I am a disappointment. I would hate to be one of the honourable member's friends. To be called a great disappointment by him is something of an accolade. I urge the Government to look at the long delays which are still inherent in the system. Some of them have been caused by representations received from the Returned Services League of Australia and others requesting that the system be amended. But the

fact is that the system we have, good as it is, is not coping with the people who are trying to use it. The delays are, I believe, unacceptable. I strongly urge the Government and the Minister to look at the total repatriation system of claims and benefits with a view to rewriting and revising it completely because what was good enough 40 years ago perhaps is not good enough now. It is hardly the fault of the veterans that they are caught up in a system which is imposing great delays on the processing of their claims and allowances. In conclusion, I again congratulate the Government and the Minister for bringing forward these measures. I urge the Department of Veterans' Affairs, the Minister and the Government to look at a total rewriting of the repatriation system, which has a lot of anomalies. I am sure it can be improved, particularly to allow the claims and appeals to be processed more quickly than at present.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (8.0)-The honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) has clearly put the view of the Opposition and indicated that the substantive amendments contained in the Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill are supported by the Opposition. Indeed, many of the present proposals were actually canvassed by way of an amendment moved by the Opposition in March earlier this year. That amendment was, of course, on that occasion defeated by the Government by the use of its superior numbers in this House. We welcome the change of heart. Perhaps it was not adequately explained at the time why the Government was taking the view that it then took. Nevertheless, I do not believe that we should be churlish about it. As far as we are concerned, it is better late than never.
That does not mean as far as I am concerned that this House should not address itself very seriously to the amendment moved by the honourable member for Bonython. I want to deal with that aspect of the amendment which refers to the need for a judicial inquiry into the effects of herbicidal spraying and the use of defoliants in Vietnam and their impact upon Vietnam veterans and their families. When I said by way of interjection to the honourable member for McPherson (Mr White) that I was disappointed with his contribution to this debate, I was not making a personal reflection. What I was seeking to do was to point out to the honourable member who himself had a distinguished record in Vietnam and who holds what would be regarded on any view of the matter as a very safe seat for the Government that I

Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1969

would have hoped that, as a result of his involvement, he would have been concerned to examine the plight and the problems of Vietnam veterans and to look at the mass of evidence which has been brought to public attention by the Vietnam veterans' organisation. My hope was that he would have been concerned to use his own knowledge and background and be influenced by his own natural sentiment. The fact that he holds a position within the Government parties caused me to hope also that he would use his voice on this occasion to remind the Government that this very important group of ex-servicemen has become a group of warriors forgotten by this Government.
The same patriotic appeals that we heard from various members of the Government when young Australians were conscripted or were part of the regular armed Services to go to Vietnam, the same concern and the same patriotic fervour have not been evident when these men who, on their own behalf and on behalf of their families, have asked for a judicial inquiry. They have not asked for any automatic compensation. On not one occasion have they ever demanded compensation as a right. On the basis of their experience, on the basis of suicide rates that are grossly disproportionate within their ranks and on the basis of continued illness, onsets of carcinoma and other diseases which are clearly related to chemical spraying, the Vietnam veterans have asked this Parliament and this Government time and time again for a judicial examination of their problems so that all the evidence can be considered. I have not heard to date from any Minister or any other Government member an argument that suggests that that is somehow an unreasonable request.
Why should the only people in this community who get the benefit of judicial inquiries or royal commissions be people who have broken the law? Why should the only people who are the subject of this kind of interrogation, this judicial process, which is essentially a process designed to examine the evidence and pursue it wherever it may lead, be the tax evaders or members of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union of Australia? Here we have one group of Australian citizens who have been saying to this Government for many years: 'We believe that, as a result of our service and our perception of our service to this country, something should be done'. It was not their political decision that placed them in Vietnam; it was the decision of Ministers sitting opposite. But, having endeavoured to discharge, to the best of their ability, their duties as members of the armed Services, they came back to Australia. They now find themselves suffering a range of diseases. In many cases they are concerned that their

exposure to those defoliants has not only affected them but also caused serious defects in their children and has produced an incredible range of pressures and tensions in their domestic situations.
The Vietnam veterans have said to this Government on the basis of scientific and medical evidence available to them: 'We believe we are entitled to have a royal commission which will test the evidence that we will bring. We will bring our scientific advisers. We will bring our medical advisers. They can give their evidence under oath and be subject to cross-examination'. Is that an unreasonable request? They have added: 'Let the Government, the Department of Defence and the Department of Veterans' Affairs which have spent thousands and thousands of taxpayers' dollars resisting this argument bring their experts to be subject to the same adversary process, the same process of cross-examination and then let the royal commission decide where the truth lies'. In Australia where we have a Prime Minister who recently felt the need to talk about fairness and equity, has there ever been a fairer question posed to any government? Is it not a matter of equity that this group without a single paid organiser and with a membership the greater proportion of whom suffers a range of illnesses, with its lack of resources, has virtually had to fight this Government for every concession that has been won? It is not good enough for the honourable member for McPherson to stand up and to say: 'Oh, this Government has treated Vietnam veterans better than any government in the world'.
I refer the House to a recent article in the Melbourne Herald by Bruce Wilson in Washington. He describes the attitude of the Reagan Administration and the Veterans' Administration in the United States of America. What has been their approach? It is the same as this Government's. Mr Wilson states:
. . . it has now become quite clear that the VA's-
That is, Veterans' Administration-
real aim is to stall. stall and then stall again.
He points out that a group of American Congressmen is now so concerned about the stalling capacities of the Veterans' Administration in the United States that it is now combining within the resources of the Congress to take the administration of those problems away from the Veterans' Administration. Is the situation any different here? The only difference, I suppose, is that in the United States there are some Congressmen across party lines who, as a matter of conscience, are not prepared to tolerate an attitude which means stall, stall and stall again. The same terms could

1970 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill

be aptly applied to the attitude of the present Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) and the Department of Veterans' Affairs. He talked about the achievement of counselling services as though they were some beneficial handout to veterans by this Government. How did counselling services come about? The Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner), who is sitting at the table and who is, I believe, a man of some conscience on this matter, knows as well as I do that counselling services did not come about as a result of any initiative within the Government or the Department of Veterans' Affairs. They came about because one more veteran hung himself and there was a pile of correspondence from an anguished widow to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) pointing out that this was likely to happen again. In that situation, as a result of the pressure from Vietnam veterans and their organisation, counselling services were created.
On the last occasion this matter was debated the Minister who is sitting at the table cited in this House figures that were wrong. He knows now that they were wrong. I do not believe he did so deliberately. I have enough good grace and enough regard for the Minister to say that he was fed the same misinformation from the Department which marks that Department's continued approach to this matter. How can we talk about equity and justice? The Minister or any member of the Government could not deny that, as a result of the existence of the Vietnam Veterans Association, of its seeking scientific evidence from America and of the capacity of its scientific adviser whose view was accepted by the Repatriation Review Tribunal, Colin Simpson's cancer was found to be caused by his exposure to toxic chemicals while in Vietnam. Therefore the Tribunal found in favour of his family.
What would have happened if the Vietnam Veterans Association had been prepared to accept the glib assertions of Ministers on behalf of this Government? If it had not been prepared, with its meagre resources and its honorary membership, to chase to America for evidence which in this case gave justice to a family that would have preferred the life of the father, this would not have happened. We cannot bring him back. For how long will the future of so many of these families have to rest upon the capacity of this organisation which, time and time again in its representations to the Minister for Veterans'Affairs, is subjected to continual and wilful misrepresentation of its cause? We are told that there is a Senate inquiry. How did we get a Senate inquiry? Every member of the Liberal Party voted against having any inquiry at all.

Mr Scott-They opposed it.
Mr HOLDING-They opposed it. But now that it has been forced upon them they embrace it because they have the numbers on it. I will wait to see the results of that inquiry. I must say that I have not been impressed by the fact that before the evidence was even completed the committee's Chairman-a Government nominee, of coursereleased a Press statement, on 31 May 1982, wherein he expressed doubts about the need for a judicial inquiry, as sought by the Vietnam veterans. Who is kidding whom? I do not believe that all honourable members on the other side of the House are men who are blind to injustice where it occurs and I do not believe that all the truth exists on this side of the House. But if there are men of conscience on that side of the House it is time they entered this debate and it is time they examined the evidence of the Vietnam Veterans Association.
I sat and listened to evidence given to that inquiry by a Captain Manning. I know nothing about the man. For all I know he is a man of great integrity. But he was financed and paid by the Department of Veterans' Affairs. He was paid for a very lengthy examination to do what? It was to examine flight paths to try to prove that not too many Australian servicemen in Vietnam were exposed to chemical defoliants. I do not object to his doing that. I do not object to the Department of Veterans' Affairs putting together that sort of team to make that sort of investigation. But if it was good enough for the paid officers of the Department of Veterans' Affairs to spend their time on this matter and to go public disputing the arguments of the Vietnam Veterans Association, and if the Minister is so confident that he is prepared to spend public money on this matter, why should not that evidence be given to an independent judicial tribunal where it can be cross examined, weighed and tested and where the adversary process can measure inaccuracy? It is the same old story-stall, stall, stall.
While officers of the Department of Veterans' Affairs are saying that they are men of good will and that they want to see that something is done about these men Senator Messner, with a broad smile on his face, has his less senior officers, such as Captain Manning, doing otherwise. Only today in the news services a Dr Spragg, who is a psychiatrist and who is a spokesman paid for by the Department-I do not know the extent of his research-was reported as saying, in speaking at a conference in departmental time about his use of departmental money, that he discounts any possibility of agent orange or any chemical being the

Repatriation Legis/ation Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1971

cause of any veterans' problems, that the problems are due to post-traumatic stress disorders. I do not object to his saying that but I object to public money being used to put a one-sided argument in public when this Government and this Minister are not prepared to take that evidence and put it where it ought to be-before an impartial, judicial inquiry, call it a royal commission if you will. If the evidence is that good it will stand up. If it will not stand up it is time we sought justice and truth on behalf of these men.
That is all that they have ever asked for. I think it is reasonable for a married woman who has had two perfectly normal children and whose next child after her husband came back from Vietnam was born with a gross deformity still to want to have another child. But she has that doubt. Is there no compassion in this Government that it is not prepared to try to resolve that doubt or to pursue the evidence and let the truth fall where it may? That is all these men have ever asked for. That is all their families and wives have ever asked for. The Government has suppressed evidence. It refuses to answer the simplest questions. I have had a question on this subject on the Notice Paper since April 1981. A simple question directed to the Prime Minister is still unanswered, and it will not be answered. The attitude of the Government towards this issue is a national scandal. It can only purge its contempt of our ex-service organisations, it can only serve justice for members of the Vietnam Veterans' Association if it is prepared to grasp the net~le and say that they are entitled to a full examination of their problems within the framework of a judicial inquiry, nothing more. Nothing less will satisfy them.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (8.21 )-1 support the amendment, put forward so ably by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) and seconded by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), with regard to the Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill 1982. I do this with a heavy heart because over the last months I have heard on a number of occasions attempts by the Opposition to get the Government to recognise and to move to the benefit of Vietnam veterans or forgotten soldiers. I should like briefly to go over the Vietnam tragedy of 14 years as it was seen and told by some creditable persons in recent months. On 9 September this year a Brisbane man shot himself dead. On the following day the Courier-Mail reported:

There are those who believe that bullet was fired not by his own hand, but by the Vietcong, 6000 miles away in South Vietnam 14 years ago.
His father, for example, 'The Vietnam war had a marked effect on my son,' he said yesterday.
'He saw some terrible things. He told me the Vietnamese woman who did his laundry was beheaded by the Vietcong and her head was nailed to the door.
'He'd been a very quiet, serious kid; he loved cars, he didn't drink or smoke.
'The only girl he ever had was his wife, Ira, and they were married just before he went to Vietnam.
'He just wasn't prepared for what he saw there-none of them was.'
A doctor has reported that when Graham saw the movie Apocalypse Now it re-created the war for him in all its threedimensional sound-wracked reality.
'How,' Graham asked his wife, Ira, as he glanced at other filmgoers as the film blasted across the screen, 'can those people sit here and eat ice cream?'
What Graham Rolley-
The young man who took his life-
saw in Vietnam to change his life was military warfare on a huge scale while people in other parts of the world were starving, blood trails where the shells he had fired during the night had landed.
They were the things he told his father about, and how they worried him.
As the years rolled on, Graham, now 36, became familiar with the wards and psychiatrists of Greenslopes Repatriation Hospital.
And now he is dead.
'It was Vietnam that caused it all,' his sister, Mrs Susan Bennett, said:
'He was obsessed by it. He was always talking about it, and going to see films like Apocalypse Now and the Deerhunter over and over again.
"He would say it never solved anything, that it was just a waste of human life.
But he never said he shouldn't have gone. That's the way he was-if there was a job to be done, he just did it.'
Graham was to have appeared in court again yesterday for sentence.
Instead his barrister, Mr Des Draydon, told Judge Gibney:
'Perhaps now something can be done to destroy the public belief that Vietnam returned servicemen are whingers who are trying to make a quick buck out of pensions.'
I realise that this matter sounds sensational. It is all the more sensational to me because it is a reality to which many people want to be kept blinded. On an AM program the same day Mr Des Draydon, who was representing this young man, was questioned by John Austin, who asked:
How can you be so sure that the emotional disturbance that was the experience of Graham Rolley is really typical of Vietnam veterans?
Des said:
Not all veterans do. Many go through it initially. Some are going through it years later. I can only rely on the scientific

1972 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Repatriation Legis/ation Amendment Bill

evidence available. that evidence is mounting. Don't just ascribe it to general madness. This isn't madness. These are people reliving the horrors of a war.
John Austin asked, in effect, whether it would not be better just to forget about the Vietnam war; it is all over now.
Draydon said:
One can't forget about it. One can't say, 'Let's just forget about it, it never happened', and hide one's head in the sand. What society, who sent them there-society sent them there, society has to say, 'Boys, although we may say now we should never have been there, you fellows did the right thing. We sent you there and we welcome you as people who did the right thing'.
Draydon called for more public awareness of the problem and for more sympathy for it. The Courier-Mail took up the tragic record a number of days later on 16 September when Bob Hannah, the Queensland welfare officer for the Vietnam Veterans Association, was reported as beginning a register of dead Vietnam veterans, marking the reasons for death. Suicide and murder were among the violent deaths. The article states:
On almost every page, among the conventional blue ink entries of cancer, leukaemia and heart attacks, there is at least one in red. Sometimes there are two or three, on one page there are four.
Already it suggests that more veterans have died since the Vietnam conflict ended than the 473 killed there but as yet no one knows just how many. Welfare organisations have not bothered to compile follow-up statistics.
Bob and other association workers have had to go to cemetries and find the names and serial numbers of dead veterans and then carry out their own investigations to find what happened to them.
'No one else wants to know,' he said. 'The Government, the RSL, medical people, welfare workers, no-one is interested.'
Nearly all the ex-Diggers were in their late 20s or early 30s when they died and as Bob pointed out, they were the fittest men physically and psychologically Australia ever sent to war.
'Something happened to them there and it's time the Federal Government made some serious attempt to find out . . .'
That is Bob Hannah, the welfare officer for the Vietnam Veterans Association, who was being reported. On 17 September the Vietnam Veterans Association stated:
The reasons for demanding a Royal Commission were strong and clear in 1980. They are stronger and clearer now. Veterans must learn, from a non-political and impeccable source, whether or not those toxic chemicals have adversely affected them.
The Association pointed out that it and 39 other national ex-service organisations are calling for the royal commission that we are now calling for. The following day, in a letter to the editor of the Courier-Mail, the Minister for Veterans Affairs (Senator Messner) defended the Government's lack of action. In doing so he brought up the second aspect which we are fighting for in our amendment. The first one is an immediate,

independent judicial inquiry into the effect on Vietnam veterans of their exposure to herbicides and pesticides. The information I put forward, I think, is a strong basis upon which to call for this judicial inquiry, particularly in view of the fact that 39 associations, including the Vietnam Veterans Association, are calling for that inquiry 14 years after the veterans were seduced into giving themselves, at the peak of their physical fitness, for this country. What is so different about this matter is that they are cast aside when other people are feted on ANZAC Day and on other occasions when we get together to revere what Australians have done in war. The second aspect of the amendment seeks to increase benefits for the wives of totally and permanently incapacitated veterans. In a letter, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) wrote:
The government has acted to make available free medical treatment in urgent cases for Vietnam veterans and their wives, even if they have no repatriation entitlement.
But there is a problem there. There is a loophole. The treatment is just for urgent cases and most of these people are chronically ill. The illnesses of veterans are going on and on and they are reflecting on their wives so that they are in fear of having a family and in fear of how their children will be affected. They are not being properly compensated. In the Courier Mail of 16 September an article by Ken Blanch stated:
A Veterans Affairs Department officer who addressed a meeting of Vietnam veterans a couple of weeks ago put their problems down to post-service stress and said it was no different from that suffered by participants in Australia's other wars.
He angered the listeners by telling them: 'Sometimes puppy dogs feel sick, too. They go off by themselves and have a sleep and then they feel better'.
I make it clear, as I did in March of this year, to honourable members on the other side of the House what sorts of problems veterans who were exposed to agent orange have been suffering from. We are not talking of trifling medical disorders. The conditions include carcinomas of several kinds, nausea, diarrhoea, weight loss, lethargy, depression, anxiety, fits of rage, insomnia, headaches and skin rashes. The cumulative effect is a high incidence of suicide. Their families also are really suffering. They do not receive compensation. It is now well known that their children may have a number of physical deformities. When we add to this already extensive list of physical problems the emotional pressures placed on a family trying to decide whether to keep having children after one or more miscarriages or the birth of a deformed child we are getting to the root of why families break up or why people commit suicide or turn to crime.

Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1973

This Government has paid lip service to Vietnam veterans but its expressed concern about the weak, the young and the infirm has not been evident from its treatment of Vietnam veterans and, I emphasise, their spouses and families. Those women are bearing the brunt of the exposure of their husbands to herbicides and defoliants. Despite extensive evidence which has been available for some years about the very real human problem of these veterans and their families, it took until about four months ago for the Minister for Veterans Affairs to announce that there would be free emergency treatment for wives and children at repatriation hospitals. The problem is that the facilities are earmarked for emergency treatment only. I am concerned about the number of veterans and families who are chronically affected by different diseases and do not have access to these facilities.
If this House can hold judicial inquiries into meat scandals or any number of issues which have come before the chamber month after month, why can it not hold a judicial inquiry into what is wrong with Vietnam veterans and the rotten deal they are getting in Australia? If honourable memers are so proud of Australia~-they have been saying that during the last week when the Commonwealth Games were being held-and if they are so concerned when they line up with their medals, march and hold their heads up high on ANZAC Day, why are they not calling out aloud and why is not someone in this House, which is rapidly becoming deficient and defunct, doing something about this very real problem? Vietnam veterans and their families should be compensated. Something should have been done. If this House rejects the Opposition's amendment and continues to reject the pleas of the returned soldiers it is a sick institution.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (8.35)-1 will be extremely brief on this matter; I will speak for less than three minutes. Recently I was approached by a constituent who is 74 years old and who is trying to survive on a pension. Her pension is being eroded because she is looking after her son who volunteered for the armed forces and served in the front line in Vietnam. That son-I promised I would not use names-has found that what happened to him in Vietnam has left him in the situation where he has had to go for mental attention. I think this point should be made and hammered home to this Government: If we have compassion for the people of Australia whom we put into uniforms of various colours we also have responsibility.

In this case I put on the record my concern for a serious situation which has arisen for one constituent. The information I have leads me to believe that in a few months the person concerned will become one more of the statistics that have been revealed by other honourable members speaking on this question. I just put the matter on the record and thank the Government for the opportunity to do so. 1 ask the Government to have the compassion to look after the veterans that it sent to Vietnam, a decision that I, as a citizen, opposed. Nevertheless, I want to see those Vietnam veterans treated with all the dignity, respect and compassion that they deserve.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (8.37)-1 hope that the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) will provide to the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) the details of the case he just mentioned.
Mr Scott-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I am sorry but 1 did say that I promised not to disclose the names.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- There is no point of order but the honourable member has made his point.
Mr THOMSON--I can understand the honourable member for Hindmarsh not wanting to announce the names publicly. Perhaps he could raise the matter privately with the Minister for Veterans' Affairs. This debate started to be a debate on the Repatriation Legislation Amendment Bill which is before the House. The honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) in fact gave what could be called a paean of praise to the Bill. He approved of it, and it has been approved of by very many announcements of veterans' organisations. I have some Press releases in front of me. 'Veterans score well in Budget' says Sir William Keys. 'Best Budget ever for ex-servicemen and women' is the comment from an old comrade of mine, Bruce Ruxton of the Victorian Returned Services League. Many years ago Mr Ruxton served under my command, so I know him very well.
This is a good Bill. It does a great deal for veterans. It picks up a great many things that have been of concern to many members of the Government. There is always a constraint on financial availability, but this Bill picks up some very important factors. It has been hailed by veterans organisations. I received a letter from my own branch of the RSL only this week praising the Bill and all it has done. There is no doubt that it has done a great deal to meet many of the problems put forward to the Government by the RSL and other Service organisations. It is a very good Bill.

1974 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Repatriation Legis/ation Amendment Bill

A great deal has been said about the problems of Vietnam veterans. I am certainly personally aware of them. I have served in a number of wars from 1942 to the end of 1972. There are problems for all ex-servicemen. Vietnam veterans have been treated more generously than the veterans of any other war of which I have personally had experience. The honourable member for McPherson (Mr White) made a similar point. There is no doubt that the Government has done a great deal. The Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner), who is in the chamber, has done a great deal. Of course there will be problems. There are problems after every war. Old soldiers all round the place realise that. I really do take objection to one statement made by the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling). She said that Vietnam veterans were cast aside on ANZAC Day. Nothing could be further from the truth. My personal experience is that that is quite the opposite of the truth.
Mrs Darling-Mr Deputy Speaker, I rise on a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mrs DarlingYes, I do. I did not say that. I would not like the Minister to think that I said that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If that be the case, the honourable member will have an opportunity. The honourable member may seek the call from the Chair at a later juncture.
Mr THOMSON-I wrote the honourable member's words down at the time. I may have misheard them but I do not think that I did. 'Cast aside on ANZAC Day' were the words I heard. I immediately thought that every ANZAC Day I am entitled to march with veterans of a number of wars but I always choose to march with those of Vietnam though, of course, most are a good deal younger than I am.
I speak now very briefly on the amendment. Any government is always constrained by finance. It is true in respect of the first part of the amendment concerning increased benefits for the wives of totally and permanently incapacitated veterans that the dependants pension for such wives has not been increased for a number of years. Successive governments have taken the view that available funds should be used in ensuring that incapacitated veterans and war widows are adequately compensated in terms of pension and have the best possible medical treatment facilities available to them. As an indication of this policy, I point out that a TPI veteran, in receipt of a service pension, and his wife will receive $22.92 a

week increase on 11 November this year as a result of this Bill. Indexation of the pension will bring the total family income to $280.85 a week for a man and his wife. In addition, the veteran is eligible for free medical treatment and the wife is eligible for pensioner health benefits.
The second issue in the amendment relates to a judicial inquiry. The Government's attitude is that a judicial inquiry would not provide a scientifically valid answer whether the problems that some veterans and their families are experiencing could be related to possible exposure to herbicides or any aspect of service in Vietnam. I said that from my personal experience these sorts of things happen to veterans of all wars. I understand that the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment inquiry on the use of pesticides, which I understand will be completed by the end of November, is capable of covering these relevant matters. The Committee has similar powers to those of a judicial inquiry including the right to summon witnesses and documents. In some respects it may have wider powers than a judicial inquiry. It is for these reasons that the Government rejects the amendments put forward by the Opposition.
One point was made by the honourable member for McPherson. I say the gallant and honourable member for McPherson because he merits that title through the decoration which he achieved in Vietnam. I am glad that the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) had the grace to apologise for the comment he made by way of interjection.
Mr Holding-I did not apologise. That was the last thing I did. I said that he misunderstood what I said.
Mr THOMSON-I did not misunderstand what the honourable member said for a moment. The Minister for Veterans' Affairs recently announced at the national conference of the Returned Services League that a review of legislation would be undertaken as a matter of priority as requested by the honourable member for McPherson. This will mean a simplification and a rationalisation of the very complex provisions contained at present in the Repatriation Act and its associated Acts. I am informed that the Minister has had discussions with Sir William Keys on this matter to ensure that there will be full involvement of veteran organisations in the review. In this Bill, the Government has done a great deal for veterans of all wars. It has corrected many anomalies. It has also provided for Vietnam veterans additional benefits which are not in this Bill but some of which have been referred to by other

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1975

honourable members. I commend the Bill to the House.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mrs DARLING-I do.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member may proceed.
Mrs DARLING-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I would like to explain the situation that was just misrepresented by the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson). I am sure that he did not do that purposely. I do not think he does that type of thing. Most definitely he did misunderstand because I am quite sure that Vietnam veterans are allowed to march on ANZAC Day. It was not marching on ANZAC Day that I was thinking of when I made my appeal for special consideration. In mentioning ANZAC Day, the point I was drawing to attention-even if I did become emotive at that point and perhaps juxtapose some words-was that on ANZAC Day when many Government members and other members of our society are marching and feeling very proud of Australia and all they have done for returned soldiers, they should think of the injustice being done to Vietnam veterans. They are different from other returned soldiers as they have been exposed to a new element, herbicides, which all the evidence would suggest have ruined their lives and are causing them cancer. Veterans are dying from cancer and their children may do also. The injustice is that they are calling, in association with 39 other associations, for a judicial inquiry but are suffering in the meanwhile.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I feel that the honourable member has quite established her point.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.

DIESEL FUEL TAXES LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 17 August, on motion by MrHodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)--Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering the Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Bill, the Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Bill (No.1) and the Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Bill (No.2), as they are associated measures. Of course, separate questions will be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKERIs it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these three measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (S.49)-At the outset, I express the Opposition's disgust with what is happening in this Parliament. Once again we have sat only for a few weeks in the Budget session but everything is now being rushed through. Already we have seen many examples of the Government absolving itself from any form of ministerial responsibility. During the last week when the Parliament sat, we saw the judiciary attacked by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). Now the Parliament itself is being treated with contempt. The Parliament is where members represent their people's interests. We have been through a debate where the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) took a very strong interest in the question of Vietnam veterans, where the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) wished to represent the people in her electorate and the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) wished to represent an individual.
It is very important that we use this Parliament as the elected representatives of our people to put the points of view of our electorates, various interests and various individuals. But again the Government is riding rough-shod over it. I am told that this debate is to be for 50 minutes as far as the Opposition is concerned. I suppose that all the back bench members of the Governmentnot one of them is here-will cop it. They will not say a word about these very important measures. I think this is absolutely disgusting. We were to have 110 minutes. There were to be five speakers from our side. We are now told that we are to have 50 minutes. I will have to cut my speech short or my colleague the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) will not be able to say a thing.

1976 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

I just put on record that we are disgusted at the way in which this Parliament is being run.
The Opposition does not oppose these Bills. Their purpose is to introduce a system of rebates on duty paid on diesel fuel used off-road in agriculture, mining, forestry and fishing. Fuel used in residential premises, hospitals and aged persons homes and nursing homes will also be eligible for the rebate. These Bills replace the automatic exemption which previously applied to all off-road use of distillate. The rationale for exempting off-road use was that excise was essentiallya road tax. However, the apparent rationale for removing off-road exemption and then introducing a system of rebates for most off-road users is in fact to apply a similar tax on rail transport to that which currently applies to road transport. The excise is to be applied at the rate of 6.155c per litre, the same as for petrol, because the Budget also raised the excise by one cent.
We do not oppose the Bills because they are Budget Bills, but it is impossible to be other than highly critical of what the Government is doing and how it is doing it. The measure will particularly disadvantage primary industry, the mining industry and the tourist industry. The Bills represent another pathetic example of the confusion, the bumbling and the sheer incompetence of the Fraser Government. This Government has proven itself to be not only a disastrous economic manager but also an inept and inefficient administrator. The Bills are designed to implement a measure which has been poorly thought out. They have been amended; they have been withdrawn. Debate on them was called off in the last session of Parliament and now we are finally debating them nearly two months after the measure was announced on Budget night way back in August. National Country Party members and Ministers and Liberal Party members representing rural seats have been subject to so much embarrassment and confusion that they have not known which scapegoat to blame in their own Government. The honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe) even blamed the Bureau of Customs rather than the Government of which he is a member. Admittedly there has been a lot of work on the back benches of the Government trying to get the administration, the eligibility, of these measures cleared up. But it is absolutely hopeless. The people who hope to get the rebate do not know where they are and the bills are mounting up. I understand that some forms were printed after August, and there was another new form in September. I do not know how the Government can print forms when the measure still has not been debated in the Parliament. Is that again

another example of treating the Parliament with absolute contempt?
Large fuel users in primary industry, such as fishermen, have had to extend their overdraft limits. The people I have been talking with over the last few weeks fear that they may be eventually faced with requests for forms of documentation that they cannot provide to gain the rebate. Several fishermen have shown me the most basic of dockets and say that if they are given rebates on the basis of those eventually-I do not know when it will be; it is two or three months since the measure was first announced-as they should be, it is highly likely that abuses and corruption will occur. I think we need to take this very seriously. I was shown dockets which are entirely handwritten. I am sure the fishermen should be eligible for the rebate, but they point out that, if they are to be paid on that basis eventually, we will have a lot of corruption.
The people supposedly eligible have had to expend thousands of dollars due to the incompetence of the Government, which decided to change from a certification system to a rebate system fundamentally to get more revenue, to attack the State railway systems and to disadvantage several industries. I could name the wheat and sugar industries-most of the crop industries-and industries such as mining, forestry and tourism. All this was done on the ostensible rationale that there were abuses in the certification system. There were abuses, but they could have been tidied up by recertification, sounder procedures and higher penalties for corruption. What makes the Government think that there will not be abuses and rorts with the rebate system? The Government simply cannot have it both ways. The Budget estimate was that $176m would be gained on the basis of 5.155c a litre. The figure is now 6.l55c a litre. It will produce about $2 10m in a full year or $192m this year. Surely that is not all due to abuses. So the Government cannot say that it is just tidying up abuses. It is simply a revenue measure. The Government has to make up its mind which it is going to be; and I say that this is simply to get revenue.
The relevant Minister is trying to have it both ways. He put out a release saying that it will be easy to get the rebate-details have to be given only once and from then it will all flow smoothly. It looks to me like a paper shuffler's paradise. How will the army of bureaucrats who will have to be employed discern between the fuel used by a truck off-road and then on-road? I cite the example of a wheat truck in a paddock carting wheat to the silos. Fishermen have been cynically amused by the naive inquiries that they have had

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1977

from officials asking how much fuel they use. Of course, fishermen are particularly angry because the price of distillate has risen by over 600 per cent since 1964, and this is for an industry which receives nil assistance in terms of the Industries Assistance Commission's measure of effective
protection.
On 9 September I put a question on notice to the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). He admitted in his answer that the changeover to the rebate system was not properly thought out. He said that any change in rail freight for primary producers will be a matter for State rail authorities. I am not sure where that leaves producers in South Australia where the Commonwealth railways transports the wheat. Are they to be excluded from the freight increases? The Minister says that he does not know what effect increased rail freight will have on road transport and the deplorable state of many country roads through cutbacks in funding. The Minister in his answer said that he did not know how much extra income would be earned from the grain industry through this increased freight charge. I understand that the National Farmers Federation has estimated a
20 per cent increase in rail freights while there are other estimates as high as $20m alone for the wheat industry. There will be an additional cost of at least $30m for primary industry; that is, if all the forms flow and everyone gets the rebate. But a lot is still subject to doubt. What about the cane trains and the sugar trains? Do we know exactly how they go for any exemption?
If the Government is seriously concerned about abuses in the certificate system, why has it not seriously considered the suggestion that fuel be coloured so that on-farm distillate is clearly distinguishable from off-farm distillate. The number of inspectors needed to keep tabs on this would be a useful comparison to make with the extra administrative cost for the rebate system in general. I note that the original Bill contained a minimum claim limit of $100. Many small farmers would have been disadvantaged by that limit. At 6.155c a litre a farmer would have had to buy 1,600 litres of diesel to be eligible to make a claim. The Government has been forced to change the minimum claim limit to 1,000 litres or within three months of a previous claim. But I assure the House that many people in primary industry still do not know where they are with this measure.
Under the system of rebates all purchases of diesel fuel will be made on the duty paid price. To obtain the rebate the user must lodge a claim with the Collector of Customs. Claims for rebates will be limited to a minimum amount and users must keep records of fuel purchases and usage for a

period of not less than two years. Just how long users will have to wait before a rebate claim is
processed is not made clear. It seems to me that this is a rather complicated way to impose an excise on diesel used by the railways. Is there also the implication of widespread misuse of the off-road exemption by primary producers and others, because I note that the Bill contains investigative powers essential for the effective administration of the new rebate system? If we accept that $30m or more will be the additional farm cost, it can be seen that while this is a small addition to the total level of farm costs, it is not an insignificant amount to producers facing the prospect of a 40 per cent decline in farm incomes this year, the combined result of a rapid acceleration of farm costs and the drought. Of course, part of the acceleration in farm costs is due to the Budget. Freight is only one aspect of farm costs affected by the new diesel excise arrangements.
Although rebates are to be paid on diesel used off-road, producers will initially have to meet the 6.155c per litre. As a result, any change in the excise arrangements will have a major direct impact on farm costs through on-farm fuel usage. Rural industries, including fishing, are big fuel users, and the biggest fuel users are diesel users. For example, in the wheat industry fuel equals 13 per cent of total cash costs. In the dairy industry fuel equals 6.5 per cent of total cash costs. In the sugar and tobacco industries fuel equals 10.5 per cent of total cash costs.
In the fishing industry fuel equals 30 per cent to 40 per cent of total cash costs. The figures I have given are taken from Bureau of Agricultural Economics surveys for the years 1979 and 1980. Tuna boats and prawn boats use about 200 litres of fuel an hour and in the average year they cruise for 3,000 hours, so this is very big money indeed. I just do not know for the life of me, if the idea of this measure is to provide for off-road use, why there cannot be a total exemption for the fishing industry. Surely even this Government can understand that fishing boats do not ride on roads. The fishing industry will be the most severely affected rural industry because of the large component of total cash costs of this industry that fuel represents. As we all know, parts of the fishing industry are already experiencing severe economic difficulties.
I would have liked to go through the mechanism of this legislation but I will leave that to other speakers. I hope that there will be some from the Government side. Let us just take some of the implications for the forestry industry and the mining industry. The legislation contains a very limited definition of forestry, including only those

1978 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

beneficiation operations carried out in the forest or plantation. On this basis forest operations will incur very significant additional costs because the mills are not directly located within the forest or plantation. Wood harvested from the forest is required to be transported some distance to pulp mills where beneficiation of the wood takes place. In the case of the mining industry, the definition of mining includes, firstly, the dressing or beneficiation, at the mining site or elsewhere, of minerals et cetera. This would be analagous to the process of pulp making.
Secondly, the definition includes the transporting of the minerals or ore from the mining site to the place where they are dressed or beneficiated. This would also be analagous to the transportation of wood from the forest to the pulp mill. I do not have time to go into all that. The forestry industry says that it wants to be treated equally with the mining industry. It does not quite know where it stands. It wants clarification.
If we look at the eligibility criteria for the exemptions that have been set out for the mining industry it is very easy to see that these measures will add significantly to rail costs for coal producers in both New South Wales and Queensland. The Australian Mining Industry Council has estimated that overall they will add $50m a year to costs. The mining industry itself is still concerned that the legislation is unclear, particularly with respect to the position regarding iron ore miners who process, or crush, the ore. This is still uncertain. In Western Australia one iron ore producer may be in a different position from another iron ore producer. It depends on whether the producer uses a private railway or its own railway or whether it actually crushes the ore or beneficiates it. I have been unable to find out exactly what the situation will be. Fundamentally we have been faced with the fact that the Government is amending these Bills and that the back bench has been worried about eligibility and administration. I hope that the relevant Minister will clear up some of these things in his contribution tonight.
I will not speak for much longer. I wish simply to say that these are rotten Bills. They are poorly thought through. The Government has put up a straw man to say that there are abuses. The legislation is all about getting more revenue for the Government. It is all about putting additional costs on to the primary industries of this country, whether they be agricultural or mining, and the tourist industry. I hope that the Government can come forward with some explanation. All that it has done in the last two months or so and all that it will do until people get some of the money back through rebates is to place an added cost burden

on some of our primary producers and other people in this country who are trying to make a living even under this rotten Government.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (9.4)-ln speaking on these three pieces of legislation relating to
changed arrangements regarding diesel fuel excise I wish to make some comments about various sectors of industry, those that are directly affected by the rebate and those that are not. However, before proceeding I point out that the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) asked whether this legislation is designed to raise revenue. I would have thought that that was fairly obvious. In fact there has been an estimate of the revenue that will be raised. According to my figures, which may be a little out of date at this time, the benefit to revenue will be $16lm this year and $l72m in a
full year. So of course these Bills relate to revenue. I cannot see why the honourable member is questioning that when he himself admits that since they are Budget Bills, horrific as he said they were, the Opposition will nevertheless not be opposing them.
The honourable member made much play of the additional cost burden that would be borne by the mining and fishing industries and other primary industries as a result of these Bills. One of the reasons why they have been delayed is that a number of back benchers have been concerned that the administrative arrangements that were originally proposed should be streamlined and modified. I believe that the situation now is that a significant cost burden will not be placed on those people who will be exempt. Perhaps in the case of
the fishing industry some fishing co-operatives, for example, which have to pay for their fuel on a cash on delivery basis will have to carry the interest burden for some weeks, but the very purpose of amending this legislation was to make it easier, more administratively streamlined, and not to impose a cost burden on those exempt categories about which the honourable member for Werriwa was speaking.
The original proposal for the administering of the rebate was that it could be claimed only as it accumulated to the level of $100 in value. There was some suggestion that it may be able to be claimed only at the end of the financial year. The responsible Minister has changed that so that the rebate can be claimed once 1000 litres-in effect, $61.55 worth of rebate-~have been purchased or once every three months, whichever is the sooner event. That has made a tremendous difference. I understand also that the rebate will be able to be claimed on the basis of presentation of consignment notes or evidence of delivery of the fuel. Evidence of payment will not be required. So an

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1979

exempt purchaser will be able to make an immediate claim for the rebate once the fuel has been delivered to him, on presentation of documentary evidence that it has been delivered to him.
I wish to mention some other groups in the community which, because of the change in the rebate from an off-road, on-road basis to a different basis, are naturally fairly unhappy about the additional costs that they will bear. I have before me a note which reminds me that my colleague the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe) pointed out to me some days ago that the distributor was to carry some burden. Generally he has to pay the oil companies the full price of the fuel within seven days whereas the farmer may pay when he gets the rebate. The other groups that are exempt-the people who are involved in charter shipping, or cruise operatorswill now be paying the levy. They may well question why they should have to pay a levy which applies for the Bicentennial Road Development Program, but I point out that those operators will benefit from that program in that the people they take on their boats will in many cases arrive at the port of embarkation by road. Much of the money collected under the Bicentennial Road Development Program will be spent on highways that are very close to and serve those areas of Queensland, such as the Great Barrier Reef, at which so many of these charter boat operators are based.
Public transport will have to pay the additional fuel excise. That means that rail and ferry operators, which were previously exempt, will now have to pay this excise. I cannot see that that will necessarily lead to disastrous consequences. In fact, one group that should be very pleased about that decision is the independent road transport operators, who will now have a much fairer chance to compete with State rail authorities. Some commercial operations which have been using diesel for heating purposes, such as dry cleaners, bakers, brickworks and others, will also be affected. In my electorate, an area which experiences cold winters, quite a number of commercial premises, clubs and such types of organisations use diesel for heating. Indeed liquid fuels should be conserved. I think those sorts of operations should have been looking carefully at using some substitute form of energy rather than scarce liquid fuels.
I believe local government has somewhat of a difficulty. I would like to put its case to the Minister because often local government has to pay substantially more for construction operations. In many cases that applies to small local government authorities which have a small ratepayer base. For

example, I can think of a number in my area where the additional bill for diesel will be, say, between $10,000 and $20,000. On a ratepayer basis it becomes quite significant because in many cases the smaller local government areas that have a big involvement in road construction and maintenance have a small ratepayer base.
It may be something like $2 or $3 per ratepayer whereas in larger provincial councils or metropolitan councils that do not have that construction activity the additional excise is barely noticeable. Of course, this measure has also reduced somewhat the benefit that the councils were to get from the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program. My colleague the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron), who will be making some comments later on, I am sure will mention the situation where people are reliant on diesel for power generation for their business activities. This applies to some motels and other tourist operations in isolated Australia which are not connected to bulk power supplies. They are reliant on diesel. This will affect their operations.
The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) asked why it was necessary to introduce these changes. I refer him to efficiency audit report No. 4 of the Auditor-General which examined the collection of excise duties and deferred Customs duties by the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs. In that report the Auditor-General pointed out that the opportunities for abuse of the system were widespread, that they occurred at the user, distributer and even the company level. Whilst it was very difficult to estimate the degree of abuse and the loss to revenue from that it was nevertheless felt that a change in the system was essential to try to overcome this abuse. I believe that there will be a significant number of additional public servants engaged to process and administer these applications. A figure of 120 has been used. Of course, the costs of those additional 120 bureaucrats will have to be offset against the abuse. Personally I would be interested to hear some more definitive figures of the costs of administering the scheme and the estimations of the abuse.
I wish to make sure that my colleague has time to speak in this debate. Before closing I would just like to raise one further issue. Perhaps the Minister could refer to this matter in his closing comments. The system of making claims for the rebate involves the applicant first making a claim and then he or she will be asked to provide certain basic pieces of information as to the use of diesel and the like. However, a number of people have asked me whether existing certificate holders will

1980 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

automatically be invited to make a claim; in other words, will the Department write to existing certificate holders outlining the procedure that is necessary for them to make their claims or will they, of their own accord have to write to the Department?
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.15)-1 enter this debate on one narrow interest-that is, my interest in the tourist industry.
Mr Harris-Self-interest.
Mr JOHN BROWN-No, it is not self interest. It is very unusual for me to be narrow. 1 try to adopt a broad view on all of these matters but because of my specific interest in the tourist industry I felt compelled to enter this debate. 1 think the decision the Government has made to remove the exemption that applied to some industries in some areas has been disastrous; in particular I apply that to tourism.
I guess that two factors are involved here. Firstly, this Government, which purports to be a government of private enterprise and a great efficient economic manager of this country, reveals itself as its period of office extendsprobably in a limited fashion-as being a government of ad hockery. So many decisions are made that can affect the industries that the Government purports to represent so desperately without reference to those industries that it is no wonder that the Australian Labor Party suddenly finds itself not being cossetted by industry but certainly being on a much more acceptable wave length with industrial leaders around this country. The great hopes that private enterprise had for the Fraser Government are suddenly disappearing. The decision on diesel excise is a fairly good example. I do not think the Government really realises the import of tourism to the Australian economy. It is probably the only chance we have in Australia of a growth industry which employs people and which is so labour intensive. Yet it strikes me as quite odd that this Government that purports to be a government of free enterprise has not yet come to grips with the great impact that the tourist industry has on our economy.
I will just relate a few simple facts to the Government for its own elucidation. The facts are these: The tourist industry provides 2.7 per cent of our gross domestic product; the mining industry provides 2.8 per cent; and the car manufacturing industry provides 2.6 per cent. I am sure that some of the honourable members sitting on the other side of the House do not realise just how important the tourist industry is to our economy in the broader sense. When I saw this move by the Government to introduce a new petrol excise Bill,

particularly on diesel fuel which, in terms of the Government announcement, was to extend the amount of money that would be available to improve public roads, I was disappointed if not surprised that while the exemption which has always applied to agriculture and to mining was retained
that which traditionally applied to tourism was removed. The tourist industry suddenly found itself with an imposition of a 6.16c per litre increase in the cost of its diesel fuel. I apply my criticism in particular to the islands off the Queensland coast. 1 am glad that the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh), who is seated at the table, is a Queensland representative, albeit from the National Country Party up on the Downs. Surely he must realise that the Great Barrier Reef lies off the coast of Queensland; that it is probably one of the world's greatest, if under-exploited, tourist attractions; and that all those coastal towns such as Mackay, Townsville, Proserpine and Cairns exist almost entirely on the prosperity of the off-shore islands.
Mr Donald Cameron-A gift from Joh BjelkePetersen to the world.
Mr JOHN BROWN-Joh Bjelke-Petersen would not know that they are there. He ignores them as much as this Government. He has exploited them and ignored them. To impose an increase of 6.1 c a litre on the cost of diesel fuel to these off-shore islands is tantamount to ringing the death knell for them. I hope that the people in the coastal towns in northern Queensland who are totally represented by the Government understand what the Government is doing to the iron lung which keeps them in business-the off-shore islands.
The criterion that was applied to remove this
excise exemption to increase the amount of money available for public roads has no application whatever to those off-shore islands. Anyone who has been to the Heron, Dunk or Hayman islands would realise that there are no public roads upon them. The life-blood of those islands is diesel fuel. As the honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) pointed out, with a certain amount of ignorance, of course they are not attached to mainland electricity. They generate their electricity by virtue of diesel fuel. They also run their boats on diesel fuel. They run their tractors on diesel fuel. In fact, they put diesel fuel in their boats to go to the mainland to bring back diesel fuel to sustain their electricity supply. Yet this Government, in its unthinking, uncaring and stupid fashion, under this Bill, is removing the exemption of 5.16c a litre from the tourist resorts and is also increasing the price by 1c a litre; so those resorts are now looking at an increase of

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1981

6.1 c a litre in the cost of their diesel fuel. As I pointed out before, this will almost sound the death knell for them. It is a pity that the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen)-I cannot think of his portfolio; the Minister for nothing-has left the House because I have in my hand a letter from Mr Jim Kennedy, a great friend of the Minister for nothing, the Deputy Chairman of the Travel and Tourist Association in Queensland. It is a plaintive appeal to the Government to rethink what this piece of legislation will do to the tourism industry off the coast of Queensland.
I am pleased to report that my leader, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), a couple of weeks ago in my company in Queensland made a statement to the Press that the Australian Labor Party in government would restore the exemption that the tourism industry, particularly off the Queensland coast, had from the imposition of petroleum excise. I must say that all of those resort owners, from Jim Kennedy down, are delighted to think that at least the Labor Party has an understanding of the importance to the Queensland economy and the Australian economy of the tourism industry, particularly on the off-shore islands, and that the Labor Party understands the great opportunities that the tourism industry offers to employ all of the half a million people who find themselves unemployed under the present regime.
Of course, most of those people are unskilled or semi-skilled. The tourism industry provides great opportunities for people with limited skills to find employment. As I said once before, no-one has yet invented a machine that makes a bed. All of those people who are employed on those islands off the Queensland coast are basically semi-skilled or unskilled. Yet the Government is cutting off the opportunities the tourism industry on the islands provides not only to employ the people who are already there but also, through its proliferation, to employ some of the people who are languishing in the coastal towns in Queensland and who cannot find employment.
My task in speaking to this legislation is to implore the Government to look at what this Bill will do to those off-shore resorts. Mr Kennedy, in his letter to me that I mentioned earlier, pointed out exactly what effect the imposition of these provisions will have on some of those islands. I will give the examples he gave of estimates in specific terms of what this extra excise will cost those islands: Dunk Island, $30,000 a year; Happy Bay, $15,000 a year; Lindeman Island, $20,000 a year; Hayman Island, $100,000 a year; Daydream Island, $25,000 a year; South Molle Island, $60,000 a year; Great Keppel Island, $50,000 a year; Heron Island, $75,000 a year; Tangalooma,

$50,000 a year; and Brampton Island, $50,000 a year.
If honourable members opposite were to look at the profitability of the tourism industry in the presently declining economy under their administration, they would realise what an effect this will have on the viability of those islands, what an effect it will have on the tourism industry in Queensland and what effect it will have on those coastal towns which some honourable members opposite represent. It is high time that the Government looked at the inefficiency of its administration, controlled by the agrarian Bolsheviks of a 14-man Cabinet, eight of them cockies, five of them lawyers and only one who is neither and he is well on the way to becoming a millionaire. I refer to the right honourable member for Flinders, Sir Phillip Lynch, who is working very hard at it. It is time honourable members opposite realised that they are supposed to be representing the business community in this country. All they are representing are the narrow political views that they assume. It is no wonder that the business community is generally disenchanted with the Government and is turning to the Labor Party for succour.
This legislation is a prime example of the Government's lack of understanding of the business community. It makes all these ad hoc decisions without consulting the tourism industry or any other industry. Did anyone from the Government go to the tourism industry and ask it what impact this decision would have upon it? No, of course not; it is too stupid to do that. These people have faithfully supported the Government's political line for many years, but their support has dropped off because they realise they are not getting proper representation from the Government. It is high time that the Government looked at its record of destroying Australian industry. This is one industry that has a chance of growth. Apart from the proliferation of tax evasion, this is probably the only growth industry we will find while honourable members opposite are in government. All they have done is made an effort to destroy industry. My plea is quite simply that the Minister at the table relay to the Minister responsible for the imposition of these provisions the view that consideration should be given to the impact that this legislation will have upon the tourism industry by removing its diesel fuel exemption.
Mr McVeigh-Does that include a return to a 40-hour week?
Mr JOHN BROWN-He is pretty thick, the farmer from the Downs. I do not know what he is talking about when he speaks of the 40-hour

1982 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

week. He had better go back to his clydesdales and leave tourism to me, because I understand it. Let me tell the Minister that the tourism operators understand it also. They understand that the Government has let them down badly. The Labor Party has made a definitive announcement that in government-that will not be too far off-we will restore the exemption to the off-shore islands and undertake a review of the whole tourism industry with a view to restoring the exemption that it has always enjoyed but that will now be taken away from it..
Mr Deputy Speaker, I leave it there because time is short. I hope the Government will take note of what I am saying to it: The economy of Queensland to a great extent depends upon the prosperity of the tourism industry. Due to the fact that this Government has destroyed the general economy, the tourism industry is in a state of recession. This is just another nail in the Government's coffin. Unless it rethinks this proposition and at least restores the exemption to the offshore islands, it will be in dire straits.
Mr IAN CAMERON (Maranoa) (9.26)-The honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) spent a lot of time on tourism. I suppose the tourism industry is a capitalist type industry. I do not know what sort of people go to Hayman Island and other such places.
Mr MeVeigh-He goes.
Mr IAN CAMERON-Yes, I suppose the capitalists in the Australian Labor Party go, but how do they get there? They get there on a 17.5 per cent loading on their wages and four weeks annual leave fully paid. What about the poor farmers left back in the bush? They have to pay for their own holidays. It is all very well for the tourist operators to whinge and cry about an increase in taxation, but what about the increase in taxes paid by the farmers and the extra money we have to find? We cannot pass on our charges.
Mr Donald Cameron-Hear, hear!
Mr IAN CAMERON-That is right.
Mr Donald Cameron-He thinks that tourism is---
Mr IAN CAMERON-That is right. Tourism is a luxury industry. The farmers have to do their work before they can go for a holiday and they pay for their own holidays. Actually, I have a lot of difficulty in supporting these diesel fuel tax Bills; but, as I am a member of the Government and as this legislation has been brought forward as part of the Budget, of course I have to support it. But I can assure honourable members that this legislation has caused more trouble in the bush

than has any other Budget item. Although the farmers are not taxed in this legislation, I can assure honourable members that the boys in the Australian Taxation Office are not quite as dumb as they look. They have exempted farmers, miners and other people from paying this tax but, unfortunately, because this will have a compounding effect, we will find that in the long run we will have to pay the tax. Places such as Quilpie, Windorah, Birdsville and Cunnamulla, that have to generate their own power, will have to pay an increased tax on cartage, on rail freight. They will have to pay an increased tax on diesel to generate their electricity. They also will have to pay an increased tax to their local authorities. Honourable members know who pays the local authorities. It is the farmers and graziers who pay the rates. So in the long run they will pay the tax anyway.
This measure was brought in because of the tremendous tax cut of $1.8 billion contained in the Budget. Of course, that is of most benefit to the pay-as-you-earn taxpayers, of which no doubt the honourable member for Parramatta as a member of parliament is one, as are public servants et cetera. The farmers have to carry them on their backs. It is not as though we have not been doing that for the last 100 years, but we will have to do it a bit more now. But the Government has brought down a good Budget. We have seen a big decrease in the level of personal taxation. Of course, Budgets are usually balanced one way or another. If we are giving some money with one hand we usually have to pick up a bit with the other. That is really what this is about. As a farmer representing basically farmers, I am very grateful that the Government has seen fit to continue to exempt from this tax people in primary industry, mining, forestry and fishing, hospitals, aged persons homes, et cetera. As has been mentioned by other speakers, everybody pays the tax. One has to apply for a rebate by filling in a form. No doubt the bureaucrats are still thinking up one. The form has to be filled in and sent to the Australian Customs Service in Brisbane in my case. Those eligible will get a rebate. As the honourable member for Calare mentioned, this has come about because the system was being abused. Unfortunately, a few people within society abuse laws. This is just another example of that. Apparently the Department of the Treasury was not collecting about $50m.
Some cases were not mentioned. For instance, bakeries were not mentioned. The bakers in Goondiwindi have to generate their own heat with diesel.

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1983

Mr Donald Cameron-Burn out the dry cleaners.
Mr IAN CAMERON-There are the dry cleaners. I have to get my suit dry cleaned occasionally so that I look a bit respectable as a member of Parliament. The blokes in Tara, Goondiwindi and St George have to generate their own power with diesel, whereas the capitalists who live in Sydney-the honourable member for Parramatta lives in Sydney-and places such as that have natural gas piped from Maranoa, from the Cooper Basin, and they are not paying an extra tax on it. One can see that the imposition of this tax has been selective. Of course, we in the National Country Party have fought very hard for changes. We will continue to fight for more changes because we are not very happy with the way in which this tax is applied and is being collected.
It concerns me that governments continue to tax fuel. I am one of those who have spoken out very strongly against world parity pricing of fuel. I will give the House just a few figures. The crude oil levy is now 16.045c a litre or 38 per cent of a litre costing 42c. The excise duty is 6.15c or 14.7 per cent. Royalties are 0.7c or 1.7 per cent. The total tax on every litre of fuel one puts in one's petrol tank is 54.6 per cent. But if one fills one's tank in New South Wales one will have to pay another 7.1 per cent. That is the position under the Labor Government there, of course. It is a lot harder to work under a Labor government than it is to work under the National Country Party Government in Queensland. We do not have a special fuel tax, but the Labor Party does in New South Wales. The tax in New South Wales is 7.1 per cent. One has to pay 61.7 per cent in tax for every litre of fuel that one puts in one's tank. That is how much is going to government. I ask the House: How much longer can we continue to tax fuel-an essential commodity-to this extent? I have argued about this for a long while. I do not believe we should be taxing it to this extent. We should be looking at other avenues of taxation. I think it is absurd that we have to continue to increase the tax on this essential commodity. In the last Budget we have seen not only a 6.155c a litre increase in tax for some people but also a lc a litre surcharge to fund the Bicentennial Road Development Program. It is a very worthy project, but we still have to pay for it. Next year we will see a 2c a litre surcharge.
Mr John Brown-Are you supporting the Bills or opposing them?
Mr IAN CAMERON-I am supporting the Bills. The honourable member also supported the

Bills; he should not forget that. I put it to the House that the Government should be looking at other avenues of raising taxes than fuel. I believe that fuel has been used enough as a milking cow. I know that for every tank load of fuel that comes onto my farm, as the figures I have pointed out show, I pay 55 per cent in taxation. I am paying more in fuel tax than in personal taxation. Most farmers are paying more in fuel tax than they are in personal taxation.
Mr John Brown-They don't pay any personal tax anyhow.
Mr IAN CAMERON-We do not if we can help it, I can assure the honourable member of that. We cannot afford to do so after we have paid all our indirect taxes, fuel included. We have no money left.
I take this opportunity of talking about the Cooper Basin and the Jackson oil field in the western end of the Maranoa district. We have to look at bringing crude oil from that part of Australia, preferably to Brisbane. Some people want to take it to South Australia but, as a Queenslander, I would like to see it go to Brisbane. CSR Ltd-a Queensland company-has done a great job in the exploration of that part of Australia. I point out that in 1980 it found three fields and in 1981 it found 12 fields. In 1981 it drilled 24 exploration wells. This year it intends to drill 36. In 1981 CSR ran 4,500 kilometres of seismic line. This year it intends to run 9,000 kilometres of seismic line. I must say that this is of tremendous benefit in providing employment opportunities, et cetera to that part of Australia. All up, the group intends to spend $1.1 billion in the next four or five years. I would like to see the oil pipeline from the Jackson field, which is west of Eromanga, coming down to Moonie and connecting with that pipeline to the refinery in Brisbane.
Mr John Brown-What has this got to do with the diesel fuel excise?
Mr IAN CAMERON-Without crude oil we would not have any diesel fuel. We have to find the crude oil first. Does the honourable member not know that much? I thought that, being a member of the tourist industry and whatnot, he would be an expert on this and would know that we have to have crude first. Of course, the Government has done a tremendous amount to encourage exploration for crude oil. We are now about 75 per cent self-sufficient in this very precious commodity. Worldwide we are seeing a downturn in the price of crude oil. I believe that will continue. It is unfortunate, I believe, that we have gone on to parity pricing.
Mr John Brown-Oh!

1984 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

Mr IAN CAMERON-It is. We are sticking to the price of light Arabian crude. This is a questionable practice. But there is still a lot of crude in the world. There is still a lot of crude to be found in Australia. I believe that while this Government gives the encouragement that it gives to the exploration companies we will continue to find more crude. That is all I have to add to the debate on these Bills. I support them.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (9.37)-Firstly, I thank my colleague the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) for cutting short his remarks so that I could have some time to speak. I thank also my colleague the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) for doing the same thing. It has been pretty difficult in this House lately to get time to speak on Bills as the Government is trying to rush things through and get the House up as soon as it can. This is the third time that these diesel fuel Bills have been listed for debate in this House. We finally have them before us. I understand that they kept being taken off the Notice Paper because the back bench members on the other side of the House could not make up their minds on what they wanted to do about them. After listening to the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron), I am not surprised that they could not make up their minds. I did not know whether the honourable member was supporting or opposing the legislation.
Mr Fisher-We are not dictated to like your mob.
Mrs CHILD-The honourable member does most of the dictating himself. The legislation seeks to introduce new diesel fuel duty payments and administrative arrangements as provided for by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in the recent Budget. The old scheme of issuing certificates to purchase diesel fuel for off-road use at duty free prices has been terminated. In its place we now have a complicated system of rebates. The new system will apply to those involved in many industriesagriculture, mining, forestry and fishing. The one I particularly want to speak about is the fishing industry. It applies also to its use in domestic premises, hospitals, aged persons homes and nursing homes. The normal rebate requirement will apply. The diesel must be used for purposes other than propelling a road vehicle on a public road. Of course, boats do not do that.
I point out to the House that the provisions of this legislation will disadvantage the fishing industry very greatly. In fact, the industry is amazed at the lack of commercial awareness demonstrated by the Government and by tltis legislation. Surely the Government could recognise that with today's

rates of interest on overdrafts fishermen and others will be bearing an unnecessary operating cost prior to receiving the rebate, which the Government itself admits will be delayed. If one reads the sheet headed 'Diesel Fuel Rebate Scheme' one will see that the rebates will be delayed for quite a long time due to the complexity of the scheme. Perhaps the Government is unaware that tuna boats use 200 litres of fuel an hour and run at times for 3,000 hours each session. Consider the number of forms to be submitted to claim the rebate, the waiting, the enormous amount of money out laid and the wait involved in getting the money back. This industry should be exempt from the payment of the duty in the first place. The reasons are quite clear.
Provisions of the new legislation will now require operators of all fishing vessels to purchase diesel at full price and then claim the rebate for duty so paid. The rebate is to be paid at determined intervals. This is an unnecessary imposition of additional costs at a time when tuna and trawl fisheries are confronted with rising operational costs and stagnant fish prices. The fishing industry is appalled at the legislation. I am well aware that the previous plan was open to abuse and was indeed abused. As the honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) pointed out, the Auditor-General pointed to this abuse and to the fact that it was widespread and suggested that a change in the system was essential to overcome the abuse. The new scheme will not eliminate the abuse but it will lay the foundation of additional bureaucratic expansion to administer the rebate scheme.
Mr Ian Cameron-More jobs.
Mrs CHILD-Certainly it will produce some jobs. I think many more staff will be needed, but where will be the saving? If the idea is that the Government introduce a new scheme to provide more jobs I would support it 100 per cent. But the Government is supposed to be introducing the scheme to save money and I cannot see where it will save the money. The Department of Industry and Commerce will administer the new system and a very complicated affair this will be with multiple applications, particularly for the fishing industry. The Budget was introduced on 17 August. It is now two months since it was introduced. Presumably it will be another month before this Bill is passed and the Australian Customs Service will be able to produce the claim forms. This is causing massive disruption to industry and to farmers as they extend their overdrafts to meet the new arrangements and wait months for their rebates. Surely things are bad enough in

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1985

industry and back on the farm without this added burden.
I have slanted most of my remarks towards the fishing industry but equally I could have cited hospitals, the timber industry, the tourist industry-which has been particularly hard hit, as my colleague, the honourable member for Parramatta pointed out-or primary industry. The honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe) drew this subject to the attention of the House on 5 September when he pointed out the extra financial and administrative burden on farmers. I endorse wholeheartedly what he had to say. The only time. I parted company from what he said in a very good speech was when he tried to put the blame onto the Customs Service. The Service only advises the Government; it is the Government of which the honourable member for Paterson is a member that has decided to adopt this illconceived plan. I know it is popular these days to blame the Public Service for everything that goes wrong in a department but I still hold to the idea that the Minister and the Government are responsible for such decisions and, specifically, they are responsible for this clumsy legislation.
I fail to understand why this Government will never learn from overseas experiences. Britain experienced the problem of abuse of duty-free diesel fuel. It did not set up an expensive inefficient, time wasting bureaucracy to delay payments and add costs to the industries concerned. Britain adopted a sensible and very simple solution; it coloured bright green the diesel fuel that was sold duty free to those who held certificates. It proved to be a very successful deterrent against abuse in that police and Customs had the power to stop and check vehicles and sample the fuel. The penalties imposed against those who transgressed were heavy. I suggest to the Government that it colour the fuel green, cut out the bureaucracy, cut out the abuse and save the industry the interminable forms and heavy interest on extended overdrafts while people await their rebates. The Government should let the fishermen and the farmers get on with their jobs.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (9.44)-My comments are intended to be brief in accordance with my undertaking given to the Deputy Whip. I would like to observe very quickly that until the very end of the speech of the previous speaker, the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child), the honourable member had said very little other than that people will be bothered by having to fill out forms and wait for rebates. Contrary to the impression that the honourable member for Henty created, the categories of exclusion include persons who use

diesel fuel for off-road purposes in the agricultural, fishing, mining and forestry industries. Most of her speech was taken up with reference to the fishing industry. I cannot help making reference to the fact that in my electorate-I am following a little the remarks of the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron)-I also have a baker who has to use diesel fuel to bake the bread in the town of Boonah. I do not believe that the Government has intended an extra tax to apply to food, but in small country town bakeries that is one side-effect. I hope that the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Mr Wilson), who is sitting at the table and who I know is a responsive Minister-
Mr McLean-A reasonable Minister.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-And a reasonable Minister, will take on board the fact that this is one of the side-effects of the legislation that may not have been contemplated by those in the office buildings in Canberra who suggested this type of legislation as a suitable revenue gatherer. I take the points made by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) in his capacity as the Opposition spokesman on tourist matters. The views expressed by him are not without some sympathy on this side of the House. Undoubtedly the measure will be an added imposition on the tourist industry. But what the honourable member for Parramatta did not say was that in recent years this Government has introduced several measures which have greatly assisted the tourist industry. The Australian Labor Party in years gone byfederally and in the States-has never even recognised the tourist industry for what it is worth. Any assistance or encouragement has always come from this side of politics. It may well be that the honourable member made speeches so that he could send them out to the owners of all those islands he recited this evening. But let him attach this speech also which reminds him that it is a government of our persuasion, more than previous governments of his persuasion, that has had the ability to recognise the import of tourism, which is truly a free enterprise creation.
Finally, I refer to the small farmer who may not utilise as much fuel as is required to qualify for a rebate. There are dairy farmers in my electorate and undoubtedly in other electorates who have only a small usage. This measure will have an effect on them. I grant that it would be a reduction in terms of income for taxation purposes but for some this is an imposition which, I am sure, as I said at the beginning of my speech, those who conceived this idea never really considered. That goes to show that many of the people in Canberra should perhaps spend a little more time in the electorate of Maranoa and the electorate of

1986 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

Fadden to see what life is really about before they put forward propositions such as this.
Mr WALLIS (Grey) (9.48)~In taking part in this debate on these diesel Bills I would like to endorse the concern expressed by the shadow Minister for Primary Industry, the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), in what he had to say about the fishing industry. Unfortunately I have been told that I may speak only for five minutes, otherwise I would have had something to say on that matter. Perhaps something can be said on it at a later date. My main reason for speaking tonight is to discuss the effects on councils. Myelectorate is a large country electorate similar to that of the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron). I have 24 councils in my electorate. Four of those councils are large country-city councils or corporations. There are other smaller corporations and, of course, the district councils which service the areas further out. All told there are 24 local government bodies in the electorate. Those councils will be affected by this legislation.
A number of councils have written to me expressing concern about this. It is quite obvious that the Government has not thought out this matter very well because, unfortunately, it appears that on one hand the Government is giving the councils something and, on the other hand, it is taking it away. Because this matter is tied up with the bicentenary I feel there has been a con job. It is like giving a birthday present to someone as long as he pays for it himself. This has been the case in this area. As I said, concern has been expressed by a number of councils to which I shall refer. A letter was written to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) by the District Council of Elliston, the third largest council in South Australia, which is situated on the shores of the Great Australian Bight. It stated:
As you would probably realise, this Council's earthmoving plant is almost wholly involved in the construction and maintenance of roads throughout this District. The District happens to be the third largest Council area of the State and has some 1,000 kilometres of unsealed roads under its control.
Whilst your Government has indicated that additional funds will become available to Local Authorities under the new arrangements, it does seem ludicrous to simultaneously increase plant operating costs. It appears that there is no guarantee that this Council will be advantaged under the revised arrangements and it is possible that the ultimate result of your policies will be a reduction in real terms in the funds available for roadworks.
Council also mentions that whilst your policy attempts to direct more funds towards roadworks, it does not take into allowance the time spent by machinery on other works. For example, machinery time is spent on the construction of fire access tracks in remote areas and on-site works for civil construction jobs. It is not ethical to charge a duty on diesel used by machinery involved in the latter mentioned works as these

types of works have absolutely no relationship to the road system. It is commonly conceived that the actual users of the facility are the appropriate parties which pay the cost. Your
Government~
That is, this Government~
has recognised this concept in continuing to grant exemptions to agricultural, mining and other industries which activities do not directly involve the use of the road system.
That is the opinion of the District Council of Elliston on the Eyre Peninsula in South Australia, and I think it is symptomatic of the general view. In a similar letter the District Council of Murat Bay, the most westerly council in the State, had this to say:
With the expenditure by local government on roadworks rising in a totally disproportionate manner to the roadworks expenditure of the State and Federal Governments, the current situation is obviously totally inequitable to local government.
Road construction costs, particularly in rural areas are rising at a far more rapid rate than inflation, the imposition of this additional burden~~
That is this additional tax~
will ensure that Commonwealth Grants Commission funding paid to local government through the State Governments will not be an 'untied grant' in the same manner as previously. Perhaps local government's fears that the 'untied' nature of these grants will soon become a thing of the past, are already being realised.
As I said, that was the opinion of the District Council of Murat Bay, the most westerly council and one of the largest in the State. The general view of councils was expressed by the Local Government Association of South Australia in a letter which it wrote to me about this matter. I do not want to delay the House much longer on these issues. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard this letter from the Local Government Association of South Australia.
Leave granted.
The letter read as follows~
Local Government Association of South Australia
2 Hutt Street, Adelaide, S.A. 5000
ML: MF 930/82
1st September, 1982
Mr L. G. Wallis, M.P., 99 Commercial Road, Port Augusta, S.A. 5700
Dear Mr Wallis,
You will be aware that the recent Federal Budget contained provision for a new levy to be applied to all fuel, the specific intent of which is to channel more funds directly into road construction. It has been the contention of this Association for some considerable time that the nation's road system requires urgent attention and, as such, we were supportive of this move and acknowledged it as a fitting bi-centenary project.
Our enthusiasm is significantly diminished, however, by the statement by the Treasurer that as from the evening of the Budget, all diesel fuel would bear the full rate of excise duty irrespective of its end use. Local Government until then

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1987

received an exemption of 5.155 cents per litre for diesel used by 'off-road' vehicles. Councils will not receive an exemption from now on. The extra cent per litre applied this year and the further cent to be applied next year, will accentuate our problem.

The exemption previously granted was of direct assistance to Council road construction and maintenance activities. Withdrawal of the exemption cannot be seen as anything but a clear reduction in the Commonwealth's commitment to the road system and consequently, significantly undermines the value of road funds derived from the new levy. In South Australia, we hold grave fears that Councils may be no better off in the final analysis than they were before the budget. Accordingly, scepticism over the contribution of the Bicentenary project to the upgrading of our road system is widespread. From our perspective, this is extremely disappointing.

We are currently attempting to compile figures on the cost of the exemption being taken from Local Government. In small Councils, such as the District Councils of Barossa and Owen, the cost will between $2,500 to $3,000 annually. In larger areas, such as the District Council of Coonalpyn Downs, the cost will be in the order of $7,000 per annum. In the Metropolitan area, the cost varies but will be most significant in the fringe Council areas. It seems reasonable, therefore, to assume that across the 127 Council areas in this State, the loss will be at least in the order of $400,000 to $500,000.

This Association respectfully requests your support in our efforts to return Local Government exemption from diesel fuel tax for off-road vehicles. Such an event would not only ensure that needed resources are channelled into roads, but would help restore trust in the fairness of the Commonwealth Treasury.

Yours sincerely,
J. M. HULLlCK,
Secretary-General
Mr WALLIS-I hope there will be a rethink of this matter. Councils feel that on the one hand they have been given something and on the other hand it is being taken away. Quite recently the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) sent me a copy of a document listing road grants to all the local government areas in my electorate. Of course, the imposition of this additional diesel fuel tax will take some of the shine off those grants, and a lot of people in those councils feel that the Government has pulled a shifty one in that it involves the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program, et cetera. As I said earlier, it looks as though the councils, like everybody else in Australia, are to get a birthday present for the bicentenary but will have to pay for it themselves.

Question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Messages from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.

The Bill.

In Committee

Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) (9.55)-by leave-I move:

(I) Clause 5, page 2, lines 7 to 27, omit proposed subsections 164 (1) and (2), substitute the following sub-sections:
" '( I) A rebate is, subject to sub-sections (2) and (2A) and to such conditions and restrictions as are prescribed (being conditions and restrictions that relate to goods generally, to goods included in a class of goods that includes diesel fuel or to diesel fuel only), payable to a person who purchases diesel fuel, being diesel fuel upon which duty has been paid, for use by him-
(a) in mining operations or primary production (otherwise than for the purpose of propelling a road vehicle on a public road);
(b) at residential premises in(i) providing food and drink for;
(ii) providing lighting, heating, air-conditioning, hot water or similar amenities for; or
(iii) meeting other domestic requirements of,
residents of the premises;
(c) at a hospital or nursing home or at any other institution providing medical or nursing care; or
(d) at a home for aged persons. " '(2) Where a person-
(a) purchases diesel fuel for use by him in a manner referred to in sub-section (I); and
(b) uses the diesel fuel otherwise than in a manner referred to in that sub-section.
then-
(c) if rebate has not been paid under sub-section (I) to the person in respect of the diesel fuel-rebate is not payable to the person in respect of the diesel fuel; or
(d) if rebate has been paid under sub-section (1) to the person in respect of the diesel fuel-the person shall, on demand in writing made by a Collector, pay to the Commonwealth an amount equal to the amount of rebate paid to him in respect of the diesel fuel and, if the person fails to pay to the Commonwealth the amount demanded within such period as is specified in the demand, the amount may be recovered in a court of competent jurisdiction as a debt due to the Commonwealth.
" '(2A) Subject to sub-section (28), a Collector may refuse to consider an application for rebate under this section if-
(a) the application does not relate to diesel fuel purchased for use in a manner referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (I); and
(b) the quantity of diesel fuel in respect of which the application is made is less than 1,000 litres.
"'(28) A Collector shall not refuse to consider an application made by a person for rebate under this section by reason only that the quantity of diesel fuel in respect of which the application is made is less than 1,000 litres if-
(a) the application is the first application by the person for rebate under this section; or
(b) a period of not less than 3 months has elapsed since the person last made an application for rebate under this section.' "0
(2) Clause 5, page 3, lines 21 and 22, omit "and includes the transporting, milling or processing, in a forest or plantation, of timber felled in the forest or plantation;", substitute the following: "and includes-
(c) the transporting, milling or processing, in a forest or plantation, of timber felled in the forest or plantation;

1988 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Diesel Fuel Taxes Amendment Bill

(d) the milling of timber at a sawmill that is not situated in the forest or plantation in which the timber was felled; or
(e) where timber is milled at a sawmill that is not situated in the forest or plantation in which the timber was felled-the transporting of the timber from the forest or plantation in which it was felled to the sawmill;".
(3) Clause II, page 7, lines 4 to 24, omit proposed subsections 78A (I) and (2), substitute the following subsections:
.. '( I) A rebate is, subject to sub-sections (2) and (2A) and to such conditions and restrictions as are prescribed (being conditions and restrictions that relate to goods generally, to goods included in a class of goods that includes diesel fuel or to diesel fuel only), payable to a person who purchases diesel fuel, being diesel fuel upon which duty has been paid, for use by him-
(a) in mining operations or primary production (otherwise than for the purpose of propelling a road vehicle on a public road);
(b) at residential premises in-
(i) providing food and drink for;
(ii) providing lighting, heating, air-conditioning, hot water or similar amenities for; or
(iii) meeting other domestic requirements of,
residents of the premises;
(c) at a hospital or nursing home or at any other institution providing medical or nursing care; or
(d) at a home for aged persons.
.. '(2) Where a person-
(a) purchases diesel fuel for use by him in a manner referred to in sub-section (I); and
(b) uses the diesel fuel otherwise than in a manner referred to in that sub-section,
then(c) if rebate has not been paid under sub-section (I) to the person in respect of the diesel fuel-rebate is not payable to the person in respect of the diesel fuel; or
(d) if rebate has been paid under sub-section (I) to the person in respect of the diesel fuel-the person shall, on demand in writing made by a Collector, pay to the Commonwealth an amount equal to the amount of rebate paid to him in respect of the diesel fuel and, if the person fails to pay to the Commonwealth the amount demanded within such period as is specified in the demand, the amount may be recovered in a court of competent jurisdiction as a debt due to the Commonwealth.
.. '(2A) Subject to sub-section (28), a Collector may refuse to consider an application for rebate under this section if-
(a) the application does not relate to diesel fuel purchased for use in a manner referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (I); and
(b) the quantity of diesel fuel in respect of which the application is made is less than 1,000 litres.
.. '(28) A Collector shall not refuse to consider an application made by a person for rebate under this section by reason only that the quantity of diesel fuel in respect of which the application is made is less than 1,000 litres if-
(a) the application is the first application by the person for rebate under this section; or

(b) a period of not less than 3 months has elapsed since the person last made an application for rebate under this section.' ".
The main purpose of the amendments circulated is to amend the Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Bill 1982 to simplify the process of claiming rebates of duty paid on diesel fuel and to extend the eligibility for rebate to sawmilling operations carried on outside a forest. In the Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Bill provision is made for a rebate of duty on diesel fuel to be paid to certain categories of persons when they use the fuel for 'off-road' purposes. That Bill forms part of a package of measures designed to terminate the previous diesel fuel certificate system which enabled users of diesel fuel to purchase such fuel for 'off-road' purposes duty free, on presentation of a certificate. Clause 5 of the Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Bill enables certain categories of users to obtain a rebate of the duty paid on diesel fuel used for specific 'off-road' purposes. These categories comprise users in the agricultural, mining, forestry and fishing industries, and in domestic premises, hospitals, nursing institutions and aged persons' homes.
I turn now to the amendments which have been circulated. These amendments will remove the requirement in the present Bill that a person is required to purchase and use the fuel before an application may be lodged, and will place in its stead a provision under which a person may claim a rebate after purchase for the specified uses. It is proposed that payments of the rebate will be made on the basis of the estimated proportion of fuel purchases that will be used for specified purposes. The present Bill provides that domestic users may claim rebates at any time but imposes a minimum limit of $100 per claim on all other users. The amendments change this latter provision to allow other than domestic users to claim after three months of a previous claim or after 1000 litres of fuel have been purchased. One thousand litres is equivalent to a rebate of $62 at the current rate of duty. This change will benefit small users of diesel fuel, particularly those users engaged in primary production.
The amendments also extend the eligibility for rebate to milling operations carried on at a sawmill located outside a forest or plantation, including the transport of timber, other than on a public road, to those sawmills. The present Bill restricts rebate eligibility to forestry milling and to the processing of timber in the forest or plantation. This amendment is proposed so as not to disadvantage mills located outside the forest in comparison with competitive establishments located

Diesel Fuel Legislation

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1989

in the forest. Because of the revised criteria whereby rebates will now be paid on purchases of diesel fuel for use rather than on amounts of fuel used in the defined categories, the amendments include provision for the recovery of rebates paid to a person in circumstances where the person initially purchases the fuel for use in the defined categories but subsequently uses that fuel in some other manner.
Finally, Mr Chairman, the amendments alter the provision in the Bill relating to residential premises to make it clear that diesel fuel used at those premises in providing domestic lighting will be eligible for the rebate. For this purpose the word 'lighting' has been inserted into proposed section 164 (I) (B) (II) of the Customs Act and proposed section 78A (I) (B) (II) of the Excise Act.
1 mention that it is proposed to amend the Customs and excise regulations to set out the requirements relating to applications for the rebate and to the procedures for claiming rebates. It is the view of the Government that these changes will lead to a far more simplified claiming process for the rebate and enable more frequent payments of claims than would have been possible under the arrangements originally proposed by the Bill.
Consideration interrupted.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)-It being 10 p.m., 1shall report progress.
Progress reported.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10 p.m. 1propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Sir James Killen-I require the question to be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
DIESEL FUEL TAXES LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (lO.2)-1t is my understanding that the speech of the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) referred to the amendments moved on behalf of the Government and circulated in the last sittings of Parliament. The Opposition has had a chance to inspect these amendments. Our general reservations about the way these measures will be implemented and the costs

to the tourism, primary, mining and forestry industries remain but we accept that the amendments are a small concession and that they tidy up some aspects of administration and eligibility. All that the Opposition said tonight was in the knowledge of these amendments being moved. We do not oppose the Bills overall. We also do not oppose the amendments.
Amendments agreed to.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Fife)-by leave-read a third time.
DIESEL FUEL TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No.1) 1982
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 17 August, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time.
DIESEL FUEL TAX AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1982 .
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 17 August, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time.
PRIVILEGE Mr SPEAKER-Earlier today, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) raised as a matter of privilege an article published in the Australian newspaper today. The portion of the article to which the Leader of the Opposition particularly drew my attention read as follows:

1990 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Adjournment

Government sources said the public servant's name had been deleted from a sheaf of documents tabled yesterday in the House of Representatives by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Hayden.
The honourable gentleman drew attention to a number of other matters. However, I have now had an opportunity to examine the matter further. There can be no breach of privilege unless there is obstruction of or impediment to the performance of the duties of the member or a tendency to do so. Nothing said by the Leader of the Opposition would lead me to the conclusion that he has been so obstructed or that the article has a tendency to do so. There may have been a misrepresentation of a degree to be decided on a factual basis but there is no breach of privilege.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, with your indulgence I wish to make a few comments. First, I accept completely your ruling. I have enough confidence in and respect for you to do that unreservedly. The second thing I have to say is in the light of the evidence that I produced today, namely, that the explanation to Mr Hill of the Australian made it clear that there could be no justification in fact for any claim of a deletion in the sense that documents, as I outlined, showed beyond any doubt that Mr Moore had ceased to be a director of the relevant companies at 31 May 1977 and that any suggestion to the contrary, explicit for instance in documentation subsequently provided for official purposes, would have been erroneously based. I think that was established beyond any doubt. One can reach only one conclusion, therefore, and that is that Mr Hill, or whoever was responsible for that claim in the newspaper article, proceeded to write it in spite of the clear evidence produced for him. He failed to refer to the clear evidence on this matter that had been referred to him. One is left with the quite justifiable suspicion that there was some politically prejudiced motivation in this matter. Allowing for Mr Hill's previous employment I think that is not an unreasonable conclusion to reach.
I conclude by saying that this is not the first time. I have had a problem with Mr Hill. On an earlier occasion, in Tasmania, he reported matters quite erroneously and in a way which, if they were intentionally reported erroneously, could have been motivated only by a wish to disadvantage the Labor Party and me in the presentation of a particular issue. I regret that and I trust that the management of the Australian newspaper shares my concern about this matter. I hope that it takes steps to make sure that it does not happen again.

ADJOURNMENT
Trade Union Activity in the Philippines-Australian Steel Industry and
Trade Unions-Adelaide International Airport-Computerised Legal Information Retrieval System-Discrimination in the Public
Service-Tabling of Papers
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (10.9)-1 wish to raise tonight the crackdown on trade union activity by the Marcos Government in the Philippines. This morning's newspapers tell us that as part of the campaign by the Philippines Government against political opposition its agents had shot and killed one of two Catholic priests upon whom the Government had placed a bounty because of their alleged political activities. Another report said that the Australian priest from Perth, Father Gore, is currently being unjustly harassed as a subversive by the Philippines security forces. On 13 August the Government arrested without trial Felixberto Olalia, a distinguished trade unionist and an official of the KMU-a coalition of progressive unions with an estimated membership of over one million workers. Mr Olalia, 79 years of age, was described by the Far Eastern Economic Review on 27 August as one of the few credible trade unionists in the country. Since his arrest a total of 38 unionists have been arrested, including another KMU leader, Crispin Beltram; At least three union offices have been raided and ransacked.
I raise the matter of the arrest of Philippine trade unionists not only because it is an important human rights issue but also because Australia is increasingly being implicated in supporting the Marcos regime through the economic ties and through the militarisation of Australia's aid programs to the Philippines. Australian and United States Government support is being used to shore up the Marcos dictatorship. This Australian Government has been a strong advocate of closer military co-operation with the Marcos regime as a way of strengthening the region against the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and its ally, Vietnam.
Increasingly, since the lifting of martial law in January last year, unions in the Philippines have been demanding improvements to the appalling pay and conditions under which Philippine workers have been suffering. Wages range from one-tenth to one-quarter of what workers in Australia receive. Official estimates suggest that an average family of six needs 55 pesos or $A7 to survive. Hundreds of thousands of Philippine

Adjournment

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1991

workers are receiving equal to or below the daily basic wage presently set at 15 pesos or $A2. These appalling conditions explain the dramatic increase in union activity in the Philippines. There were over 250 strikes in 1981 as many workers strived to regain rights and wages lost since 1972 when martial law was declared. The Government's response has been to strengthen labour laws through measures such as giving business more freedom to fire workers, declaring a list of so-called vital industries in which strikes are outlawed and empowering the President to certify virtually any strike as affecting the national interest. In the past 12 months five workers have been killed and many more injured on picket lines. Union organisers have disappeared and hundreds of workers have been arrested in their attempts to improve their working conditions.
From Australia's point of view we are no longer passive onlookers in South East Asia. It is increasingly clear that Australian business is perceiving the Philippines as an attractive area for investment which is able to reap profits through the exploitation of cheap labour and raw materials in the area. The Philippines is also becoming an important source of trade worth about $300m. We are becoming one of the Philippines, largest suppliers of raw materials and capital equipment. As the Australian Government allows our local manufacturing sector to crumble, Australian companies are closing factories and exporting their industries to Asian countries where political repression of workers keep wages low and profits high.
Australian companies with operations in the Philippines include the Dunlop organisation, Safcol Pty Ltd, Australian Consolidated Industries Ltd and the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd. For example, Dunlop Olympic Ltd now employs some 4,500 people in overseas factories. It has four factories in the Philippines and two in Malaysia. Dunlop's investment strategy undoubtedly seeks to benefit from the anti-union position of the Marcos regime and appalling wages and conditions. This is typified in the export processing zones, such as in Bataan 150 kilometre north-west of Manila. Foreign-owned companies employ some 20,000 workers and two Australian companies, Dunlop and Australia Star Billiards, operate in the zone. The Dunlop workers had a long and tough struggle just to form a union. It is not surprising then that Australia's foreign policy is locked in to buttressing the political oppression of opposition forces and trade union activity in the Philippines. Our aid program, rather than assisting the poor to improve their lives, is providing

military logistical support to the Marcos Government. Australia has been expanding its tole in developing the counter-insurgency capabilities of the neo-colonial Marcos regime. An increasing number of personnel from the Philippines armed forces have been trained in advanced counterinsurgency warfare in Australian military schools. We have been selling the Philippines planes such as the Nomad aircraft. We have sold it the Dartthe automatic range target system. The military collaboration between Australia and the Philippines Government has been supported by bilatera! aid programs, such as the Northern Samar integrated rural development project. A report in March this year by the Catholic Commission of Justice and Peace suggested the aid was useless in terms of improving people's standard of living but assisted the Government's military aims.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (lO.15)-It was interesting to hear the speech of the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) because no doubt it involves a situation of concern. I wish to talk about some of the effects that the actions of various trade unionists in Australia have on the people of Australia. Some time ago in this House I asked the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) about his meetings with the then Secretary of the Federated Iron workers Association of Australia in regard to the future of the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd. I was aware that the iron workers were seeking help from the Government because they, as workers, are currently considerably concerned about their future and, of course, the future of the steel industry. Of course, the problem with the Australian steel industry is that it is now the most expensive producer of steel, bar one, in all the world. The entire blame for this situation does not lie with the work force. Nevertheless there is some evidence that it has created a problem, as the productivity drop per man hour between 1975 and 1982 has been 6.8 per cent. This has been at a time when productivity per man hour in the steel industry throughout the world has been growing substantially.
The problem that BHP, as our prime supplier of steel, has represented to other industries was clearly exemplified when the Santos company called a tender for 38 kilometres of steel pipe. The price for Japanese pipe, probably manufactured from Australian iron ore and coal and delivered back to Australia duty paid, was half the price of that of local manufacture. If we extrapolate the sorts of costs throughout the entire energy system that would be applied to the price of gas, we can

1992 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Adjournment

see that many other workers and many other businesses also would have had increased costs had Australian steel pipe been used. Somebody has to ask themselves who bears the eventual burden. It is interesting to me to note that for the first time a company such as BHP is feeling the brunt of the Government's saying that we will have a halt. I am very pleased to hear that for the sake of all the people down the line who would otherwise have been pressured out of their jobs.
It is interesting in this area of one lot of workers affecting another lot of workers to consider the situation that applied in New South Wales when 400 workers decided that the jobs of millions of New South Welshmen were really not worth worrying about if there was some personal gain for themselves. A similar situation occurred recently in New South Wales in the case of electricity workers. Nobody really cared. One sometimes wonders where the enemy is. In this case I am suggesting the enemy is within. Various unions in Australia have for so long been convinced that the sole enemy was their employer that they have been unable to identify the fact that maybe some of their colleagues, their brothers, are equally the problem. It is this matter which I wish to refer to tonight. There are those workers who get the industrial advantage completely unrelated to their own abilities or productivity. It has been the greed of these sectors of the work force that has substantially reduced the opportunities for others to gain employment.
Mr Kent-How about the management?
Mr TUCKEYI am not saying that that is not a problem. I am pointing out that when one stops and thinks one might wonder, for example, what will happen to many people when the bank workers achieve their aim of a 9-day fortnight. It has been said that the boss can pay. I would like to bet the honourable member that at that time it will be found that the people who will pay will be the customers of the bank; in other words, the brother workers.
Mr Kent-What about the profits?
Mr TUCKEY-I am glad the honourable member referred to profits because I looked at the matter of profits the other day. Profit is not normally consumed in wine, women and song. It is usually reinvested in business. In fact even the shareholder gets little. I will look at one point. The classic example for BHP is the situation enforced by the use of Australian flag coastal shipping. Australian shipping is unique in the benefits that it provides to its work force. consequently the Industries Assistance Commission has

declared that this feather-bedded industry imposes a burden on BHP of $25m per annum compared to international shipping costs. Calculated on an income of $20,000 per annum for a steel worker, the burden of this feather-bedding is the loss of 1,250 jobs for members of the Federated Iron workers Association. It is reason enough in my view for an urgency motion at the Australian Council of Trade Unions. If the ACTU cannot resolve this type of injustice one should question its existence.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (10.20)-Tonight I want to raise the question of the international airport at Adelaide. In particular I refer to a Press report in today's Adelaide Advertiser, the headline being:
Unfinished work will greet jumbo jet sightseers.
I do this because it was made abundantly clear to this House from this side and from certain quarters on the opposite side that this was a political stunt by the Tonkin Government. The report in the Advertiser goes on to say:
Despite a last-minute frenzy of activity, the $11 m Adelaide International Airport will be far from finished for Saturday's arrival of a Qantas jumbo jet.
I have reason to believe that Qantas Airways Limited had its arm twisted to encourage it to go to Adelaide anyhow. The report goes on:
The City of Adelaide Boeing 747-
I think it is a 747B--
will be the centre of attraction for an expected 100,000 airport visitors at the weekend.
They--and the Minister for Aviation, Mr Fife--
Who happens to be at the table tonight--
Who will be on the aircraft for its flight from Sydney-will see an unfinished terminal building . . .
The article goes on to refer to the plane as follows:
On Sunday it will make three trial flights of one to 1t hours, carrying more than 300 guests each time, before returning to Sydney that night.
Regular scheduled services through Adelaide International Airport will start on November 2.
The report goes on to explain that the airport director, Mr W. B. Harris, and the builders stated that the terminal was far from finished. It continued:
Mr Harris said October had been a target date for it to be 'usable' and it had never been envisaged to have it completely finished by now.
Ho, ho! Guess who is having an election in the next few weeks? Tonkin. The article continued:
March or April would be, and had always been, the completion date.

Adjournment

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1993

Really that is where one should stop and say, 'Here is the political stunt exposed', as it was exposed by me and by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) on the evening that we debated the report on the international airport by the Public Works Committee. Anyone who tries to twist my views on the international airport had better have the courage to do it outside this place, because I made it clear on the record that I am not opposed to it. I supported the Committee's recommendation. The Committee was bipartisan. The Chairman was a member of the Liberal Party. The Committee brought down a recommendation. But the Cabinet said: 'No, we are not going to have it. We are going to have it where we said it was going to go'.
On that night, I think I am correct is saying, there were four or five divisions on that question. This side of the House, the Labor Party, sought the suspension of standing orders to allow the Chairman, a Liberal Party member, the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey), the right to express his views on that report. He was Chairman of the Public Works Committee. Honourable members opposite refused him the right to speak on that report. If honourable members opposite tell me that the Liberal-Country Party Government was not in collusion with the Tonkin Government to try to pull this political stunt then I will go 'he', as will the people in Adelaide because they are awake to this Government. Not only are we to see this festival of the opening of the international airport; we will also see the opening of an international hotel which Tonkin, when Leader of the Opposition, is on record as saying he was opposed to. Nevertheless, now he is seeking the opportunity to speak at the opening on 5 November. Guess who is going to have an election in November? It is the Tonkin Liberal Government, which will soon be in Opposition. This facade with respect to the international airport that it has put up, through working with this Government, will be exposed.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (10.25)- Honourable members may recall that I have previously addressed the House concerning a Bill introduced into the Victorian Parliament to amend the Council of Law Reporting in Victoria Act. That Bill has now been passed, having recently been rushed through both Houses on the same evening. This new Act claims to make it unlawful for anybody except the Council of Law Reporting in Victoria, a body which is not elected or responsible to any Minister or to the public, 'to

commence the publication or to publish the whole or any part of any reports of judicial decisions of any court in Victoria', unless the reporting is done by or in association with a newspaper, a news magazine or a news broadcast.
The powers which this new Act purports to give the Council are extraordinarily wide. On the face of it, one now needs permission even to quote from a judgment unless one is a newspaper proprietor. Law students will require permission before they sit for examinations, and lawyers quoting Victorian judgments will need permission before they can send out their advice, create their own private data bases or even write letters on word processors. Further, if the word 'report' is not read to mean a formal case report, then freedom of speech in Victoria is itself being restricted because everyone requires permission to summarise or to discuss in detail a Victorian court decision unless, of course, one happens to own a newspaper. One can only wait with bated breath to see what treasures will be contained in Mr Cain's version of a freedom of information Bill. This legislation does not concern only Victorian courts adjudicating domestic Victorian issues. It purports to cover Federal courts' sittings in Victoria, State courts exercising Federal jurisdiction and State courts considering legislation uniformly enacted by the States and the Commonwealth, such as the new Companies Act. Furthermore, the Council has shown that it will use its powers to restrict publication of judicial decisions and it has restricted the CCH from publishing cases heard in Victorian courts on tax and company law.
This legislation is outrageous and I hope that the Commonwealth Attorney-General (Senator Durack) will move at once to open up access to all laws-cases, statutes and regulations-and to put these laws in the public domain, where they belong. The Acting Attorney-General (Mr N. A. Brown), in answering a question on 23 September this year, said:
We believe there should be the absolute and most extensive freedom in the dissemination of legal matters which are of importance to the profession by way of statutes and law reports.
One could say to the public as well. There need be no delay about deregulating judgments from Federal courts and tribunals and Commonwealth Acts and regulations. What could be easier than to announce that copyright restrictions on these legal materials are lifted for both hard copy and electronic media? Similarly, I hope the Government will announce that it will legislate to open access to the laws in the States and especially in Victoria. That the Commonwealth has constitutional powers to do this is hardly arguable in the

1994 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Adjournment

light of section 51 of the Constitution and its various subsections, as well as chapter Ill's powers to make laws with respect to the judicature.
The whole saga of computerised legal information retrieval systems in Australia provides a most salutary lesson. The deliberations of the Attorneys-General and their advisory bodies have not been published and are still secret. There has been little public debate, if any, because there is so little information on Government policies. Victoria, by being, as it were, the first cab off the rank, has been able to steal a march on all the other States and the Commonwealth. By arguing that a government-controlled monopoly is necessary, it was able to give a Victorian monopoly to a joint venture between a Victorian company and a large United States computer company and is able to ensure that the computer company's new $18m computer centre is located in Victoria. By arguing that government-controlled monopolies are necessary and that for convenience there ought to be a single national operator, the Victorian Government is attempting to ensure that such a national monopoly is under its control.
But what is also frightening is the magnitude of the waste caused by the governments. The money spent in establishing government policy, in setting up advisory committees, in paying consultants, in sending politicians, committeemen and their consultants around the world, in drafting invitations for proposals, in the answering of these proposals by companies, and in the evaluation of these proposals and the subsequent negotiations would probably have been enough to establish a computerised legal information retrieval system. If this wasted money were spent on establishing one rather than on working out how the computerised legal information retrieval system is to be controlled, we would probably already have a computerised legal information retrieval system and it would be largely paid for. The shame of it is that it could have been achieved so easily-simply by the deregulation of copyright-at so much less cost to everyone involved and much more quickly.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (1O.29)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to table certain documents relating to a question I asked this morning.
Leave granted.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (1O.29)-Tonight I want to speak about the extraordinary bias against women in recent advertising for Australian Public Service positions. In particular I wish to draw attention to a pamphlet titled 'Computer Programming'-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The Chair would be reluctant to think that the honourable member for Canberra would think in turn that this is bias, but it being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted.
Mr Fife-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require the debate to be extended to enable me to respond to the honourable member for Hindmarsh.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may continue until 10.40 p.m. I call the Minister for Aviation.
Mr Scott-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I think the Minister said that he wanted to respond to something I said. I hope that I will have the opportunity to respond and to rebut.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr Scott-Well, I want to have the opportunity, ifthere is something he says-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) (1O.31)-Mr Deputy Speaker, it is obvious that the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) wanted to hit and run because he does not want to allow me an opportunity which-
Mr Scott-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. That is an insulting remark. I will debate this issue with the Minister half hour for half hour at any time he likes.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr FIFE-Mr Deputy Speaker, as you pointed out, the honourable member for Hindmarsh is probably unaware that the Standing Orders provide that a Minister can ask for the adjournment debate to be extended for a few minutes to allow him to respond to something that an honourable member has said. The honourable member for Hindmarsh has tried to have it both ways in relation to the Adelaide Airport. He made it clear in his address to the House tonight that he does not oppose-indeed, he said that he supported it-the provision of international facilities at Adelaide. He then went on to reflect on those who have been responsible for the decisions and the construction of the Adelaide Airport. He pointed out that I will be on a Qantas Airways Ltd aircraft on Saturday morning. He is correct there. I will be flying into Adelaide. I hope that the honourable member will be there to meet me because it will be an historic occasion. It will be the occasion when Qantas undertakes the trial flights. I was certain that the honourable member would be sufficiently aware of procedures to know that it is necessary

Adjournment

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1995

for the airline to undertake these trial ft.ights before the first regular scheduled service is brought into operation.
A new $llm international terminal with associated apron and taxiways is almost complete. Major works are well advanced to enable the airport to handle the wide-bodied domestic jet aircraft, the Airbus, and also the Boeing 767. I understand that initially three international airlines will have approval to operate to and from the Adelaide Airport. Indeed, the Government has provided approval for Qantas, British Airways and Singapore Airlines Ltd, and arrangements allowing Air New Zealand to ft.y to Adelaide are expected to be finalised shortly. It is sad that the honourable member, who represents an Adelaide electorate, should introduce a sour note in relation to the provision fo these new facilities. They are outstanding facilities and they are being provided by this Government to ensure that in the future South Australia will not be out of the way for international travel. I take this opportunity of paying tribute to all the personnel who have worked on the project. The project is going pretty much to time. It was always expected that the terminal building would not be completed when the first scheduled flights commenced operating.
I do not know whether the honourable member for Hindmarsh is suggesting that Qantas should not be permitted to ft.y into Adelaide as early as it will be doing. I do not know whether he is suggesting that British Airways, which wishes to ft.y to Adelaide, should be denied the right to do so and that passengers should be denied this opportunity. I think it is deplorable that the honourable member shoud reft.ect on those people who have had the responsibility for the planning, design and construction of this magnificent building. I look forward to my visit to Adelaide on Saturday. I take the opportunity tonight to thank the South Australian Government, and particularly the Premier, for the very close co-operation that that Government has provided the Commonwealth. I am sure that most of South Australian residents would agree that this project has been completed in almost record time. It is not long since the first sod was turned and now this project is near completion.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The time provided for the extension of the adjournment debate-five minutes in responsehas expired. As no other Minister is rising to speak the Minister for Aviation is entitled to speak for the remainder of the available time. Does the honourable member for Hindmarsh wish to raise a point of order?

Mr Scott-I consider that the statement from the Minister-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

Mr Scott-.

is unworthy-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hindmarsh is required to resume his seat.

Mr Scott-The Minister-

Mr DEPUTY "SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Hindmarsh must resume his seat. The Chair is obliged to apply Standing Orders. There is no opportunity at this juncture-

Mr Scott-He has suggested that I have said-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Hindmarsh will resume his seat. As the Minister for Aviation has completed his remarks the debate is concluded.

Mr Scott-I wish to make a personal explanation.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The House stands adjourned until I0 a.m. tomorrow.

House adjourned at 10.37 p.m.

NOTICES The following notices were given:

Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.

Mr N. A. Brown to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.

Mr Carlton to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953, and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.

Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.

Mr Hunt to move-

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Construction of Physics Division Building, Materials Research Laboratories, Maribyrnong, Vic.

1996 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Papers

PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 13 October 1982, pursuant to statute:
Australian Bureau of Statistics Act-Australian Bureau of Statistics-Proposal for collection of information-1982-No. 9-New topics to be included in population survey, November 1982.
Customs Tariff Act-Orders-
Developing Country-No.8 (1982).
Forum Island Country-No.2 (1982).
Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterminationsStatutory Rules 1982, Nos. 263, 264.
Parliament House Construction Authority ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 265.
Trade Commissioners Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 266.

REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Joint House Department: Cleaning Contracts Mrs Kelly to ask Mr Speaker:
(I) Have tender procedures been used in the letting of cleaning contracts for the (a) Kurrajong Annexe and (b) East Block Parliamentary offices; if so, which firm was successful in each case.
(2) How many firms put in tenders in each case.
(3) Did an officer from the Joint House Department travel to the Wagga Wagga College of Advanced Education in relation to the tendering of cleaning contracts there.
(4) If so, did this officer travel in the same car and stay at the same motel with the successful tenderers for the contracts referred to in part ( I).

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1997 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Kingsford-Smith and Tullamarine International Air Terminals
(Question No. 4731)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(1) What was the total cost of building (a) Kingsford Smith International Air Terminal and (b) Tullamarine International Air Terminal.
(2) What was the cost of additional runways and taxiways provided for these terminals.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

What funds have been allocated to the Aboriginal Development Commission for the purpose of (a) acquiring traditional lands, (b) establishing viable economic ventures and (c) providing low-cost housing finance in each year since its establishment.
Mr Wilson-The an!iwer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed that the Aboriginal Development Commission allocated the following amounts for the purpose indicated:

1980-81 1981-82 1982-83

Actual

Actual Estimated

Expenditure Expenditure Expenditure

(I) (a) $38,121,448 including the cost of access roads, carparks, aprons and taxiways; (b) $30,722,105 including the cost of both the domestic and international terminals as well as access roads, carparks and aprons.
(2) (i) No additional runways were provided for the international terminal building at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. The cost of additionsl taxiways is included in the cost of the terminal building given in the answer to question I (a) and is not seperable. (ii) The international terminal building at Melbourne (Tullamarine) Airport was built as part of the whole new airport project. Runways and taxiways built for the international terminal cannot therefore be identified separately.
Public Broadcasting Stations in Sydney Metropolitan Area
(Question No. 4741)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) What is the current position relating to the issuing of 'C' category licences for public broadcasting stations in the Sydney metropolitan area.

(a) Acquiring Traditional Lands
(b) Establishing viable economic ventures
(c) Providing lowcost housing finance (that is housing loans)

$

$

$

755,000 540,000 770,000 4,648,926 8,040,880 4,435,937

8,318,871 10,076,330 12,500,000

In addition to providing housing loans, the Commission in 1981-82 was given responsibility for making Grants-in-aid to Aboriginal housing associations for the purchase and construction of housing as follows:
1981-82 Actual expenditure . . . . $23,683,200 1982-83 Estimated expenditure . . . $29,000,000
The Commission also allocated funds for the purchase of land for social and economic purposes as follows:

1980-81 1981-82 1982-83

Actual

Actual Estimated

Expenditure Expenditure Expenditure

(2) When is it expected that successful applicants will be able to commence broadcasting operations.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal, is as follows:
(I) On 3 September the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal announced the grant of licences for eight of the nine 'C' category licences for public broadcasting stations in the Sydney metropolitan area. The decision on the licence for the ninth station which is intended to serve the Marrickville, Canterbury, Hurstville, Kogarah and Rockdale areas (Region iv) is expected to be announced shortly.
(2) It is a condition of each of the licences granted to date that the stations shall commence operation by I September 1983.
Aboriginal Development Commission: Funds
(Question No. 4744)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

$

$

$

117,187 3,139,361 3,030,000

Independent Audit: Attorney-General's Department

(Question No. 4779)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In those instances where grants are made pursuant to legislative provisions, it is required by the legislation that an audited financial statement of receipts and payments of the

1998 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

organisation be provided. Where a grant in excess of $5,000 is made to an organisation in those instances where there is no legislative requirement for an audited financial statement, an independently audited statement is required as a condition of the making of the grant. Where a grant of $5,000 or less is made to an organisation in those instances where there is no legislative requirement for an audited financial statement, a certificate by a responsible officer of the organisation showing that the amount provided was expended in accordance with the terms of the grant is required as a condition of the making of the grant.
Independent Audit: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 4794)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The requirements for audit of grants to non-government organisations are contained in Finance Directions issued pursuant to the Audit Act. Departmental instructions covering such grants specify procedures to ensure the proper expenditure of funds.
Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 4796)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Export Development Grants Board determines grants under the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974 and the Export Expansion Grants Act 1978. Details of recipients are shown in the Board's Annual Report. The 1981-82 report was tabled on 9 September 1982.
(2) Preliminary examination of the data indicates that some $271 m has been paid to non-government organisations in the financial year 1981-82.
Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 4801)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2)--
Payments made to Non-Government Organisations

United Nations Association of Australia

Australian Institute of International Affairs

The Australian National University-

Australia/Japan and Western Pacific Econ-

omic Relations Research Project

Secretariat in Australia of Australia/Britain

Society

Indonesian Project-The Australian National

University

.....

African .Enterprise

Archbishop's Overseas Relief Fund

Association of APEX Clubs of Australia

Austcare

......

Australian Association of Gerontology

Australian Baptist World Aid and Relief

Committee

Australian Board of Missions

Australian Catholic Relief

Australian Churches of Christ Overseas Mission

Board

......

Australian Council of Overseas Aid

Australian Council for Rehabilitation for the

Disabled

Australian Council of Churches

Australian Council of Social Service

Australian Executive Service Overseas Program

Australian Freedom from Hunger Campaign

Australian Institute of Urban Studies

Australian Jaycees

Australian National Council for the Blind

Australian Overseas Disaster Relief Organi-

sation

.........

Australian Red Cross . . . . . . . .

Australian Society for Inter-Country Aid for

Children . . . . . . . . . . .

Australian Tuberculosis and Chest Association

Bible and Medical Missionary Society

Christian Foundation for the Blind

Commission for World Mission

Community Aid Abroad

Compassion . . . . .

Country Women's Association

Cumberland College Foundation

Eritrean Relief Committee-through

AUSTCARE/ACC/ACR

For Those Who Have Less

Foresight

Foster Parents Plan

Foundation for the South Pacific

Institute of Cultural Affairs

International Disaster Emergencies Committee

Lutheran World Federation

National Council of Women

Overseas Service Bureau

Paulian Association of Lay Missionary Society

Quaker Service Council

Rotary (FAIM)

.....

Royal Australian Planning Institute

Salvation Army

Save the Children Fund

Scouts

Seventh Day Adventist World Service

Society of St Vincent De Paul

Sudan Interior Mission

UNICEF of Australia

Amount
$
20,000 15,000
100000
150,000
72,000 35,000 12,200 15,375 140,000 15,000
60,000 45,000 455,000
26,682 180,000
20,000 345,000
10,000 35,000 140,000
3,402 4,000 30,000
53,000 80,000
3,000 5,000 30,000 2,500 85,000 239,989 28,031 17,000 25,150
200,000 50,000
250,000 180,000
5,000 30,000 50,000 310,000 2,403 452,962 50,000 60,000 66,700 11,500 56,466 290,000 4,183 218,177 34,544 50,000 140,000

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1999

Payments made to Non-Government Organisations

Amount

Wheelchair and Disabled Association
Women and Development Network-through
YWCA/ACC . . . . . . Women's Agricultural Bureau of South
Australia World Vision
YMCA of Australia YWCA of Australia

$ 14,000
20,000
6,324 974,415 40,000 23,000

Total

6,087,503

Contributions to International Organisations and Nongovernment Organisations Overseas are not included in above
list.

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 4817)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised that the following grants or payments were made to non-government organisations in 1981-82:

Grants-in-Aid

National Council of Women of Australia

Country Women's Association of Australia

World Wildlife Fund Australia

.Working Women's Centre, Australia

Australian Council of National Trusts

National Trust of New South Wales

National Trust of Victoria

National Trust of Queensland

National Trust of South Australia .

National Trust of Western Australia

National Trust of Tasmania

National Trust of Northern Territory

National Trust of the Australian Capital Te-

rritory

.....

Surf Life Saving Association of Australia

Royal Lifesaving Society . . . . . . .

Federation of Australian Historical Societies

Conservation Organisations
Australian Conservation Foundation Australian National Parks Council Friends of the Earth . . . . . . . Royal Australian Institute of Parks and Re-
creation . . . . . . . . . . . Keep Australia Beautiful Council (National) ProjectJonah . . . . . . . . . . Nature Conservation Council New South
Wales . . . . . National Parks Association New South Wales

Amount
$
8,000 3,500 50,000 25,000 60,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 30,000 15,000
5,000 330,000 110,000
8,000
75,000 1,000 5,000
5,000 15,000 1,500
38,630 9,000

Conservation Society of New South Wales

Conservation Council of Victoria

National Parks Association of Victoria

Conservation Council of Queensland .

National Parks Association of Queensland

Wildlife Preservation Society of Queensland

Conservation Council of South Australia

Nature Conservation Society of South

Australia . . . . . . . . . .

Environment Centre of Western Australia

Conservation Council of Western Australia

Western Australian National Parks and Re-

serves Association

Conservation Trust of Tasmania

Environment Centre Tasmania (Hobart)

Environment Centre Launceston

Canberra and South East Region Environ-

ment Centre

......

Environment Council Northern Territory

North Coast Conservation Council

Murray Valley League for Development and

Conservation . . . . . . . .

Townsville Regional Conservation Council

Wide Bay Burnett Conservation Council

Capricorn Conservation Council

Assistance for Sporting Activities
Australian Aerobatic Club
Australian Anglers Association
Archery Association of Australia
Amateur Athletic Union of Australia
Australian Little Athletics Union National Football League of Australia Ltd
Autocycle Council of Australia Australian Badminton Association
Australian Baseball Federation
Australian Basketball Federation
Australian Billiards and Snooker Council Bocce Federation of Australia
Australian Bowls Council Australian Women's Bowling Council
Australian Indoor Bias Bowls Council The Amateur Boxing Union of Australia
Australian Canoe Federation Australian Casting Asociation
Australian Cricket Board
Australian Women's Cricket Council
Australian Croquet Council Australian Amateur Cycling Federation
Darts Federation of Australia (Inc.)
Australian Amateur Diving Association
Equestrian Federation of Australia Australian Amateur Fencing Federation
Game Fishing Association of Australia Gliding Federation of Australia
Australian Golf Union Australian Gymnastic Federation
Hang Gliding Federation of Australia Australian Ladies Golf Union
Australian Hockey Association Australian Women's Hockey Association
Australian Amateur Ice Racing Council Australian Ice Hockey Federation
National Ice Skating Association Judo Federation of Australia
Federation of Australian Karate-Do Organisations . . . . . . . . .
National Karting Council of Australia

Amount
$
1,500 29,420 6,400 37,000 3,000
1,500 20,770
5,900 14,880 8,000
500 13,800 14,185 3,885
12,250 7,930 1,500
5,200 6,100 3,000 3,000
8,000 4,000 21,000 85,000 6,000 50,000 7,500 12,000 64,000 100,000 5,000 7,000 5,900 10,000 5,000 15,000 32,000 3,500 48,000 8,900 5,000 26,000 6,800 18,000 21,000 28,000 4,000 30,000 31,000 51,900 7,000 34,000 85,000 45,650 14,500 11,000 19,000 24,000
39,500 2,000

2000 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Amount

Australian Lacrosse Council
Australian Women's Lacrosse Council
Surf Life Saving Association of Australia Confederation of Australian Motor Sport
All Australian Netball Association Orienteering Federation of Australia
Australian Parachute Federation Amateur Modern Pentathlon Union of
Australia Australian Polo Council
Polocrosse Association of Australia Australian Power Boat Association
Australian Amateur Power Lifting Federation
Australian Federation of Amateur Roller Skaters
Australian Amateur Rowing Council Australian Rugby Football Union Australian Ski Federation Australian Shooting Association
Australian Clay Targets Association Field and Games Federation of Australia Amateur Pistol Shooting Union The National Rifle Association of Australia
Australian Small Bore Rifle Association Sporting Shooters Association of Australia
Australian Universities Sports Association
Australian Soccer Federation
Australian Women's Soccer Association Australian Softball Federation Squash Racquets Association of Australia Australian Surfriders Association Amateur Swimming Union of Australia Synchronised Swimming Committee Water Polo Committee Australian Table Tennis Association The Lawn Tennis Association of Australia Australian Taekwondo Association Australian Tenpin Bowling Congress Australian Touch Football Association Australian Amateur Trampoline Union
Australian Underwater Federation Australian Volleyball Federation Australian Water Ski Association Australian Amateur Weight Lifting Fede-
ration Australian Amateur Wrestling Union
Australian Yachting Federation Australian Commonwealth Games Assoc-
iation Australian Olympic Federation Confederation of Australian Sport Australian Council for Health, Physical Edu-
cation and Recreation Australian Sports Medicine Federation
Drug Control Committee Custom Credit Tennis Australian Institute of Sport Australian Olympic Federation
Australian Commonwealth Games Association
Aboriginal Arts Board Aboriginal Artists Agency (National)
Aboriginal Arts and Crafts Pty Ltd (National)
Aboriginal Cultural Foundation (National)

$
18,500 2,800 22,000 23,000 62,000 39,000 28,000
8,500 5,500 6,000 13,800
17,500
30,000 51,000 48,000 53,500 26,660 15,800 5,200 11,800 13,000 4,000 8,000 15,900 76,000
1,600 48,000 53,150 21,800 83,000
1,000 28,700 33,300 53,000 10,300 27,000
5,500 10,000 9,000 67,000 47,500
46,000 17,000 100,000
1,300 50,000 80,000
43,250 25,000 28,000 60,000 2,738,200 500,000
185,000
70,000
221,000 268,600

Aboriginal Publications Foundation (National
Australian Aborigines Woomera (National)
Central Queensland Aboriginal Cultural Corporation
Doomadgee Cultural Committee
Gununamanda Pty Ltd (Qld) Aboriginal Advancement League (Australian
Capital Territory)
Aboriginal and Islander Dance Theatre (New South Wales)
Aboriginal/Islander Skills Development Scheme (National
Aboriginal Law Council (Queensland)
Australian Council of Trades Unions (Victoria)
Central Queensland Aboriginal Culture Corporation
Freewheels Theatre-in-Education Company
(New South Wales) Galiwinku Arts (Northern Territory)
Geelong and District Aboriginal Co-operative
Hedland National Aborigines Day Observance Committee
MarIam Welfare Association (Queensland)
Mount Margaret Local Residents Group (Western Australia)
National Aborigines Day Committee (Victoria)
Nyoongah Community Inc. (Western Australia)
Orange Aboriginal Corporation (New South Wales)
Pitt Street Uniting Church
Port Lincoln Aboriginal Organization (South Australia)
Port McLeay Community (South Australia)
Swan River Stage Company (Western Australia)
Sydney University Settlement (New South Wales)
Wayee Radio and Cultural Aboriginal Cor-
poration (Tasmania) Widjarookie Players (South Australia) Yumbaya Aboriginal Group (Western
Australia) Aboriginal Artists Agency (National) Aboriginal Country Music Program
(National)
Aboriginal Training and Cultural Institute (New South Wales)
Araleun Arts and Cultural Trust (Northern
Territory) Centre for Aboriginal Studies in Music
(National)
Mantaka Music (Queensland) Teenage Roadshow (National) Widjeri Co-operative Ltd (New South
Wales) 32nd Interversity Choral Festival (South
Australia)
Aboriginal Advancement Council (Western Australia
Aboriginal Sacred Sites Protection Authority (National)
Adelaide Festival Centre Trust Gallery (South Australia)
Amata Arts and Crafts (South Australia)

Amount
$
78,934 30,282
411 1,617 3,876
910
2,175
79,800 12,000
3,000
500
2,000 3,000 3,000
500 1,250
1,000
500
29,006
260 200
460 199
7,500
2,750
1,806 1,556
500 1,000
42,340
300
2,500
51,734 1,000
10,000
250
517
500
104
3,000 31,956

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2001

Anthropology Museum University of Queensland
Aparawatatja Art and Craft (South Australia)
Art Advisers Manual (National)
Aurukun Community Inc. Pty Ltd (Queensland)
Balgo Hills Community Artists (Western Australia)
Biennale of Sydney (New South Wales) Ernabella Arts Inc. (South Australia)
Expansion and Development Program (National)
Galiwinku Arts and Crafts (Northern Territory)
Iwantja Community Indulkana (South Australia)
Maningrida Arts and Crafts (Northern Territory)
Maningrida Djumi Museum (Northern Territory)
Maroo Billagooda (Western Australia)
Miligimbi Arts and Crafts (Northern Territory)
Mimi Aboriginal Arts and Craft Pty Ltd (Northern Territory)
Mimi Aboriginal Arts and Craft Warehouse (Northern Territory)
Morington Island Arts and Crafts (Queensland)
National Site Recorders Conference (National)
Newcastle Regional Arts Gallery (New South Wales)
Ngoonbi Cooperative Society Ltd (Queensland)
Papunya Tula Artists Pty Ltd, (Northern Territory)
Ramingining Arts and Crafts (Northern Territory)
Shepparton Aboriginal Arts Council Cooperative (Victoria)
Tasmanian School of Art Tiwi Designs (Northern Territory) Tiwi Pima Art (Northern Territory) Tiwi Pottery
Toomelah National Aborigines Day Committee (New South Wales)
Townsville Aboriginal Week Committee (Queensland)
Utopia Women's Batik Group (South Australia)
Yirrkala Dhanbul Community Association (Northern Territory)
Yuendumu Mens' and Womens' Museum (Northern Territory)
Alternative Publishing Co-operative Ltd (New South Wales)
Aurukun Handcrafts (Queensland) Information Program (National) Maningrida Literature Production Centre
(Northern Territory) Murrin Bridge Aboriginal Community (New
South Wales) Oenpelli Literature Production Centre
(Northern Territory) William Collins Pty Ltd (New South Wales)

Amount

$
10,360
9,800 1,500
5,000
8,511 8,000 25,361
1,738
25,160
5,191
20,300
3,175 1,939
7,600
5,061
10,000
9,550
2,000
1,900
3,900
23,746
13,365
47,308 500
14,541 10,826 22,055
500
500
4,000
30,042
7,000
6,275 318
1,048
2,000
119
2,000 3,300

Awabakal Newcastle Aboriginal Cooperative (New South Wales)
Borroloola Aboriginal Community (Northern Territory)
Film Archive Program (National)
Pamela Lofts Productions Pty Ltd (New South Wales)
Radio 6NR Perth Aboriginal Artists Agency Australian Aboriginal Theatre Company
(National) Australian Aborigines Woomera (National)
Centre for Aboriginal Studies in Music (National)
World Council of Indigenous People
Community Arts Board Blue Folk Community Arts Association Inc. (Australian Capital Territory) Browns Mart Community Arts Project Inc. (Northern Territory) Childrens Activity Groups Association (Queensland) Childrens Activities Time Society (Western Australia) Childrens Free Embassy (New South Wales) Creative School Holiday Club Ltd (Victoria) Desperate Measures Inc. (Western Australia) Geelong Association of Music and Art (Victoria) Kids Activities Newtown (New South Wales) Pipi Storm Ltd (New South Wales) South Australian Creative Workshops Inc Tasmanian Youth Theatre and Allied Arts Centre Inc. Albany Arts Council (Inc.) (Western Australia) Blacktown Art and Crafts Group (New South Wales) Brisbane Community Arts Centre Central Western Queensland Cultural Activities Association Community and Art Centre Foundation Inc. (Tasmania) Community Arts (and Adult Education) Centre of Newcastle (New South Wales) Footscray Community Arts Centre (Victoria) Grenfell Community Arts and Crafts Centre (New South Wales) Hills Childrens Arts Access Centre (New South Wales) Kelso Community Group (New South Wales)
Laverton Community Centre (Victoria) Lithgow Multi-purpose Childcare Associ-
ation (New South Wales)
Mooroolbark Community Centre (Victoria) Multi-centres Touring Arts Exhibition (New
South Wales) Mundaring Community Arts and Crafts
Centre (Western Australia) Rainbow Theatre and Art/Craft Workshops
(New South Wales) Rainbow Workshop (Victoria) Redfern Creative Leisure Centre (New South
Wales) Ritchies Mills Arts Centre (Tasmania)

Amount
$
500
1,374 341
12,338 5,200 50,251
15,000 22,595
7,600 15,000
18,000
26,400
25,200
30,100 10,000 19,500 2,500
1,000 23,000 22,730 10,000
2,500
6,112
4,500 25,000
2,000
17,000
5,000 15,000
1,000
2,000
650 1,000
4,075 1,900
2,000
3,000
3,000 6,800
3,000 12,500

2002 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Riverwood Community Centre (New South Wales)
South Side Childcare Association (Australian Capital Territory)
St. George Creative Workshop (New South Wales)
Sydney University Settlement (New South Wales)
Toe Truck Theatre Ltd (New South Wales) Woollahra-Waverly Acts Centre Co-
operative Ltd (New South Wales) Araluen Arts and Cultural Trust (Northern
Territory) Arts Council of Australia (National) Brisbane Community Arts Centre . . . . Central Western Region Community Arts
Committee (New South Wales) Community and Performing Arts Resource
Team (Tasmania) Corporation of the Town of Thebarton
(South Australia) Corporation of the City of Prospect Corporation of the City of Elizabeth Corporation of the City of Noarlunga Eastern Shore Association for Development
of the Arts (Tasmania) Ethnic communities Council of Queensland Experimental Art Foundation Inc. (South
Australia) Eyre Penisula Regional Cultural Centre Trust
(South Australia) Multicultural Education Council of Western
Australia (Inc.) Murray Edmonds Management Services
(National) Northern Regional Cultural Centre Trust
(South Australia) Riverland Regional Cultural Centre Trust
(South Australia) South East Region Cultural Centre Trust
(South Australia) South Western (Metropolitan) Regional Arts
Development Committee (New South Wales) Summerland Coast Tourist Authority (New South Wales) Townsville Cultural Association (Queensland) Arts Council of Australia (National) Adelaide Festival of Arts Inc. (South Australia) Barcaldine Amateur Theatrical Society (Queensland) Brisbane Community Arts Centre Brisbane Warana Festival Ltd Centrestate (Queensland) Community and Arts Centre Foundation Inc. (Tasmania) Continental Carnival Sub-committee of Stanthorpe Apple and Grape festival (Queensland) Gingila Community Co-operative Ltd (New South Wales) Dong Huong Club (Victoria) Family Festival in Willoughby (New South Wales) Festival of All Nations Ltd (Victoria) Festival of Perth

Amount
$
1,900
1,000
750
12,000 1,650
1,000
8,500 13,542 3,175
9,458
8,000
7,000 7,000 5,384 8,460
6,728 12,000
6,000
13,250
9,675
4,000
6,250
6,500
6,870
7,500
5,820
7,965 32,152
44,080
2,000 1,000 4,530 3,100
3,000
500
1,000 1,500
1,000 7,000 20,160

Focus Inc. Adelaide Festival Fringe (South

Australia)

Glenn Innes District Information and Service

Centre (New South Wales)

Goondiwindi Arts Festival Association

(Queensland)

Gosford City Festival of the Waters (New

South Wales)

Greek Community Council of Sydney

Greek Cultural Association of Sydney

Hungarian Council of New South Wales

Italian Arts Festival Society (Victoria)

Italo-Australian Welfare Centre (Western

Australia)

Lithgow Multi-purpose Childcare Associ-

ation (New South Wales)

Mattara Spring Festival Committee (New

South Wales)

Mildura Arts Centre (Victoria)

Mount Isa Branch, Queensland Arts Council

Multi-cultural Music Festival Organising

Committee (Victoria)

New South Wales Committee of Italian Arts

o

Festival Australia and K International

Festival

Committee

(Victoria)

South Sydney Festival Committee

Spring Festival Committee (New South

Wales)

St George Creative Workshop (New South

Wales)

Sydney Committee Ltd

Tallangatta Arts Festival Committee

Tasmanian Fiesta Ltd

Thirty-first Festival of Latvian Arts and

Crafts in Australia (Queensland)

Union of Australian Women

Williamstown Summer Festival Ltd (Vic-

toria)

Women and Arts Festival (New South

Wales)

Adelaide Folkloric Society Inc. (South

Australia)

Aldeias de Portugal (New South Wales)

Armenian Cultural Society in Australia (New

South Wales)

Association of Bandura Players in Australia

(New South Wales)

Australian and Croatian Folkloric Group

'Linda' (New South Wales)

Australian-Turkish Music Society (New

South Wales)

Belleli National Dancers (New South Wales)

Chapter Helene-Order of Ahepa

(Queensland)

Chilean Oance Group Trans-Andinos (New

South Wales)

Chilean Folk Dancing Group Aconcagua

(New South Wales)

Committee for the Day of Russian Culture

(New South Wales)

Croatia Folkloric Group (New South Wales)

Croatia Cultural Folklore Group 'Lado'

Geelong (Victoria)

Croatian Folk Dancing Group of Brisbane

Croatian Folkloric enemble 'Koleda' (New

South Wales)

Amount
$
7,000
1,500
800
1,400 1,000 2,500 1,000 4,000
1,000
750
1,500 2,500 2,000
2,100
4,000
500 500
700
200 11,000
500 8,000
1,500 1,000
3,460
23,150
11,240 550
800
300
1,000
1,800 750
750
500
600
700 750
1,000 300
1,500

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2003

Croatian Folkloric Group 'Croatia' (Queensland)
Dances of Asia (New South Wales)
Festival of All Nations Ltd (Victoria)
Folkloric Group 'Sumadija' (New South Wales)
Greek Arts Centre 'Laiki Skini' (Victoria) Greek Cultural Association (New South
Wales)
Greek Lyceum Dancing Group (New South Wales)
Greek Orthodox Community of Melbourne and Victoria
Greek Popular Shadow Puppet Theatre (Victoria)
Hellenic Club Dancers (Australian Capital Territory)
Hrvatska Folklorna Grupa (Velebit) (New South Wales)
Indo-Chinese Australian Women's Association Inc. (South Australia)
Indonesian Society of Queensland Italian Dance Group (Queensland) Koledari (New South Wales)
Krishnan Nair School of Indian Dance (New
South Wales) Margaret Walker Dance Centre (New South
Wales)
Melbourne Cyprus Turkish Folklore Group (Victoria)
Melbourne School of Bandura (Victoria)
Multi-cultural Education Council of Western Australia
Nancy Caruana Greek Dancers (New South Wales)
Newtown Neighbourhood Centre (New South Wales)
New South Wales Turkish Education and Cultural Association
Polish Folkloric Ensemble Kunjawy of Newcastle (New South Wales)
Polish Folkloric Ensemble 'Syrenka' (New South Wales)
Polish Performing Arts Theatre in Australia (New South Wales)
Polish Vocal-Dancing Ensemble 'Lowicz' (Victoria)
Polonia Inc. (Western Australia)
Serbian Folklore Group 'Avala' (Victoria) Shalom (Victoria)
Spanish Folkloric Group (New South Wales) The Boite (Victoria)
Ukranian Folk Dance Ensemble 'Kalyna' (Queensland)
Western Australian Sri Lanka (Ceylon) Association (Inc.) (Western Australia)
West Australia Ukranian Folk Dancing
Group (Western Australia) Yugoslav Kud Vuk Karadzic (Western
Australia) Art Network (National)
Arts Council of Australia (National) Australian Council of Trade Unions
(National)
Australian Youth Performing Arts Association (National)
Canberra Community Arts Front Inc. (Australian Capital Territory)

Amount
$
500 3,150 20,500
500 18,380
2,500
800
2,000
1,000
250
1,000
1,560 500 500 500
2,000
11,000
1,000 1,778
8,275
3,700
2,000
635
800
1,000
1,700
1,000 1,500
750 1,000
750 7,000
1,000
750
750
500 3,345 21,500
7,932
6,000
1,600

Community Arts Network of Queensland
Community Arts Network of South Australia
Praxis Incorporated (Western Australia) South West (Metropolitan) Regional Arts
Development Committee (New South Wales)
TREE Community Performance Group (New South Wales)
Victoria Community Arts Network (Victoria)
Woolloomooloo Mural Project (New South Wales)
Artreach (New South Wales) Arts Access Society (Victoria)
Australian Council of Trade Unions (National)
Brisbane Community Arts Centre (Queensland)
Community Activity Centres Network (New South Wales)
Community Improvement Through Youth (South Australia)
Corporation of the City of Noarlunga (South Australia)
Corporation of the City of Prospect (South
Australia) Garage Graphix (New South Wales)
Joint Photographic Exhibition Committee
(New South Wales) Katoomba Youth Centre Management Com-
mittee (New South Wales) Labor Council of New South Wales Lorna Hodgkinson Sunshine Home (New
South Wales)
Minto Community Arts Programme (New South Wales)
Nancye Bridges Artists 'Concertcare' (New South Wales)
Newcastle Out-of Workers (New South Wales)
Nic Nac (Surry Hills) Neighbourhood Information Centre (New South Wales)
Southern Media Co-operative (New South
Wales) Summerland Coast Tourist Authority (New
South Wales)
Trades and Labor Council of Western Australia (Western Australia)
TREE Community Performance Group (New South Wales)
Victorian Trades Hall Council (Victoria) Workers Cultural Action Committee (New
South Wales)
Workers Health Centre (New South Wales) Youth Emergency Shelter (Windsor)
(Queensland) Aruluen Arts and Cultrual Trust (Northern
Territory)
Arts Council of Australia (National) Blacktown Community Council for the Arts
(New South Wales)
Bread ahd Circus Theatre Company (New South Wales)
Carringbush Regional Library (Victoria) Central Western Regional Community Arts
Committee (New South Wales) Community and Performing Arts Resource
Team (Tasmania)

Amount
$ 800 2,500 635
1,640
2,500
1,000
1,800 3,000 35,333
9,000
1,000
10,000
9,000
2,090
3,000 6,825
4,100
350 7,000
1,700
1,848
7,210
3,293
790
4,000
4,000
15,000
2,500 12,000
8,000 5,653
4,100
2,000 102,253
2,110
5,000 8,000
8,400
2,000

2004 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Community Outreach Centre (Victoria) Flying Fruit Fly Circus (New South Wales)
North Queensland Regional Arts Association Prospect Mural Group (South Australia) Public Art Workshop (Victoria)
Round Earth Company (Tasmania) Sidetrack Theatre (New South Wales) South Coast Trades and Labour Council
(New South Wales) South Sydney Visual History Group
South West (Metropolitan) Regional Arts Development Committee (New South Wales)
St Martins Youth Arts Centre (Victoria) Arts Council of Australia (National) Specialist Advisory Services (National) Aboriginal Artists Agency (National) Adelaide Festival of Arts Inc (South
Australia) Association of Bandura Players in Australia
(New South Wales)
Festival of Perth Queensland Highland Pipers Society
Craft Board Adelaide Festival Centre Trust (South Australia) Art Gallery of Western Australia Museum of Applied Arts and Sciences (New South Wales) WollongongCity Gallery (New South Wales) Down the Lane Workshop (New South Wales) Meat Market Craft Centre (Victoria) Mt Rankin Pottery (New South Wales) Moorhead Pottery (New South Wales) Stephen Nicoll and Colin Patterson (Victoria)
Australian Red Cross Society (South Australia)
Central Western Regional Community Arts Committee (New South Wales)
Central Western Queensland Cultural Activities Association
Orange Potters Group (New South Wales) South Coast Labour Council (New South
Wales) Tamworth Art and Gallery Association (New
South Wales) Tasmanian School of Art Wollongong Institute of Education (New
South Wales)
Craft Council of Australia (National) Craft Council of the Australian Capital Terr-
itory Craft Council of New South Wales Craft Council of Northern Territory Craft Council of Queensland Craft Council of South Australia Craft Council of Tasmania Craft Council of Victoria Craft Council of Western Australia Craft Council of Australia (National) Craft Council of Australian Capital Territory Craft Council of New South Wales Craft Council of Northern Territory Craft Council of Queensland Craft Council of South Australia

Amount
$ 8,000 8,000 7,725 4,000 8,000 4,120 10,000
6,000 12,000
9,000 10,000 646,062
1,520 1,500
9,480
1,700 14,940
1,000
5,000 3,334
3,334 5,000
7,000 7,500 5,500 3,500
6,000
2,250
8,500
2,000 3,000
6,000
2,100 4,500
5,250 214,000
6,500 10,500 8,000 10,000 8,500 7,000 9,000 10,000 73,081 5,670 11,700 23,452 8,280 5,500

Craft Council of Tasmania
Craft Council of Victoria
Craft Council of Western Australia
Ethnic Artists Agency (National) Embroiderers Guild Victoria
Goethe Institute Jewellers and Metalsmiths Group of
Australia (National) Potters Society of Australia Pottery in
Australia (National) Queensland Potters Association
Tasmanian School of Art World Crafts Council Art Gallery of Western Australia Bauhinia Creative Workshop (Queensland)
Clayton Arts Council (Victoria) Clermont Ceramics (Queensland)
Collingwood Education Centre (Victoria) Craft Council of Australian Capital Territory Craft Council of New South Wales
Craft Council of Northern Territory Craft Council of Queensland Craft Council of South Australia
Craft Council of Tasmania Craft Council of Victoria Craft Council of Western Australia
Dalby Potters Group (Queensland) Dysart Pottery Club (Queensland) Fairhaven Centre (New South Wales)
Footscray Community Arts Centre Ltd (Victoria)
Gemfields Potters Group (Queensland)
Grenfell Community Arts and Crafts Centre
(New South Wales) Gunnedah District Spinners/Weavers (New
South Wales)
Mullewa Pottery Club (Western Australia) Rolleston Arts and Crafts Group
(Queensland)
Singleton Potters Group (New South Wales) Sydney University Settlement Tamworth Handspinners and Weavers (New
South Wales) Whyalla Potters Guild (South Australia) Wollahra Waverly Arts Centre (New South
Wales)
Arts Access Society (Victoria) 'Australia: Clay' exhibition
Ballarat Fine Art Gallery (Victoria) Bendigo Art Gallery (Victoria)
Crafts Council of New South Wales Crafts in Gear (National) exhibition Enamel Exhibition
Exhibitions in Community Places Goethe Institute Jewellery Exhibition to Europe
Orange Civic Centre Gallery (New South Wales)
Edward Parkenovicz (National) Queensland Art Gallery Queensland Arts Council Recent Ceramics Exhibition Tableware by Australian Potters (National)
Tasmanian School of Art Gallery Wagga Wagga City Art Gallery (New South
Wales) Ararat Gallery (Victoria) Art Gallery of South Australia

Amount
$
13,200 13,000 18,100
488 3,000 9,000
3,675
3,500 500
1,523 4,950
727 1,000
500 750 3,900 1,000 2,500 1,000 2,000 1,500 1,500 2,500 2,000 1,250 500 1,000
500 750
500
250 600
750 1,250 6,000
500 1,000
500 6,954 1,276
600 600 12,515 1,471 6,833 6,961 3,960 31,345
3,000 3,350 12,000 1,500 3,938 1,500 1,833
2,700 542 868

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2005

Ballarat Fine Art Gallery (Victoria)

Bathurst Regional Art Gallery (New South

Wales)

Bunbury Arts Centre (Western Australia)

Castlemaine Art Gallery (Victoria)

La Trobe Valley Arts Centre (Victoria)

Manly Art Gallery (New South Wales)

Museum of Applied Arts and Sciences (New

South Wales)

National Gallery of Victoria

Newcastle Region Art Gallery (New South

Wales)

Orange Festival of Arts (New South Wales)

Queen Victoria Museum and Art Gallery

(Tasmania)

Rockhampton Art Gallery (Queensland)

Sale Regional Art Centre (Victoria)

Shepparton Arts Centre (Victoria)

Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery

Wagga Wagga City Art Gallery (New South

Wales)

.

Crafts Promotion (National)

Crafts Resources Study (National)

Crafts Training Research (National)

Instrument Making and Repairs Study

(National)

Local/Regional Crafts Program (National)

Professional Development Research

(National)

Publications and Resource Material

(National)

Radio and TV Promotions (National)

Specialist Advisory Service (National)

Literature Board Angus and Robertson Publishers (National) Champion Publications (National) Cory and Collins (National) Creative Research Publishers (National) Footscray Institute of Technology (Victoria) Frederick May Foundation (New South Wales)
Fremantle Arts Centre Press (National) Greenhouse Publications Pty Ltd (National) Hale and Iremonger Pty Ltd (National) Harper and Rowe (Australasia) Pty Ltd
(National) Hyland House Publishing Pty Ltd (National) The Macmillan Company of Australia Pty
Ltd (National) McPhee Gribble Publishers Pty Ltd
(National) Melbourne House Pty Ltd (National) Norstrilia Press (National) New South Wales Institute of Technology Penguins Books Australia Ltd (National) Redback Press (National) Rigby Publishers Ltd (National) University of Queensland Press (National) Western Australia Committee for SISA
(Western Australia) Alella Books (National) Ansay Pty Ltd (National) Australian Literary Studies (National) Hale and Iremonger Pty Ltd (National) Harper and Rowe (Australasia) Pty Ltd
(National)
Hecate Press (National)

Amount
$ 87
816 308 189 637 1,490
4,661 3,073
1,151 1,006
6,288 332
3,241 934 804
3,634 3,100 3,234 3,625
3,000 877
3,870
1,192 850
3,822
10,060 2,460 10,080 2,640 2,650
2,000 3,720 2,520 2,520
4,680 10,800
6,120
3,720 3,840 1,920 2,630 5,500 5,040 10,200 21,020
380 1,920 2,000 3,569 4,800
3,840 2,160

Imprint (National) Thomas Nelson Australia (National) Neptune Press (National) Penguin Books Australia Ltd (National) Rigmarole Book Publishing (National) Tabloid Story (National)
University of Queensland Press (National) Western Plains Publishers (National) Alella Books (National) Angus and Robertson Publishers (National) Australian National University (Australian
Capital Territory) Biennale of Sydney Boolarong Publications (National) Compas (National) Creative Research Publishers (National) Edwards and Shaw Pty Ltd (New South
Wales) Fling Poetry (National) Fremantle Arts Centre Press (National) Goethe Institute (Australian Capital Terri-
tory) Hale and Iremonger Pty Ltd (National) Razor back Press Monash University (Victoria) Montsalvat Arts Foundation (Victoria) Neptune Press (National) New poetry (National) Poetry Australia (National) Poets in School Projects 1982 (New South
Wales) Poets Union, Melbourne Branch Prism/Poetry Society (National) Queensland Community Press (National) Randolph Press (National) Sisters Publishing Ltd (National) South Head Press (National) Transit Poetry (National) University of Queensland Press (National) Wentworth Books Pty Ltd William Collins Pty Ltd (National) Winton Tourist Promotion Association
(Queensland) Wollongong Poets Union (New South Wales) Workers' Educational Association of New
South Wales Australian Film and Television School
(National) Australian National Playwrights' Conference
(National) Canberra Community Arts Front Currency Press Pty Ltd (National) Drama Project Trust (Victoria) Festival of Australia Student Theatre
(National) Fortune Theatre Company Inc (Australia
Capital Territory) Greek Arts Centre 'Laiki Skini' (Victoria) Hunter Valley Theatre Company Ltd (New
South Wales) International Stage Attractions Pty Ltd
(National) International Theatre Institute (National) Marionett Theatre of Australia Ltd (New
South Wales) Melbourne Theatre Company (Victoria) National Theatre Inc. (Western Australia) Makar Press (National)

Amount
$ 3,000 3,360 4,200 9,720
960 6,500 10,000 2,760
960 5,232
2,650 2,200
768 2,000 1,152
960 768 756
500 768 500 4,000 1,000 816 6,000 8,286
3,200 1,600 1,776 3,072
960 2,477 1,008
768 2,192
912 3,510
1,750 250
685
9,100
9,000 1,020 5,880 4,850
900
7,067 1760
1,362
1,250 1,500
3,875 4,600 2,277 4,402

2006 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

New South Wales State Conservatorium of
Music (New South Wales) Nimrod Theatre Company Ltd (New South
Wales)
Playbox Theatre Company (Victoria)
Playlab Press (National)
Q Theatre Group (New South Wales) Queensland Youth Orchestral Council
St Martins Youth-Arts Centre (Victoria)
Salamanca Script Resource Centre (National)
Salamanca Theatre Company (Tasmania) Seymour Group (New South Wales)
Shopfront Theatre for Young People (New South Wales)
South Australia Public Schools Music Society Spare Parts Puppet Arts Theatre (Western
Australia) Stage Company (South Australia)
State Theatre Company of South Australia Swan River Stage Company (Western
Australia) Theatre Australia (National) Troupe (South Australia) Victorian State Opera
Yackandandah Playscripts (National) Angus and Robertson Publishers (National)
Australian Book Publishers Association (National)
Children's Book Council of Australia
(National) Children's Book Council of Australia (Aus-
tralian Capital Territory) Children's Book Council of Australia (Vic-
toria) Children's Book Council of Australia (West-
ern Australia) Dewan Bahasa Dan Pustaka Malaysia Hodder and Stoughton (Australia) Pty Ltd
(National) Institute of Early Childhood Studies (New
South Wales Magpie Theatre-in-Education (South
Australia) Oxford University Press (National)
Western Australian Institute of Technology A. H. and A. W. Reed Pty Ltd (National) Alternative Publishing Co-operative Ltd
(National) Hale and Iremonger Pty Ltd (National)
Hill of Content Publishing Co. Pty Ltd (National)
The Macmillan Company of Australia Pty Ltd (National)
McPhee Gribble Publishers Pty Ltd (National)
Thomas Nelson Australia (National)
Oxford University Press (National) Penguin Books Australia Ltd (National) Quartet Books Australia Pty Ltd (National) Red Rooster Press (National) Tasmanian Historical Research Association University of Queensland Press Adelaide Festival of Arts (National) Artists-in-Schools Program (National) Artlook (National) Association for the Study of Australian
Literature (National)

Amount

$
2,000
3,100 2,100 1,500 2,400
300 5,000
4,000 2,645 1,500
3,550 750
1,267 3,357 3,000
1,600 3,590
398 1,150 1,500
600
1,250
7,000
1,500
1,000
1,300 2,200
8,640
2,000
2,430 2,520
500 1,040
3,400 1,760
1,920
2,720
1,200 4,640 5,000 11,100 2,800 1,120 3,180 2,700 32,000 4,000 3,100
2,000

Ash Magazine (National)
Aspect (National) Australian Library Promotion Council
(National) Australian Book Review (National) Adelaide University University Press
(National) Australian Literary Studies (National)
Australian Society of Authors (National) Australian Studies Centre (National) Australian Writers' Guild (National) Braille and Talking Book Library (Victoria) Bulgaria-Australia Writers Exchange Canadian Association for Commonwealth
Literature and Language Studies Canada-Australia Literary Award Cat and Fiddle Press (National) CRNLE Reviews Journal (National) D. W. Thorpe Pty Ltd (National) Darling Downs Institute Press (National) Eaglehawk Dahlia and Arts Festival (Vic-
toria) Fellowship of Australian Writers (National) Fellowship of Australia Writers
(Queensland) Fremantle Arts Centre Press (Western
Australia) Hecate (National) Helix (National) Island Magazine (National) Koala Books of Canada Ltd Latvian Press Society in Australia (National) L1NQ (National) Luna (National) Meanjin (National) Muse Arts and Entertainment (Australian
Capital Territory) National Book Council (National) National Parks and Wildlife Service (New
South Wales) Overland (National) Pen International New Zealand Centre Quadrant (National) Research Projection Library (Holdings
(National) Royal Blind Society of New South Wales Scotland Australia Literary Exchange Society of Women Writers Australia
(National) Southerly (National) Tasmanian Writers' Union The Hard Word (Australian Capital Terri-
tory) The Writer and Human Rights Toowoomba Municipal Library
(Queensland) Triple -R Broadcasters Ltd (Victoria) West Australian Institute of Technology Westerly (National) Wollongong Poets' Union (New South
Wales)
Music Board Adelaide Festival Centre Adelaide Percussions Araluen Arts and Cultural Trust (Northern Territory) Armidale City Band (New South Wales)

Amount
$
1,000 4,500
7,000 17,000
2,080 2,750 15,100 1,390 10,500 1,000
430
505 4,537 1,728 1,000 4,500 2,016
600 6,000
3,330
3,000 1,250 11,000 4,750
434 953 800 800 14,400
300 56,040
5,000 14,400
1,000 30,069
297 3,000 4,043
1,000 14,400 3,420
495 956
200 2,300 2,650 13,800
330
345 750
9,000 825

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2007

Arts Council of Australia (National) Arts Victoria-Music '81 Astra Chamber Music Society (Victoria)
Australian Broadcasting Commission Australian National University (Australian
Capital Territory) Cairns Combined Schools Band
(Queensland)
Canberra School of Music (Australian Capital Territory)
City of Shoalhaven Philharmonic Society (New South Wales)
Come Out '83 Committee (Victoria) Fellowship of Australia Composers (New
South Wales) Federman (Queensland) Human Veins Dance Theatre (New South
Wales) Imperial Art and Craft Cultural Centre (New
South Wales) McPhail Centre for Performing Arts Magpie State theatre in Education (South
Australia) Melbourne Mandolin Orchestra Musica Viva Australia (National) Music Set Australia (South Australia) New South Wales State Conservatorium of
Music One Extra Dance Theatre (New South
Wales) Queen Elizabeth II Arts Council St Martins Youth Arts Centre (Victoria) Seymour Group (New South Wales) South Australian Public Schools Music
Society Tasmania Conservatorium of Music Tasmanian Dance Company University of New South Wales Ensemble Victoria State Opera West Australia Ballet Company Inc Women and Arts Festival (New South
Wales) Allans Music Australasia Pty Ltd. (Victoria) Anteater Records (Victoria) Australian Folk Trust (National) Australian Music Centre (National) Australian Music Marketing Services
(National) Bush Traks (New South Wales) Canberra Community Arts Front Inc Coopers and Hybrand (National) Country Music Australia (National) Faber Music Ltd Fellowship of Australian Composers (New
South Wales) Instrument Making and Repairs Study
(National) International Association of Music Libraries
(National) International Association of Sound Archives
(National) Jamm Pty Ltd (National) MacMillan Australia (National) NMA Publications (National) Radio University 5UV (South Australia) South Australia Recordings Adelaide Chorus Adelaide Festival 1982

Amount
$ 9,000 5,200 3,162 8,615
1,000
300
2,050
375 3,375
2,000 8,295
4,500
7,500 1,500
2,250 500
6,140 620
3,000
2,250 16,000 6,000 5,512
1,000 1,200 7,130
750 1,500
371
2,040 1,400 1,500 12,500 119,228
34,400 2,000
500 9,150 1,200 1,320
1,000
3,000
1,000
2,200 2,000 1,495 2,200 4,651 1,500
250 5,000

Artists in School Program (National)
Arts Council of Australia (National) Australian Intervarsity Choral (New South
Wales) Australian Jazz Club (Queensland) Australian Jazz Foundation (National) Australian Society for Music Education
(Tamworth) (New South Wales) Australian String Teachers' Association
(Queensland)
Balwyn Youth Concert Band (Victoria) Benalla Education Centre Ltd (Victoria) Border Music Camp (New South Wales) Browns Mart (Northern Territory) Cairns Youth Orchestra (Queensland) Canberra Youth Orchestra Chamber String of Melbourne Children's Free Embassy (National) Choral Union of South Australia Community Arts Officer Seminar (National) Department of Music, University of Western
Australia Elder Conservatorium of Music (South
Australia) Gleniffer Brae String Festival (New South
Wales) Maryborough Music '81 Committee (Vic-
toria) Melbourne Youth Music Council (Victoria) Mount Isa Youth Orchestra (Queensland) Music Co-ordinators' Conference (National) Music Teachers Association of New South
Wales Music Teachers Association of Queensland Music Teachers Association of South
Australia National Band Council of Australia
(National) National Music Camp Association
(National) New South Wales State Conservatorium of
Music North Queensland Regional Arts Association Northwest Music Project Association (Tas-
mania) Pan Pacific Music Camps (New South Wales Quaranup Music Camp Inc. (Western
Australia) Queensland Youth Orchestra Council
(Queensland) South Australian Music Camp (South
Australia) State Opera of South Australia Suzuki Society for Children (New South
Wales) Sydney Kindergarten Teachers College Sydney Youth Orchestra Tamusca Music Camp (New South Wales) Tasmanian Conservatorium of Music Tasmanian Flute Society Inc. Tasmanian Youth Orchestra Council Townsville Singers Association (Queensland) Barry Ward Agency (New South Wales) Warrnambool CMP Steering Committee
(Victoria) Western Australian Youth Orchestra Willoughby Symphony Choir (New South
Wales)

Amount
$ 10,000 5,000
1,000 5,000 21,000
900
4,450 4,000 1,000 1,000 5,875
370 9,900 1,000 1,200
600 1,276
700
3,200
1,000
2,000 6,460 2,500 2,548
6,500 1,500
1,500
4,000
32,000
3,200 11,500
1,800 3,200
1,000
13,800
3,060 200
1,000 2,000 11,000 3,000 1,500
750 5,200
500 20,000
2,000 5,000
500

2008 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Willoughby Symphony Orchestra (New South Wales)
Wollongong City Gallery (New South Wales) Young Music Society Incorporated (Aus-
tralian Capital Territory) Adelaide Chamber Orchestra Inc. Adelaide Chorus Astra Chamber Music (Victoria) Australian Chamber Orchestra Pty Ltd
(National) Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust Or-
chestras (National) Australian Music Marketing Services
(National) Australian Opera (National) Cairns Civic Orchestra (Queensland) Canberra Opera Society Community and Art Centre Foundation
(Tasmania) Crossfire International Tour
Elder Conservatoirum of Music (South Australia)
Gemini Concert Jazz Action Society of New South Wales Jazz Action Society of Northern Tasmania Jazz Action Society of Queensland Jazz Action Society of Tasmania La Romanesca International Tour Leonine Consort Ltd (National) MacPhail Centre for the Arts Magic Puddin Band (New South Wales) Melbourne Chorale Melbourne International Festival MLC Fire and General Insurance Company
Ltd (National) Musica Viva Australia (National) Newcastle Conservatorium of Music (New
South Wales) Northwest Music Project Association (Tas-
mania) Perth Jazz Society Playbox Theatre Co. (Victoria) Queensland Conservatorium Queensland Theatre Orchestra Seymour Group (New South Wales) State Opera of South Australia Sydney Philharmonic Society Tasmanian Arts Advisory Board Victoria State Opera Western Australia Arts Orchestral Found-
ation Western Australian Opera Company Western Australian String Quartet
Theatre Board All Out Ensemble (South Australia) Australian Nouveau Theatre (Victoria) Australian National Playwrights Conference (National) Brisbane Repertory Theatre (Queensland) Canberra Repertory Society Central Western Regional Theatre Company (New South Wales) Christchurch Cathedral (New South Wales) Circus Australia (National) City of Elizabeth Festival (South Australia) Darwin Theatre Group Ensemble Productions (New South Wales)

Amount
$
1,000 2,500
1,000 8,000 1,800 5,000
51,267
2,741,000
10,000 3,337,000
3,000 10,000
3,000 5,500
3,500 1,000 10,405 2,000 5,000 2,000 4,500 2,770 2,000 5,000 9,000 3,550
2,148 258,393
1,725
2,000 5,000 2,000 17,000 12,400 17,400 56,000 12,898 4,225 45,000
22,300 45,000 20,714
9,500 20,800
20,500 20,000 10,000
100 2,000 26,000 3,500 29,400 61,000

Eyre Peninsula Regional Cultural Centre
(South Australia) Festival of Perth (National)
Fools Gallery (Australian Capital Territory)
Fortune Theatre Company (Australian Capi-
tal Territory) Fringe Theatres Committee (New South
Wales) Gay Theatre Company (New South Wales)
Griffin Theatre Company (New South Wales)
Hole in the Wall Theatre (Western
Australia) Home Cooking Theatre (Victoria)
Hunter Valley Theatre Company (New
South Wales) International Theatre Institute (National) King O'Malley Theatre Company (New
South Wales) Krumpacker Pty Ltd (Victoria) La Mama (Victoria) Laiki Skini (Victoria)
Lieder Southern Regional Theatre (New South Wales)
Marian Street Theatre (New South Wales)
Melbourne Theatre Company
Mill Theatre (Victoria) Mixed Company (Victoria)
Mike Mullins (New South Wales) Murray River Performing Group (New South
Wales and Victoria)
Naliandah Drama Circle (New South Wales) National Theatre (Western Australia) New England Theatre Company (New South
Wales) New Moon Theatre Company (Queensland) New Theatre (New South Wales)
Nightshift (Tasmania) Nimrod Theatre (New South Wales) Nomadic Arts (Victoria)
Playbox Theatre Company (Victoria) Players Theatre Company (New South
Wales)
Polyon Theatre (Tasmania) Popular Theatre Troupe (Queensland) QTheatre (New South Wales) Queensland Theatre Company . . .
Riverina Trucking Company (New South Wales)
Stage Company (South Australia) Swan River Stage Company (Western
Australia) Sydney Theatre Company
Tasmanian Theatre Company Theatre Company Off Broadway (New South
Wales) Theatre South (New South Wales) Theatre Works (Victoria)
Theatrical Trucking Company (New South Wales)
TN Theatre Company (Queensland)
Troupe (South Australia) West Community Theatre (Victoria) Winter Theatre (Western Australia) Women and Arts Festival (New South
Wales) Writers/Performers Workshop (Western
Australia)

Amount
$
66,000 20,000 14,300
50,500
6,000 4,000
10,300
61,591 2,500
63,600 5,610
20,000 6,000 25,200 10,500
3,700 31,125 700,144 14,000 5,440 20,000
34,200 4,000 267,802
26,000 47,000
5,300 6,500 303,068 8,000 116,468
3,000 28,400 79,150 157,500 305,590
5,000 294,175
10,000 340,341 128,000
17,800 15,800 14,000
21,000 54,000 38,610 33,900 20,500
10,000
5,300

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2009

Writers Workshop Project (New South Wales)
Apprentice Theatre (Tasmania) Artists-in-Schools Program (National)
Australian Theatre for Young People (New South Wales)
Brisbane Repertory Theatre
Carclew Youth Arts Centre (South Australia)
Central Metropolitan West Performing Arts Project (New South Wales)
Crosswinds Theatre-in-Community Team (Victoria)
Children's Arena Theatre (Victoria)
Energy Connection (South Australia) Four's Company (Victoria)
Freewheels TIE Company (New South Wales)
Mushroom Troupe (Victoria)
New England Theatre Company (New South Wales)
Nimrod Street Theatre (New South Wales)
Pact Co-operative (New South Wales) Pipi Storm (New South Wales)
Reid House Theatre Workshop (Australian Capital Territory)
Salamanca Script Resource Centre (Tasmania)
Salamanca Theatre Company (Tasmania) Sidetrack Theatre Company (New South
Wales)
St Martins Youth Arts Centre (Victoria) State Theatre Company, Magpie (South
Australia)
South West Office of Regional Administration (Western Australia)
TN Theatre Company (Queensland)
Toe Truck Theatre (New South Wales) Victorian Youth Theatre Association Aboriginal Islander Development Program
(New South Wales)
Australian Association for Dance in Education (Australian Capital Territory)
Australian Association for Dance in Education (Northern Territory)
Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust (National)
Australian Ballet School (National)
Australian Ballet Company (National) Australian Dance Theatre (South Australia
and Victoria) Biennale of Sydney
Canberra Dance Ensemble (Australian Capital Territory)
Dance Exchange (New South Wales) Dancers of Asia (New South Wales) Fizzical Jerk (Victoria)
Human Veins Dance Theatre (Australian Capital Territory)
International Dance Course for Professional Choreographers (National)
Kinetikos Dance Theatre (Western Australia)
Laberinto (New South Wales)
Mused Performance Ensemble (New South Wales)
North Queensland Ballet and Dance Society (Queensland)

Amount
$
9,470 5,300 8,300
3,750 33,600
6,547
2,000
6,800 52,400 15,800 18,400
45,600 36,500
2,000 599
15,200 10,000
50,000
4,000 101,612
26,000 65,900
750
4,000 7,500 91,790 4,370
12,000
7,609
4,180
40,000 268,924 1,603,171
247,000 17,000
1,850 27,490
3,350 6,780
52,960
16,000
5,660 33,500
1,600
15,600

One Extra Dance Theatre (New South Wales)
Queensland Ballet Company Sydney Dance Company
Sydney Festival Committee Tasmanian Dance Company West Australian Ballet Company MIMACT (Australian Capital Territory) New South Wales Theatre of the Deaf Sydney Corporeal Mime Theatre Victorian Theatre of the Deaf Aurora Puppets (New South Wales) Handspan Theatre (Victoria) Little Patch Theatre (South Australia) Marionette Theatre of Australia (New South
Wales) Mildura Arts Centre (Victoria) Paperbag Puppet Theatre (South Australia) Punchtucker Performing Arts Company
(South Australia) Queensland Marionette Theatre Terrapin Puppet Company (Tasmania) Maeve Vella (Victoria) Assessment Program (National) Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust (New
South Wales) Canberra Theatre Centre Trust Theatre Publications (National)
Visual Arts Board Art Projects (Victoria) Artlaw Agency (National) Artspace (New South Wales) Australian Gallery Directors Council (National) Australian Centre for Photography (National) Ann Berriman (National) Biennale of Sydney Creative Space Experimental Art Foundation (South Australia) George Paton and Ewing Galleries (Victoria) Institute of Modern Art (Queensland) Praxis Inc. (Western Australia) Print Council of Australia (National) Sydney Studio The Photographers Gallery (Victoria) Power Studio Paris City of Hamilton Art Gallery (Victoria)
City of Mildura Arts Centre (Victoria) Darling Downs Institute of Advanced Edu-
cation (Queensland) Darwing Community College (South
Australia) Experimental Art Foundation (South
Australia) Lismore Regional Art Gallery (New South
Wales) Melbourne City Libraries Praxis Inc. (Western Australia) Victorian Tapestry Workshop Victorian Trades Hall Council Wollongong City Gallery (New South Wales) Visual Arts Board Albury Regional Art Centre (New South
Wales)

Amount
$
72,858 118,200 306,000
5,037 143,000 121,500
8,000 39,900 16,500
1,648 10,000 10,500 50,400
106,000 5,000 5,000
2,100 33,000 15,400
1,000 16,984
234,000 32,030 34,700
7,000 7,500 30,000
100,000
43,925 1,250
49,000 3,000
28,200 7,200 17,000 28,000 9,980 3,640 3,000 4,667 3,000 4,000
4,000
8.000
6,000
3,500 3,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 3,000
315
10,000

2010 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Alice Springs Art Foundation (Northern Territory)
Ballarat Fine-Art Gallery (Victoria) Bendigo Art Gallery (Victoria)
Burnie Art Gallery (Tasmania) Mornington Peninsula Arts Centre (Victoria) Undercraft Gallery (Western Australia)
University Art Museum (Queensland)
Brisbane Community Arts Centre Wagga Wagga City Art Gallery (New South
Wales)
Regional Galleries Association of New South Wales
Western Australian Institute of Technology (Western Australia)
AMZART (National) Art Gallery of New South Wales
Australian Gallery Directors Council (National)
Australian Film Commission (National)
Ann Berriman (New South Wales) Helix Institute of Contemporary Art, London Ingo Kleinert (Australian Capital Territory)
Paris Biennale (National) Pitspace Preston Institute of Technology
(National)
Ray Hughes Gallery Serpentine Gallery, London
Tennant Creek Art Award Committee (Northern Territory)
Venice Biennale Visual Arts Board (National)
Womens Art Movement (South Australia) Art and Australia (National) Art Gallery of New South Wales
Bay Books (National) Biennale of Sydney Swinburne Limited (National)
Visual Arts Board (National) Albert Park Primary School (Victoria)
Borough of Kerang (Victoria) Art and Text Art Association of Australia (National)
Art Network (National) Aspect Publications (National) Children's Book Council of Australia
(National)
Experimental Art Foundation (South Australia)
Gryphon Books Pty Ltd (Victoria) Hale and Iremonger Pty Ltd (New South
Wales)
Lip Collective (National) Oxford University Press (Victoria) Power Gallery of Contemporary Art (New
South Wales)
Print Council of Australia (National) Rigby Publishing Company (South Australia)
The Law Book Company (New South Wales) Women's Art Movement (National) Art Museums Association of Australia Art Network Biennale of Sydney City Art Institute
Frederick May Foundation Power Institute of Fine Arts Visual Arts Board

Amount
$
10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 1,000
1,000
10,000
5,000 1;500 50,000
7,000 8,000 1,000
400 9,946 5,000 15,030
194 5,000 32,094
500 68,596 36,684
3,000 140 800 108
1,700 100
1,699 2,000 2,000 16,000
500 16,000 4,500
2,500
3,000 4,000
2,800 4,000 6,000
4,000 7,000 5,000 2,000 1,000 5,000 2,250 15,000 5,000 4,500 2,500
448

Australia Council Programs
Architecture and Design Committee (National)
Architecture and Design Book (National) Art of the Engineer Exhibition
Audio Visual on Design Project (National) 1982 Australia IFLA and AILA Congress Australian Institute of Landscape Architects
(National) Design in Government Project (National) Designer of the Year Project (National)
Exhibition of Australian Architecture to Europe
Exhibition Earth Architecture Project (National)
Hobart Architecture Co-operative Inc National Design Seminar Project (National) Arts Council of Australia (National) Australian Teachers of Media (National) Leigh Hobbs (National) Melbourne Theatre Co.
Salamanca Theatre Company (Tasmania) Shutterbug (New South Wales) Sidetrack Theatre Co. (New South Wales)
Theatre: Getting your act together (National)
Toe Truck Theatre Ltd. (New South Wales) Victorian Arts Council (Victoria) Festival '82 (National)
Aboriginal Artists Agency (National) Adelaide Festival 1982 Arts Council of Australia (National) Australian Dance Theatre (South Australia)
Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust (National)
CircusOz (National) Computer Music Company (New South
Wales) Confederation of Australian Professional Per-
forming Arts Ltd. (National) Crafts Council of Victoria
International Cultural Corporation of Australia (National)
International Society for Education Through Art (National)
International Visitors Program (National) Melbourne Theatre Company (Victoria) Paris Autumn Festival
Queen Elizabeth II Arts Council of New Zealand
Australian Children's Choir (Victoria) Corinthian Singers (South Australia) Forest Graduates Band (New South Wales) Goulburn Consort of Voices (New South
Wales) Koleda Croatian Folkloric Ensemble (New
South Wales) Linnet Girls Choir Matija Gubec Croatian Society (Victoria) Melbourne and Metropolitan Tramways
Band New South Wales State Conservatorium of
Music Queensland Youth Orchestra St Mary's Cathedral Choir (New South
Wales) Saules Jostas Ansamblis (New South Wales)

Amount
$
70,125 1,900 783 2,000 4,024
7,500 4,789 3,000
15,300
104 6,000 1,889 2,500 1,500
450 699 1,400 2,659 910
2,950 6,000 3,000 545,000 77,537 5,000 28,000 25,000
10,000 45,000
8,000
7,000 9,000
5,000
400 3,673 3,000 3,964
16,000 2,500 2,500 1,500
2,500
2,500 2,500 2,500
1,500
2,500 2,500
2,500 2,500

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2011

Amount

$

Arts Information Network Project (National) . . . . . . .
Crafts Resources Inquiry (National) Mary-Elizabeth Gill (National) Individual Artists Inquiry (National) Inform Consultancy (National) IYDP Research Project (National) National Arts Information Review
(National) . . . . . . . Open Channel (National) Women and Arts Project (National) ARTS Ltd. (New South Wales) Aboriginal Arts and Crafts Pty Ltd.
(National) . . . . . . . . Arts Council of Australia (National) . Australian Copywright Council (National) Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust
(National) . . . . . . . . . . Brisbane Community Arts Centre
(Queensland) . . . . . . . . . Confederation of Australian Performing Arts
Ltd. (National) . . . . . .
Victoria State Opera Co. . . . . . . . Wong and Mayes (New South Wales)

1,011 11,216
96 7,361 4,184 15,000
16,892 2,296 9,500 1,200
49,000 4,000
106,000
198,190
200
10,000 76,270
1,370

-Some organisations have received separate grants from
various Boards of the Australian Council. These have been listed separately under the Board headings.

Assistance Program for Sport and Recreation for Disabled People
Riding for the Disabled Association of
Australia . . . . . . . . . . Australian Blind Sports Federation
Amputee Sporting Association of Australia Australian Sports Council for the Disabled
Australian Deaf Sports Federation Australian Disabled Skiers Federation Australian Association for Better Hearing
Queensland Sporting Wheelies . . . .
Australian Transplant Olympics Australian Paraplegic Quadraplegic Asso-
ciation . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australian Council for Health Physical Edu-
cation and Recreation . . . . . . . Royal Australian Institute of Poets and Re-
creation

12,500 24,000 22,000
5,500 18,250 15,200 6,000 2,000 10,000
42,300
10,700
500

Other Krait Appeal Fund
Museums Association of Australia
Restoration Appeal for Saint Andrews Cathedral . . . . . . .
XII Commonwealth Games Australia 1982 United Nations Association of Australia's
Year of the Tree Campaign . . . . . Commonwealth Games Foundation
Australian Archaeological Association Conference . . . . . . . . . . .
Van Deimen's Land Memorial Folk Museum 'Narryna'-Hobart . . . . . . .
United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation . . . . . . .
International Cultural Corporation of Australia Limited . . . . . . . .
Bureau of International Exhibitions International Union for the Conservation of
Nature and Natural Resources National Institute of Dramatic Art

25,000 6,000
100,000 1,500,000
10,000 200,000
4,000
25
962
250,000 5,572
23,164 437,900

Australian Citizenship of Overseas-born Persons

(Question No. 4833)

Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

How many overseas-born persons in Australia (a) have been residentially qualified to apply for Australian citizenship by virtue of 3 years' residence and (b) have become Australian citizens in each year from 1973.

Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(a)

(b)

1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

Not available Not available Not available
415,920 400,320 374,190 1,232,200 1,196,200 1,154,200

57,102 87,549 84,059
118,189 70,706 65,094
53,555 68,145
56,459

The figures in column (a) are estimates based on census
data and other Departmental information. Estimates before 1979 did not include Commonwealth citizens.

The figures in column (b) include a small number of former Australians granted citizenship.

United States Military Satellites Supported by NASA Station at Orrora1 Valley, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 4841)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
Further to his answers to questions Nos 3698 (Hansard, 17 February 1982, page 304) and 4236 (Hansard, 6 and 7 May 1982, pages 2500-1) were any United States military satellites supported by the NASA station at Orroral Valley, A.C.T., between 1971 and 1978; if so, what were the (a) formal designations (b) dates oflaunch and (c) orbital parameters of each of these satellites.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.

Port Clinton, Queensland: Feasibility Study for Use as Coal Port
(Question No. 4859)
Dr EYeringham asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) Have Hancock and Wright proposed or prepared feasibility studies of the development of Port Clinton, Queensland, as a coal port based on its excision from the Shoalwater Bay training reserve.
(2) Has the Queensland Government sought entry to the reserve for officials of the State Department of Harbours and Marine; if so, (a) was this arranged through normal channels, (b) were attempts at entry stopped by service personnel and (c) what legal remedies will be sought and who will be charged if such attempts were illegal.
(3) What studies of land use and management in the reserve have been undertaken by Australian authorities.

2012 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(4) Was a study made of the potential development of tourist marinas and other facilities in Port Clinton; if so, (a) who made the study and (b) does the study indicate illegal access was gained to the reserve.
(5) Has the Government advised the Queensland Government that Cape Manifold has deeper water more suitable for a coal port than Port Clinton.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am not directly aware of any proposals or studies by Messrs Hancock and Wright. Newspaper reports suggest that a feasibility study for the development of Port Clinton has been issued by them.
(2) (a), (b) and (c). Through appropriate channels, the Queensland Government sought entry to the Shoalwater Bay Training Area for a State government technical team to conduct an on-site inspection and feasibility study, to establish the suitability of the area for development of a deep water port. A marine survey of Port Clinton was conducted during August 1982. There have been no known attempts at illegal entry to the Training Area.
(3) The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Division of Land and Water Resources has conducted a wide range of environmental studies of the Training Area for my Department, which are specifically related to land use and management. A number of these studies have wider application than required by the Department of Defence and have been published by the CSIRO. They cover such matters as physical and biological resource inventories, terrain classification and fire dynamics studies. In addition, the CSIRO has prepared, at my Department's request, unpublished studies on matters specifically related to Defence training activities, such as the impact on the Area of those activities and associated works proposals, vehicle trafficability, forest resources, and soil stability.
(4) I am not aware of any such study, or of illegal entry associated with any such study.
(5) No.
Commonwealth Ombudsman: Complaints Received
(Question No. 4862)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) How many complaints were received by the Commonwealth Ombudsman in the ACT, and each of the State Offices for each year since the office was set up.
(2) How many of those complaints were within jurisdiction.
(3) Of those within jurisdiction, how many were found to be sustained.
(4) Of those sustained, how many were rectified.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) Detailed statistics on complaints received and resolved by the Commonwealth Ombudsman for each year of his operation are contained in his annual reports. These statIstics are broken down to show, among other matters, the State of residence of each complainant, the relevant department or authority, findings on jurisdiction and the manner of handling, and thus substantially provide the information sought.

Industry Assistance Measures: Export Promotion
(Question No. 4867)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Is it a fact that, under the industry assistance measures announced by the Prime Minister on 19 July 1982, anybody who travels abroad for purposes of 'export promotion' can receive a cash payment of $50 a day up to a maximum of 10 days.
(2) Is it also a fact that he or she can already get 70 per cent of the fares incurred in overseas travel refunded in cash from the Export Development Grants Board.
(3) Can a travel allowance be paid for up to 3 years without the payee having to export anything.
(4) Was a travel allowance rejected by the Industries Assistance Commission because it found that such a move was likely to increase the scope for deliberate abuse.
(5) Did the Government reject this opinion; if so, for what reason.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. Claimants must first establish with the Export Development Grants Board (EDGB) that they are eligible for a grant; secondly they must satisfy the Board that a visit was undertaken primarily and principally for the development of export markets. A promotional visits allowance of $50 a day up to a maximum of 10 days is then payable as a component of the Export Market Develoment Grant which is subject to taxation.
(2) Subject to satisfying the criteria indicated in (I) above, 70 per cent of overseas airfares may be paid as a component of an Export Market Development Grant.
(3) As the development of export markets is a lengthy procedure requiring persistence over a considerable period of time and often generating low initial returns, new claimants may receive grants for three years regardless of the amount of their export earnings during this time. After receiving grants for three grant years a claimant may only continue to receive grants if his export earnings exceed $25,000 per year for goods and services or $10,000 per year if derived from industrial property rights and know how. Tourist industry claimants are exempt from these provisions but must incur at least $5,000 eligible expenditure (other than fares) before they qualify.
(4) and (5) The Government took into account the lAC's views on the possible abuse of the scheme before deciding to provide these benefits.
The Government believes that the procedures developed to administer the payments will prevent abuse. The allowance has been set at a level consistent with the shared cost principle of the scheme, that is it is not intended that the allowance cover all a claimant's living expenses whilst overseas.
United States Military Satellite Supported by Tracking Station at Carnarvon, Western Australia
(Question No. 4882)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
Further to the answer to question No. 4236 (Hansard, 6 and 7 May 1982, page 2500), what was the (a) formal designation, (b) date of launch and (c) orbital parameter of each

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2013

United States military satellite supported by the NASA tracking station at Carnarvon, Western Australia, between 1969 and the closure of the station.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Details relating to unclassified US military satellites supported from the NASA tracking station formerly at Carnarvon were provided in the answer to question No. 4235 (Hansard 6 and 7 May 1982, page 2500). Security considerations preclude the provision of details of classified military satellites that were supported by the Carnarvon station.
Strawberries: Disease Risk in Imports from California
(Question No. 4886)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Are some Californian strawberries coming into Australia heavily soiled; if so, is the soil checked by quarantine authorities for the possible introduction of animal and plant diseases.
(2) Are many of the strawberries coming into Australia with the calyx attached to the fruit; if so, can the Mediterranean fruit fly be introduced on the calyx of the strawberries.
(3) Is it a fact that strawberries cannot be fumigated or sprayed due to their perishable nature.
(4) Does it take a month of laboratory testing to determine whether strawberries are carrying disease.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. Soil is a prohibited import. All goods are inspected on arrival in Australia and if any soil is found as a contaminant it must be removed or the import is rejected. All soil removed from imported goods is dealt with to remove any quarantine risk.
(2) Strawberries are imported with the calyx attached, as it is considered an integral part of the fruit. There is a prohibition of plant debris, which includes foliage, but not the calyx. There is no possibility that the Mediterranean fruit fly would be introduced on the calyx.
(3) The perishable nature of strawberries makes treatment difficult, but not impossible. Treatment will be ordered if insect infestation is found at inspection.
(4) No. Fruit, including strawberries, is not tested for disease on arrival. Permits are not given for the import of fruit which presents a disease risk to Australian industries. Rotten fruit found at inspection would be destroyed.
Sinai Peacekeeping Force
(Question No. 4891)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Is he able to say whether a private company called 'E' Systems from the United States of America, has the contract to supply certain commodities and services to the multinational, peace-keeping force in Sinai.
(2) Who invited tenders for the contract.
(3) Which companies (a) were invited to tender and (b) were among the tenderers.
(4) What were the national origins of (a) those invited to tender, (b) those who responded and (c) what were the quotes given.

(S) Who (a) reviewed the tenders and (b) granted the contract.
(6) Was the Australian Government consulted at any stage.
(7) What reasons were given for awarding 'E' Systems the contract.
(8) What were the terms of the contract.
(9) Was a separate contract for supplying the Australian contingent ever considered; if so (a) why was this alternative rejected and (b) by whom.
(10) What items has the (a) Australian Army and (b) individual troops purchased or hired from the company.
(II) What were the individual prices of the items or services.
(12) What is the total value of purchases or hirings by (a) the Australian Army and (b) Australian troops.
(13) Has the company supplied aviation support for Australian troops; if so (a) what form did this support take, (b) what was the cost and (c) who paid for the support.
(14) Is the Australian Army capable of supplying any of the services or commodities offered for sale or hire.
(IS) Did the Australian Army offer any of these same commodities or services for sale or hire and were any of them purchased or hired.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The Multinational Force and Observers (MFO), the body responsible to the Governments of Egypt and Israel for supervising the implementation of the terms of the Peace Treaty, has arranged for 'E' Systems to suppl;' certain commodities and services to the peace-keeping force in the Sinai.
(2) to (S) The information required to answer parts two to five of the honourable member's question is not available to the Australian Government. Under the terms of the A:ustralian MFO Agreement governing Australia's participation in the MFO, the MFO is required to provide, at no cost to the Government of Australia, such commodities and services as food, lodging and base support for the Australian Contingent MFO (ACMFO). Contractual arrangements for the provision of commodities and services is a matter for the MFO.
(6) No.
(7) and (8) See answer to (2) to (S).
(9) No.
(10) (a) Neither the Australian Army nor the ACMFO has purcl;lased or hired items from the company. (b) Individual members of the ACMFO have the opportunity of purchasing an increasingly varied range of items, mainly of a personal or souvenir type, from the company run canteen service. No record of any purchase is available to the Australian Government.
(II) and (12) See answer to part (10). (13) No.
(14) Yes. See also my answers to parts (2) to (S), (7) and (8).
(IS) No.
Brucellosis: Cases among Persons Employed in Abattoirs
(Question No. 4892)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Is brucellosis a notifiable disease.

2014 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) If so, is he able to say how many cases of brucellosis have occurred among persons employed in abattoirs in Australia in the calendar years 1973 to 1982 inclusive.
(3) Is he able to say how many Federal employees, for example, meat inspectors, have applied for compensation after contracting the disease.
(4) Is he able to say whether the Federal Government pays compensation to its employees when they contract the disease; ifso, how many people have received compensation.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Brucellosis is a notifiable disease.
(2) The Department is unable to provide details of the number of cases occurring among all persons employed in abattoirs as requested. There have however been 132 cases involving the Department's meat inspection staff in the calendar years 1973 to 1982 inclusive.
(3) In the calendar years 1973 to 1982 inclusive, 129 meat inspection staff have applied for compensation after contracting the disease. Three persons did not claim compensation.
(4) Where claims are submitted and liability accepted, the Federal Government pays compensation to its employees when they contract the disease. During the period 1973 to 1982 inclusive 128 employees have received compensation. One further claim is presently being considered.
Aircraft Passenger Seats: Safety Requirements
(Question No. 4893)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
(I) Can he say whether, after investigation into the crash of an Air Florida aircraft in Washington D.C. on 13 January 1982, an official of the United States National Transportation Safety Board expressed concern about the strength of passenger seats on the aircraft.
(2) Has his Department investigated the standard and strength of passenger seats on aircraft using Australian airspace.
(3) Are similar seats and anchorage parts used in Australian aircraft as in the Air Florida aircraft which crashed in Wa,hinglOn.
(4) What are the safety requirements for passenger seats in aircraft.
(5) How often is the strength of passenger seats checked, how are they checked and by whom.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) My Department is aware of reference in a television news program to alleged expressions of concern by the National Transportation Safety Board about the strength of passenger seats in general and in the Air Florida aircraft in particular. Some preliminary information has recently been received from the NTSB and is being studied but the final report and recommendations of the Board is still awaited.
(2) My Department has no jurisdiction on the standards applicable to passenger seats of airline aircraft using Australian airspace, except when such aircraft are on the Australian register. However, since there are few manufacturers of large transport aircraft and all such aircraft are built to the same internationally accepted standards, it is accurate to say that all airline aircraft using Australian airspace are fitted

with seats which comply with the United States Federal Aviation Regulation Part 25 standards or equivalent.
(3) Yes.
(4) Internationally accepted airworthiness requirements for passenger seats in airline aircraft cover the strength of seats, of safety belts, of attachments to the aircraft structure and flammability aspects. Passenger seats are designed to provide their occupants with maximum protection in a survivable accident such as a crash landing not involving deceleration forces greater than 9 times the force of gravity. Detail standards can be found in United States Federal Aviation Regulations FAR 25-785.
(5) The strength of each type of passenger seat and its attachments is checked in structural tests before the seat is allowed to be fitted to aircraft. The condition of the seat, belt, and attachments is checked for damage and insecurity regularly while the aircraft is in airline service. Specific checks are laid down in the aircraft Inspection Schedules which are approved by my Department. They usually take place once every 65 to 100 hours of operations depending on the aircraft type, and are performed by the airlines' maintenance organisation.

Cancer Patients: Treatment with Use of Laser Technology

(Question No. 4895)

Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:

(I) Has his Department made a grant for research into the

use of laser technology in the treatment of cancer at the

Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Adelaide.

.

(2) When the project becomes marketable, could it be worth millions of dollars to the export market.

(3) Have these grants been at a level of about one third of the expenditure of the research project.

(4) Has one of the grants to a PhD. graduate been given only in alternate years; if so, Why.

(5) Has the project's progress been impeded by the nature of the on/offgrant to that graduate.

(6) When the project is completed (a) will Australian cancer patients have more chance of surviving cancer therapy and (b) will patients benefit from new operating procedures
which aid rapid recovery from operations, thus reducing the costs of hospitalisation.

Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The National Health and Medical Research Council
(N.H. and M.R.C.) is supporting a project at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital concerning research into the treatment of cancer by phototherapy, in which a laser coupled to an optical fibre is used as one light source. The project is being undertaken by Drs Jacka, Blake and Forbes, with funding of $13,605 in 1982 and a commitment for 1983, and is entitled
'Physical principles of dosimetry for cancer phototherapy with haematoporphyrin derivative (HPD).'

The project forms part of an interdisciplinary team approach to the development of an alternative non-intrusive
treatment for malignant tumours. The N.H. and M.R.C. has also supported another aspect of this research, which involves
the separation and identification of components of HPD. This work is being undertaken at Adelaide University by Drs Ward and Forbes. Details of funding are:

1980-$19,538 for project entitled 'Chemistry of photoradiation therapy of malignant tumours'

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2015

1982-$24,152 for 'Chemistry of cancer phototherapy of HPD'.
(2) The development of phototherapy is at a relatively early stage, and the fundamental mechanism by which it may kill tumour cells is not fully understood and its therapeutic spectrum is unknown. It is therefore premature to estimate the commercial potential of the research.
(3) The grants were provided at the level recommended by the N.H. and M.R.C. after an extensive peer review examination. It is understood, however, that the research is supported by significant additional funds from private sources.
(4) The grant to Drs Ward and Forbes, which sought support for a Ph. D. graduate, was provided in 1980 and 1982 but not suported in 1981. The application as presented to the N.H. and M.R.C. for support in that year did not achieve the level of scientific merit required at the time.
(5) In awarding project grants, the N.H. and M.R.C. specifies a particular term of support. No guarantee is given of further funding of the project beyond that period. Applications for funding in future years are considered as new applications and assessed on the basis of scientific merit in open competition with all other applications. These rules are understood by applicants to the N.H. and M.R.C. However, I understand that notwithstanding the lack of N.H. and M.R.C. funds the project continued in 1981 with support from private sources.
(6) The nature of research is such that it is not possible to guarantee results prior to the completion of the work. The project certainly aims at providing a non-invasive alternative clinical treatment for cancer which, if proven, could provide an alternative to existing treatment procedures and may perhaps reduce hospital costs.
Telecom Sales Office in Burwood Road, Burwood, New South Wales
(Question No. 4916)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 24 August, 1982:
(I) What annual rental is paid by Telecom Australia for shop premises it rents for a sales office in Burwood Road, Burwood New South Wales.
(2) Does Telecom intend to open a sales office in (a) Birkenhead Point shopping centre, Drummoyne, New South Wales or (b) Strathfield Plaza, Strathfield, New South Wales.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Telecommunications Commission, is as follows:
(I) $31,496.
(2) (a) and (b) No.
Sub-Post Offices within the Electoral Division of Lowe
(Question No. 4918)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
Will action be taken by Australia Post to re-open the subpost offices within the Electoral Division of Lowe at (a) Russell-Lea and (b) Parramatta Road, Canada Bay (near Fivedock West Infants School).
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on information

provided by the Australian Postal Commission, is as follows:
No. Both areas are well served by existing postal facilities.
Mammary Prosthesis: Benefit Entitlement
(Question No. 4921)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
Does Medibank Private refuse to pay benefit entitlements on external mammary prosthesis more than once in a 36 month period; if so, why is a benefit entitlement not payable more often if a medical practitioner certifies an existing prosthesis to be causing ulceration, et cetera, due to a patient's loss of weight.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The approved rules of Medibank Private provide that ancillary benefits are not payable for the replacement of any prosthesis or appliance, including an external mammary prosthesis, if the previous supply for which benefits were paid occurred within the preceding 36 months. Medibank Private has advised that this applies irrespective of the reason for the replacement, except in the case of artificial eyes for children under 17 years of age.
The health insurance legislation is primarily designed to protect persons in the provision of basic medical and hospital benefits. There is no specified provision in the legislation relating to ancillary benefits. Health insurance funds are free to determine for themselves the nature and extent of the services for which ancillary benefits are payable.
Medibank Private has advised that this particular rule, and other limiting rules in the ancillary table, are necessary to ensure the table's viability and competitiveness with other funds' tables.
Citizenship: Adopted Alien Infant
(Question No. 4922)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
Must an application be made for Australian citizenship on behalf of an alien infant legally adopted by Australian citizens pursuant to an order of the Supreme Court of a State; if so, why.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. The reason is that the Australian Citizenship Act 1948 makes no provision for the automatic acquisition of Australian citizenship by children on adoption. One of the proposed amendments to the Act, announced in the Parliament on 6 May 1982, provides for the automatic acquisition of Australian citizenship by a child, resident in and adopted in Australian by an Australian citizen, upon granting of an adoption order by a court.
Potato Growers: Effect of New Zealand Imports
(Question No. 4931)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 24 July 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the continuing concern of potato growers in the central highlands region of Victoria that their economic livelihood is threatened by the current proposals for closer economic relations with New Zealand.

2016 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the fact that the potato industry contrubutes some $16m annually to the economy of the central highlands region and provides direct employment for 1,300 people within that region.
(3) Can he say whether the New Zealand potato industry enjoys certain economic advantages over its Australian counterparts.
(4) Will he give an assurance to the central highland region potato growers that the Australian potato industry will not be disadvantaged as a result of any final trade agreement with New Zealand.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) The economics of potato growing in New Zealand, and in Australia, is influenced by many factors. For example, climatic and other resource endowment characteristics, production costs, inflation rates, currency exchange rates, transport and other marketing costs and Government assistance measures such as tariffs, quantitative import restrictions and export subsidies all have a bearing upon the relative competitiveness of the Australian and New Zealand potato industries. On balance it would seem that, in recent years the Australian industry has not been in a position of disadvantage relative to the New Zealand industry since the balance of trade across the Tasman in potato products has been in Australia's favour.
(4) When negotiating the draft CER proposals, which were released early in June as a basis for consultation with industry, considerable emphasis was given to developing procedures which would ensure that undue disruption or hardship for particular industries would be avoided. The interests of the Australian potato industry were kept very much in mind during the negotiations and led to the development of a proposal for the accelerated phasing out of New Zealand's potato export subsidies matched by a phasing out of Australian and New Zealand potato tariffs (over the same period and in the same proportional steps).
In acknowledgement of the concerns expressed by the Australian industry, including Victorian growers, the Bureau of Agricultural Ecomonics (BAE) was asked to undertake a detailed examination of the likely arrangements. The BAE concluded that the relative competitive position of the Australian and New Zealand potato industries will be virtually unaffected by the proposed liberalisation measures:
In addition to the specific arrangements for potatoes other aspects of the draft CER package include the establishment of special liaison arrangements bet ween the Government and the horticultural processing-growing industry to monitor imports and to facilitate prompt action should a legitimate complaint arise under Australia's anti-dumping legislation. More generally, the proposed CER agreement provides special measures to safeguard industries from severe material injury or demonstrable threat thereof during the transition to free trade.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Trade and Resources
(Question No. 4933)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
( I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers

(a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice from senators and members has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr Anthony~- The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Minister's staff and the Parliamentary Questions Officer in the Department are responsible for scanning the Notice Papers for questions directed to the Minister.
These questions are then forwarded to the appropriate Divisional Head in the Department for preparation of a draft reply.
The draft reply with the appropriate executive approvals is submitted to the Minister for his approval.
Once approved the reply is returned to the Department's Parliamentary Questions Officer who arranges for the appropriate number of copies to be forwarded to the Table Office via the Minister's Senior Private Secretary.
(2) 169 questions were placed on the Notice Papers from 25 November 1980 to date by senators and members.
(3) 73 days.
(4) (a) 72; (b) 27; (c) 16; (d) nil; (e) nil, 37 questions have taken less than one month to answer.
(5) 17, none of which has been on the Notice Paper for 12 months or more.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Defence
(Question No. 4935)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2) how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2017

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Questions asked of me or my Senate representative are referred by officers of the Parliamentary Services Section of my Department to the appropriate functional area(s). Almost any officer of my Department could at some time be involved in the preparation of answers to questions. A draft response is submitted by the relevant Division or Branch head for my consideration.
(2) 520 have been asked between 25 November 1980 and 25 August 1982.
(3) The average time between a question being placed on notice and the answer being lodged with the Bills and Papers Office wa.s 62 days.
(4) (a) 216; (b) 94; (c) 12; (d) I; (e) 2.
(5) At the date of lodgment of this answer 27 questions asked between 25 November 1980 and 25 August 1982 are yet to be answered. None of these have been on the Notice Paper for 12 months or more.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for National Development and Energy
(Question No. 4936)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and members, has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Ministerial and Policy Co-ordination Section in the Department is responsible for the processing of Parliamentary Questions.
Questions directed to the Minister, or the Minister representing in the other Chamber, are examined by an officer in the Section and if misdirected, arrangements made for transfer to the appropriate Minister.
Questions are forwarded to the responsible Division Head for preparation by his officers of a draft reply. This may involve consultation with other Departments and Authorities, both Commonwealth and State.
The draft reply is cleared by either the Secretary, the Director, National Energy Office, or the Deputy Secretary before forwarded to the Minister for approval.

If approved by the Minister the reply is returned to the Ministerial Section where the necessary arrangements are made for copying and distribution to the relevant Table Office.
(2) 226.
(3) 45 days.
(4) (a) 196; (b) 17; (c) none; (d) none; (e) none.
(5) As at 25 August 1982 there were 13 questions on notice. All of these questions had been placed on notice during the current Sittings.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Attorney-General
(Question No. 4942)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.
(2) How many questions on notice from senators and members has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) The question of which officers on the Attorney General's staff and in the Department examine questions and prepare replies is not capable of a simple answer. It depends upon the nature of the question. Some questions require extensive research and officers at virtually any level may be involved. Others may be answered by reference to one officer. Those most commonly involved are the Senior Officer and the Secretary, Division Heads and Branch Heads in the Department.
(2) As at 25 August 1982,244.
(3) 62 working days.
(4) (a) 114, (b) 54, (c) 22, (d) nil, (e) nil.
(5) 54 questions remain outstanding of which none have been on Notice Paper longer than 12 months.
Answering of Questions on Notice: Minister for Health
(Question No. 4956)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) What are the details of the Minister's arrangements for the answering of questions on notice, specifying what officers (a) on the Minister's personal staff and (b) within the Minister's Department, are responsible for (i) examining the question asked and (ii) preparing the answers.

2018 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

(2) How many questions on notice, from senators and members has the Minister been asked from 25 November 1980 to date.
(3) What is the average delay incurred between the time of questions being placed on notice and the provision of the answer.
(4) For each question referred to in part (2), how many have taken (a) 1-3 months, (b) 3-6 months, (c) 6-9 months, (d) 9-12 months and (e) over 12 months, to be answered.
(5) How many of these questions are currently still on notice, and what is the reason for delay in the case of each question which has been on the Notice Paper of either House for 12 months or more.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) My Department's Parliamentary Questions Officer refers questions to appropriate Divisional/Instrumentality Heads who prepare draft answers. These responses are forwarded for clearance by the Director-General or a Deputy Director-General who then forwards them to me. Occasionally a question will seek information that only I or my staff have. My Senior Private Secretary prepares the answers to such questions.
(2) 556 to 9 September, 1982 (a).
(3) 15 weeks (b).
(4) (a) 233, (b) 194, (c) 49, (d) 17, (e) 4.
(5) 54 none of which is older than twelve months.
Notes: (a) The information required by five of these questions was provided to other Ministers for incorporation in composite replies prepared by them.
(b) Calculated on the time elapsed between the dates questions first appeared in Notice Papers and the answers appeared in Hansard.
Incentive Package for Industry: Advertisements
(Question No. 4975)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 25 August 1982:
(I) In what newspapers, magazines and periodicals did the Government advertise its new incentives package for industry.
(2) Over what dates were the advertisements run and what was the cost of advertising in each publication.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Incentives Package for Industry advertising campaign was conducted over the period 13 August to 10 September. A list of the newspapers, magazines and periodicals in which the advertisement appeared, the dates of the advertisements and the cost of the advertising in each publication is set out below:

Newspaper, Magazine or periodical

Dates of appearance

The Australian The Australian Financial Review Sydney Morning Herald Daily Telegraph The Age
Sun News Pictorial

1982
13, 14 August 16, 17 August 13,14 August 13,I4August 14,I6August 14,16 August

Cost
$
5,777 4,123 6,274 7,858 5,008 7,929

Newspaper, Magazine or periodical
Courier Mail Brisbane Daily Sun Advertiser West Australian Hobart Mercury Launceston Examiner Burnie Advocate Darwin N.T. News Newcastle Herald Wollongong Mercury Canberra Times The Land Weekly Times Stock and Land Queensland Country Life Farmers Weekly WA. Countryman Western Farmer and Grazier An Nahar EI Telegraph AIWatan Hellenic Herald Greek National Vema NeosKosmos Oskosmos Greek Times Acropolis Yeni Vatan Yorum Tercuman YeniDunya La Fiamma IlGlobo Albury Border Mail Bathurst Western Advocate Broken Hill Barrier Truth Coffs Harbour Advocate Dubbo Daily Liberal Goulburn Post Grafton Daily Examiner Lismore Northern Star Maitland Mercury MurwiHumbah Daily News Orange C. W. Daily Tamworth Daily Leader Wagga Daily Advertiser Armidale Express Bega & District Times Westlakes Advertiser Bowral Highland News Cooma Monaro Express Cowra Guardian Denilquin Times Eden Imlay Magnet Forbes Advocate Forster Advocate Griffith Area News Gunnedahlndependent Inverell Times Kempsey Mac1eay Argus Lithgow Mercury Macksville Guardian Milton Express Milton Times Moree Champion Moruya Examiner MoruyaStar Mudgee Guardian

Answers to Questions

Dates of appearance
14,16 August 16 August 14,I6August 14, 16 August 14 August 14 August 14 August 17 August 14, 16 August 14, 16 August 14,16 August 19 August 18 August 19 August 19 August 19 August 19 August 19 August 27 August 27 August 25 August 27 August 27 August 30 August 26 August 28 August 5 September 6 September 30 August 30 August 3 September 30 August 30 August 17 August 17 August 18 August 17 August 17 August 17 August 18 August 17 August 17 August 17 August 19 August 17 August 17 August 3 September 8 September 9 September 6 September 7 September 3 September 7 September 9 September 9 September 9 September 3 September 7 September 8 September 4 September 3 September 8 September 8 September 8 September 7 September 8 September 8 September 7 September

Cost
$ 4,039 1,163 3,312 4,364
814
801 665 681 2,170 1,449 1,669 1,894 1,376
884 1,306
551 474 647 587
913 626 1,449 869 739 1,148 939 861 626 782 887 569 606 1,095 649 417 446 442 417 423 423 5g8
446 478 423 483 533 377 336 304 417 336 417 336 336 336 336 377 336 336 377 336 336 336 258 336 336 378 378

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2019

Newspaper, Magazine or periodical

Dates of appearance

Nowra News Leader

6 September

Nowra Shoalhaven News

8 September

Nowra S.c. Register

8 September

Port Macquarie News

6 September

Queanbeyan Age

10 September

Singleton Argus

3 September

TareeTimes

3 September

Tumut & Adelong Times

3 September

Wauchope Gazette

2 September

Windsor Gazette

I September

Ballarat Courier

17 August

Bendigo Advertiser

17 August

Geelong Advertiser

17 August

Mildura Sunraysia Daily

17 August

Shepparton News

18 August

Warrnambool Standard

18 August

Ararat Advertiser

7 September

Colac Herald

3 September

Echuca Herald

I September

Hamilton Specator

2 September

Horsham Wimmera Mail-Times

I September

Sale Gippsland Times

3 September

Swan Hill Guardian

I September

Wangaratta Chronicle Despatch 3 September

Bairnsdale Advertiser

3 September

Kyabram Free Press

3 September

Kerang Northern Times

3 September

Morwell Latrobe Valley Express 2 September

Maryborough Advertiser

31 August

Portland Observer

I September

Traralgon Journal

I September

Benalla Ensign

3 September

Hastings Sun

6 September

Healesville Mountain Views

7 September

Leongatha Star

31 August

Mornington Peninsula & Wes-

ternport Post

8 September

Casterton, The Western Adviser 8 September

Rosebud South Peninsula Gazette 8 September

Pakenham Gazette

8 September

Seymour Telegraph

7 September

Werribee Banner

7 September

Westernport Frankston Peninsula

News

8 September

Warragul Gazette

7 September

Korumburra South Gippsland

Sentinel Times

31 August

Bundaberg News-Mail

17 August

Cairns Post

17 August

Gladstone Observer

17 August

Ipswich Queensland Times

17 August

Mackay Daily Mercury

17 August

Maroochydore Sunshine Coast

Daily

17 August

Maryborough Chronicle

17 August

Mt Isa North West Star

17 August

Rockhampton Morning Bulletin 17 August

Southport Gold Coast Bulletin

17 August

Toowoomba Chronicle

17 August

Townsville Daily Bulletin

17 August

Warwick Daily News

17 August

Gympie Times

31 August

Innisfail Advocate

30 August

Ingham Herbert River Express

31 August

Ayr Advocate

I September

Dalby Herald

31 August

Beaudesert Logan-Albert Times

I September

Biloela Central Telegraph

I September

Newspaper, Magazine Cost or periodical

Dates of

appearance

Cost

$

$

423 Bowen Independent

I September

377

478 Caboolture Near North Coast

478

News

I September

377

378 Chinchilla NewsjMurilla Adver-

378

tiser

2 September

345

336 Cleveland Redland Times

I September

552

417 Emerald Central Queensland

336

News

I September

336

336 Kingaroy South Burnett Times

I September

434

423 Redcliffe Herald

I September

377

529 Townsville North Queensland

507

Register

3 September

434

616 Wynnum Herald

I September

377

402 Mount Gambier Border Watch

7 September

428

402 Port Pirie Recorder

6 September

428

454 WhyallaNews

6 September

457

303 Angaston Leader

8 September

336

339 Clare Northern Argus

8 September

336

319 Gawler Bunyip

8 September

336

381 Kadina York Peninsula Country

454

Times

8 September

386

358 Mt Barker Courier

8 September

457

358 Murray Bridge Murray Valley

339

Standard

7 September

423

303 Port Augusta Transcontinental

8 September

428

319 Port Lincoln Times

\0 September

428

319 Renmark Murray Pioneer

7 September

417

480 Streaky Bay West Coast Sentinel 8 September

345

336 Tanunda Barossa & Light Herald 8 September

336

303 Victor Harbour Times

8 September

386

428 Kalgoorlie Miner

17 August

346

319 Geraldton Guardian

2 September

434

319 Albany Advertiser

2 September

434

319 Bunbury South Western Times

2 September

386

345 Busselton Margaret River Times 2 September

386

Esperance Express

3 September

336

650 Katanning Great Southern Herald 2 September

345

319 Mandurah Coastal District Times 3 September

386

402 Manjimup Warren Blackwood

428

Times

I September

345

319 Narrogin Observer

2 September

303

446 WA. Country Newspaper Pty Ltd

Group

2 September

399

649 Collie Mail

2 September

345

434 New Norfolk Derwent Valley

Gazette 457

I September

274

482

529 402

Defence Plans for Possible Nuclear Attack

547

(Question No. 4995)

526

Mr Milton asked the Minister for Defence,

507 upon notice, on 26 August 1982:

424 424
550

(I) Have any defence plans been made in relation to a possible nuclear attack on any Australian city; if so, what are the details of the plans, including any details of the possible effects

588 617

(including estimated deaths and injuries to the residents); if not, why not.

584 434 423

(2) If plans have been made, will he provide the details; if not, why not.

336 Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable

336 377

member's question is as follows:

336

(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to my replies to

336 questions 4686 and 4687 (Hansard, 21 September 1982, pages

345 1702-4).

2020 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Department of Defence Support: Transfer of Personnel
(Question No. 5034)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(I) How many (a) positions and (b) personnel had been transferred from his Department to the Department of Defence Support as at (i) 7 May 1982 (ii) I July 1982.
(2) How many of the positions transferred (a) were in the (i) Fourth, (ii) Third, (iii) Second or (iv) First Divisions of the Public Service or (b) were non-Public Service Act positions.
(3) How many were (a) permanent and (b) temporary positions.
(4) From which divisions and sections of his Department were the transfers made, indicating (a) how many (i) Fourth Division, (ii) Third Division, (iii) Second Division, (iv) First Division and (v) non-Public Service Act positions were involved in each case and (b) how many (i) permanent and (ii) temporary officers were involved in each case.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The details of the number of positions and personnel transferred to the Department of Defence Support is as follows:
(1)-

(a) positions transferred (b) personnel transferred

Asat

Asat

7 May 1982 I July 1982

18

18

16

16

(2) (a)Fourth Division 3; Third Division 13; Second Division 2; First Division nil; (b) Non-Public Service Act nil.
(3) (a) Permanent positions 18; (b) Temporary positions nil.
(4) Purchasing Division, Major Projects Branch (excluding ADP Purchasing Section): (a) Fourth Division 2; Third Division 13; Second Division I; First Division nil; Non-Public Service Act nil; (b) Permanent officers 16; Temporary officers nil; Purchasing Division, Special Projects Section; (a) Fourth Division I; Third Division nil; Second Division I; First Division nil; Non-Public Service Act nil; (b) Permanent officers nil; Temporary officers nil.

Environmental Impact Statements
(Question No. 5037)
Mr West asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
On what dates and on what matters have environmental impact statements been prepared under the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act since 8 April 1981.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Environmental impact statements have been directed under the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act in relation to the following proposals on the dates indicated:

Olympic Dam Uranium/Copper and Gold Proj-

ect, South Australia (Roxby Management Ser-

vices)

Pilot Coal Liquefaction Plant, Morwell Victoria

(Brown Coal Liquefaction (Victoria) Pty Ltd)

Beverley Uranium Project, South Australia

(South Australian Uranium Corp Pty Ltd)

Department of Defence proposed Amphibious

Training Area, North West Cape, Western

Australia

......

Great Barrier Reef City (Tourist Development by

Mr D. Tarca), 70km offshore from Townsville,

Queensland

.....

Perth Airport Master Plan, Western Australia

Adelaide Airport Master Plan, South Australia

Alice Springs-Darwin Railway, Northern Terr-

itory

Vickery Coal Project, near Boggabri New South

Wales (Coal Cliff Collieries Pty Ltd)

14.7.81 20.7.81 29.12.81
1.2.82
4.3.82 9.3.82 29.4.82 5.8.82 24.8.82

Diesel Fuel Excise Exemption
(Question No. 5040)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(I) Did the Government change the diesel fuel excise exemption for primary producers to a rebate in the 1982-83 Budget; if so, (a) how will primary producers obtain this rebate and (b) will this rebate be payable to the rail authorities.
(2) If the rebate is not payable to rail authorities, how much will this diesel fuel excise on rail freight increase freight costs to primary producers per tonne of grain transported by rail.
(3) Is he able to say how much grain transport will be transferred to road transport by this excise.
(4) How much extra income will the Government earn from the grain industry through the diesel fuel excise on rail freight (a) in the current drought year and (b) in a normal year.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. (a) Primary producers eligible for the rebate should address their claims to the Department of Industry and Commerce which administers the scheme. The Department has issued an information bulletin which is available from customs officers, oil companies, their agencies and distributors. (b) No.
(2) Any changes in rail freights for the transport of grain resulting from the diesel fuel excise will be a matter for State rail authorities. No information is currently available on this matter.
(3) The substitution effects, if any, of the excise between road and rail transport of grains are not known.
(4) No information is currently available on which to base a reliable estimate of the likely Government revenue from this source.

Animal Diseases in Middle East Ports
(Question No. 5090)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) Was it stated in the report of the Australian Sheep Meat Study Mission to the Middle East, dated May 1982, that the mission was concerned to learn of outbreaks of highly contagious animal diseases in the Middle East region.

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2021

(2) Has his attention been drawn to outbreaks of highly contagious animal diseases in some Middle Eastern ports to which Australia ships live sheep.
(3) Is he able to say (a) how many outbreaks of these diseases have occurred and (b) what action is taken by the authorities in the countries concerned to combat these diseases.
(4) What action is being taken to ensure that exotic diseases are not brought into Australia via vessels trading with the Middle East.
(5) Does the Government intend to allow continued trading in livestock with countries in which there are regular outbreaks of highly contagious animal diseases; if so, what are the risks to Australia's livestock industries.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Report of the Australian Sheep Meat Study Mission to the Middle East in which the representatives of the Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union voiced concern has been noted. The problem of exotic disease outbreaks was reported to me late in 1980 in the report of an Australian veterinary officer who visited the Middle East, and on occasions since then when an outbreak of Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia was alleged to have occurred in Australian cattle. Disease status in the region is assessed on the basis of the Animal Health Yearbook and the regular reports of the Office International des Epizooties. However critical veterinary reports on specific outbreaks of exotic animal dieases at the livestock collection points at Middle East ports are not available routinely.
(3) (a) Outbreaks of specific diseases are reported by member countries to the Office International des Epizooties. Not all countries are members of the OlE, and the efficiency of reporting varies from country to country. The animal Health Yearbook produced by FAO/WHO/OIE gives an annual summary of the world situation on animal disease; (b) No. There are internationally agreed general principles for action to contain an exotic disease but detailed information on any outbreaks near ports is not available.
(I) and (2)-

(4) Returning vessels are cleansed and then inspected by quarantine personnel before berthing. In some cases the vessels are disinfected. Policies are determined by the Department of Health. My Department has requested that quarantine arrangements for livestock vessels be reviewed at the Chief Quarantine Officers (Animals) Conference, which will be convened by the Department of Health in November 1982. I am concerned that, while quarantine requirements are generally adequate, problems can arise if the vessel is unexpectedly delayed in port while partly or fully loaded.
(5) Yes. Quarantine risks can be eliminated by appropriate, adequate treatment of the vessel before arrival in Australia. My Department is examining ways in which to improve the flow of technical information on animal disease and welfare from regions such as the Middle East.
River Murray: Anti-salinity Projects
(Question No. 5092)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
(I) What were the high priority and anti-salinity projects for the River Murray recommended in the Maunsell Report of 1979.
(2) What funds have been allocated to each of these projects since that date, and at what stage of completion is each project.
(3) On what basis was the priority of funding for these projects determined by the Commonwealth and/or the States concerned.
(4) Have funds for farm-based measures to reduce salinity, as recommended in the Maunsell Report, been allocated; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

New South Wales Wakool-Tullakool salinity and drainage Berriquin drainage-scheme Buronga salinity interception
Victoria Mildura-Merbein salinity interception Woorinen evaporation basin upgrading Mineral Reserves evaporation basin Shepparton groundwater drainage Shepparton surface water drainage Nangiloc-Colignan drainage
South Australia Upgrading existing evaporation basins Renmark Reservoir salinity control Noora evaporation basin Berri-Cobdogla drainage rehabilitation
River Murray Commission Rufus River salinity

78-79 79-80 80-81 81-82 Completed ($'000) ($'000) ($'000) ($'000) percent

965 1,320 1,480 1,400

40

250

700

500

8

35

100

550

575

182

100

45

100

14

161

465

16

125

190

198

15

500

627

618

65

87

100

7

100

669 1,980 1,597

75

156

537

133

23

141

197

52

2022 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) The Commonwealth and States agreed to commence as soon as possible the construction of works identified by Maunsells as Priority I, and to commence Priority 2 works when funds permitted.
(4) No. A report of a Commonwealth/States working party on measures necessary to encourage more efficient irrigation practices in the Murray Valley to reduce salinity is now under consideration by the four Governments.
Air Training Corps: Issue of New Uniform
(Question No. 5095)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
(I) Have the 12 and 15 Flights, Western Australia Squadron of the Air Training Corps, been issued with the new allseason uniform that has been on issue in the eastern States for some time; if not, why not and when will the uniforms be issued.
(2) Have some cadets who joined these Flights in February 1982 still not been issued with uniforms; if so, why.
(3) When will arrangements be made to admit female cadets into the Air Training Corps as has already happened with the Army and Navy cadet system.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Nos 12 and 15 Flights Western Australian Squadron Air Training Corps, have not been issued with the new allseasons uniform. The Royal Australian Air Force is in the process of issuing the newall-seasons uniform to members of the Air Training Corps on a state-by-state basis with Western Australia and North Queensland being issued last because of their temperate climates. The newall-seasons uniform will be made available to Western Australian Squadron Air Training Corps by the end of 1982.
(2) There are some cadets who joined these Flights in February 1982 who still have not been issued with a uniform. The reason is that these particular cadets' sizes are not available in the old uniforms. They will be issued with the new uniform at the end of 1982.
(3) On 6 May 1982 the Minister for Defence announced that female cadets would be admitted to the Australian Cadet Forces Scheme. The Air Force on 12 May 1982 authorised female enrolments in the Air Training Corps and many female cadets are now enrolled in the Air Training Corps.
Anti-missile Decoy on Australian Ships
(Question No. 5112)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 21 September 1982:
(I) What progress has been made with Project Winnin.
(2) Has it reached a point where (a) deployment of the anti-missile decoy on Australian warships can be considered and (b) a time for it being brought into service can be estimated.
(3) What investigation has been undertaken of potential markets for the decoy.
(4) Have approaches been made to potential purchasers in the light of experience in the Falkland Islands.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) An experimental WINNIN vehicle has undergone a number of successful trials to demonstrate its feasibility.

(2) The RAN fully support the WINNIN development, and envisage the installation of WINNIN on RAN ships. Inservice time cannot be established until the development program has been defined.
(3) Several countries have expressed interest in the WINNIN concept, and a Defence/Defence Support team will shortly leave for overseas to investigate these interests further, including collaborative possibilities.
(4) There is little doubt that the Falkland Islands conflict has enhanced the interest mentioned in (3) above.
Government Aircraft Factory, Melbourne: Tender for Supply of Autoclaves
(Question No. 5116)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 21 September 1982:
(I) Was the instrument and control equipment offered in the tender for the supply of autoclaves for the Government Aircraft Factories, Melbourne, by Thermal Equipment of Los Angeles different to that offered by other tenderers; ifso, how.
(2) Has the tender been accepted.
(3) Was the equipment of the Leeds and Northrop type mentioned in the specifications for the tenders, if not and the tender has been accepted, why.
(4) Was his Department prepared to accept types of equipment other than those specified, if so, were all tenderers made aware of this and were they all made aware at the same time.
(5) Was the price differential between the Australian based tenders and Thermal Equipment's tender the result of different instrument and control requirements being placed on the Australian suppliers to the advantage of the overseas suppliers.
(6) Were the technical requirements for Australian based suppliers higher, and consequently more expensive, than those required of overseas suppliers.
(7) Has any opportunity been afforded the Australian suppliers to tender on the same specifications as that of the overseas suppliers.
(8) Is he able to say what would be the estimated loss of employment in Australia as a result of a Government decision to accept an overseas tender.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The instrument and control equipment required and specified in the tender for autoclaves for the Government Aircraft Factories covered three systems:
A temperature and pressure controller for a manual mode of operation and the required equipment was 'Leeds and Northrop'.
Data Logging equipment for a manual mode of operation and the required equipment was 'Leeds and Northrop'.
Master Central control system equipment for an automatic mode of operation and the tender specified 'Leeds and Northrop' or similar equipment.
Thermal Equipment Corporation of Los Angeles in their tender response offered the same 'Leeds and Northrop' equipment for manual mode of operation controllers and data logging equipment as offered by other tenderers. The company also offered 'Leeds and Northrop' equipment and two other similar equipment options for the automatic mode of operation.
One of the options for the automatic mode of operation was selected as it was less expensive than the 'Leeds and Northrop'

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2023

equipment and fully met the tender requirement. No other tenderer offered this equipment.
(2) Yes.
(3) 'Leeds and Northrop' equipment was mentioned in the specification for the tender.
(4) 'Leeds and Northrop' control equipment was specified in the tender as mandatory for the manual mode of operation and my Department was not prepared to accept other equipment. Tenderers were given the option of specifying either a 'Leeds and Northrop' controller or similar equipment for the automatic mode of operation, and all were made aware of this at the same time.
(5) No. Tender requirements for the instrumentation and control elements of the specification were the same for Australian and overseas based suppliers.
(6) No. Technical requirements for the autoclaves were established by the tender specification, and responses from all suppliers, whether of local or overseas origin were treated equally.
(7) Yes. The Australian and overseas suppliers quoted against the same specification of requirements.
(8) While the net effect on employment in Australia as the result of awarding this contract to an overseas supplier as compared with awarding it to an Australian tenderer is not known, it should be noted that Thermal Equipment Corporation have joined with Wessberg Martin Pty Ltd of Sydney to co-produce the equipment, and that the Australian content will be approximately 34 per cent of the total value of the contract.
Commonwealth Cars: Use by Ministers
(Question No. 5131)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 22 September 1982:
In what specific circumstances are Commonwealth cars made available for Ministers to visit inmates of prisons.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
It has been a long established practice, approved by Government, that Ministers have unrestricted use of a Commonwealth car and driver. Therefore, a Commonwealth car is made available on request for use at a Minister's discretion.
Deductions for Gifts to Nominated Funds or Institutions
(Question No. 2583)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) What was the cost of allowing deductions for gifts to nominated funds or institutions under section 78 (I) (a) of the Income Tax Assessment Act lor each year from 1975-76 and what is the estimated cost for 1980-81.
(2) How long has this or a similar provision existed in the Act.
(3) What is the reason for providing this allowance.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The available income tax statistics relate to deductions for gifts allowed to individual taxpayers and do not include amounts of donations by business for charitable purposes which can be shown to be in the nature of business outgoings and which may, therefore, be allowed under section 51 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. The extent to which such gifts

may be allowed as business expenses is not known. Based on the available statistics, which include deductions allowed under section 78 (I) (ab) for the 1979-80 and 1980-81 income years (not available separately), the estimates are as follows:

$m

1975-76

25

1976-77

29

1977-78

30

1978-79

31

1979-80

38

1980-81

49

(2) Since 1915.

(3) To encourage donations to the funds, authorities and institutions listed in section 78 (I) (a).

Taxation Office: Provision of Information to Government Department
(Question No. 3916)
Mr Free asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
Has information from individual taxpayers' returns been supplied by the Taxation Office to the Department of Education for the purpose of checking adjusted family incomes to determine entitlements under the Secondary Allowance Scheme and the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme; if so:
(a) what procedures exist for the receipt and approval of such req uests;
(b) when did the Taxation Office begin to supply such information; and
(c) under what circumstances is information on individual taxpayers supplied by the Taxation Office to other Government departments.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Under section 16 (4) (i) of the Income Tax Assessment Act the Commissioner of Taxation and his officers are authorised to supply information in specified circumstances to the Secretary, Department of Education or the Commonwealth Scholarships Board for the purpose of the administration of any law of the Commonwealth relating to financial assistance to students:
(a) Any information supplied is in response to a specific request made by an authorised officer of the Department of Education to a Deputy Commissioner of Taxation and is confined to specific matters related to data supplied by a person in an application for a secondary allowance or for tertiary education assistance. The Taxation Office ensures that information is only supplied within the terms of the income tax law and that the authorised persons receiving the information are aware of their responsibilities under the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act. Under no circumstances is any person given access to a taxation return.
(b) The Taxation Office has supplied information to the Department of Education in relation to the Secondary Allowance Scheme and Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme since 1973-74. Before that, however, information relating to certain scholarship holders had been supplied for many years, firstly to the Universities Commission and since 1960 to the Commonwealth Scholarship Board.
(e) In providing for the proper administration of certain Commonwealth funded programs Parliament has thought it appropriate to authorise the Commissioner of Taxation to release certain information relating to a

2024 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

person's financial affairs to a small number of Commonwealth organisations and departments, the authority being contained in sec. 16 (4) of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Sales Tax: Commonwealth Games
(Question No. 3929)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) Is it a fact that the Commonwealth Games Flag is a symbol of a group of nations, not just an event, and is therefore similar in type to the United Nations Flag.
(2) Is it also a fact that there is no other flag which symbolises the Commonwealth of Nations.
(3) Given that flags of all nations, states and the United Nations are sales tax exempt, why is the Commonwealth Games not exempt of the 17.5 per cent general sales tax.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Prior to the 1982-83 Budget the only flags that qualified for exemption from sales tax were those made of cloth, paper or plastic sheeting that were the emblems of nations, states or territories or of the United Nations.
However, the Government has decided to underline its support for the Commonwealth Games by exempting the official flag of the XII Commonwealth Games from sales tax. This is to be achieved by amending the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act to provide for exemption of the flag with effect from I January 1982. The Bill was introduced into the House on 17 August 1982.
Australian Ballet Foundation
(Question No. 4079)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 25 February 1982:
(I) Is it a fact that the answer to question No. 3657 (Hansard, 16 February 1982, page 187) treated the question requesting information about the Australian Ballet, its board and corps de ballet as if it had asked about the Australian Ballet Foundation and stated that it would not be appropriate for him to give the details requested.
(2) Is it also a fact that (a) the Commonwealth Government has paid to the Ballet Foundation, through the Australia Council, sums totalling $7 026 000 in the period 1977-82 inclusive, (b) the Foundation is in fact a holding company for the Australian Ballet and (c) the principals of fiscal accountability require that members of Parliament should be able to ascertain how public funds are spent.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to questions about the Australian Ballet asked and answered in Senate Estimates Committee meetings; if so, what is the justification for failing to provide answers to questions on notice which were answered when asked orally at a Senate Estimates Committee meeting.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) I am advised by the Australia Council that in the period 1977-78 to 1981-82 an amount of $8 190 000 was paid to the Ballet Foundation through the Australia Council.

(b) In October 1970 the Australian Ballet Foundation was incorporated as a Company under the Victorian Companies Act limited by guarantee.
(c) Yes.
(3) Yes. I am informed that a number of questions dealing with the Australian Ballet Foundation were asked at the 1981 Senate Estimates Committee B. These related to a breakdown of performances by capital city, given by the full Company and those by a selection of dancers, for both 1981 and 1982. That question was placed on notice. Further questions related to the percentage of the Ballet's 1980 income from corporate sponsorship and private sector donations. Those questions were also placed on notice. Subsequently, as I am advised, answers to the questions were provided to Senate Estimates Committee B. The answers to these questions do not provide the details sought by the honourable member.
The names of the current members of the Board of the Australian Ballet Foundation were provided to the Senate Estimates Committee on 14 September 1982 by the Administrator, Australian Ballet Foundation. This was part of the information previously sought by the honourable member, and is recorded on page 508 of the Senate Hansard of 14 September 1982.
Money Supply
(Question No. 4165)
Dr Blewett asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on II March 1982:
(I) Has the Government's monetary policy since 1976 included limiting the rate of growth in the money supply.
(2) Does the Government's monetary policy include direction to the trading banks to limit their new lending.
(3) In formulating its monetary policy, does the Government consider the effect of that policy on commercial decision makers.
(4) Do controls on trading bank lending limit the extent to which trading banks compete with each other for lending opportunities; if so does this enable trading banks to increase their interest charges on loans and alter direction of their lending towards more profitable sectors.
(5) Does the Government's monetary policy include controlling the money supply which includes liabilities of the trading banks; if so, (a) do controls on trading bank liabilities reduce the amount trading banks can advance to borrowers and (b) does this have a similar effect to direct controls on trading bank lending.
(6) Has the monopoly power of trading banks increased since 1976; if so, is this a result of the Government's monetary policy strengthening the trading bank 'cartel'.
(7) Are the trading banks required to report their profits to the Reserve Bank; if so, are these published.
(8) What is the annual rate of growth in trading bank profits in each year since 1976.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A central tenet of this Government's economic policies has always been the need to reduce inflation and inflationary expectations. A prerequisite to reducing the rate of inflation is to reduce the rate of growth of the money aggregates. In each Budget since 1976-77 the Government has announced a projected range for the money supply (M3) during the financial year.
(2) In the past, the Reserve Bank had on occasion given the major trading banks lending guidelines designed to help restrain the growth in bank lending to a degree consistent with

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2025

wider monetary policy objectives. The Reserve Bank announced on 29 June that it had withdrawn its earlier request to the trading banks to keep growth in their advances to not more than 12 per cent per annum.
(3) The Government is concerned with the effects of its policies on all groups within the community. Given that the Government's monetary policy is primarily aimed at the reduction of inflation and inflationary expectations the community overall stands to benefit from the Government's monetary policy stance.
(4) One of the undesirable aspects of the lending guidelines mentioned above was that they did, to a certain extent, tend to freeze each individual bank's share of total lending and thereby reduce competition between the banks. This is one of the reasons the Reserve Bank decided not to continue with the lending guidelines in 1982-83.
(5) As mentioned in the answer to part (I) the Government's monetary policy aims at slowing the growth of the monetary aggregates generally. The growth of these aggregates is influenced by, inter alia, the rate of growth of trading bank deposits. The Government does not have any direct controls on trading bank liabilities similar to the lending guidelines.
(6) I am not sure what the honourable member means by the 'monopoly power of the trading banks'. Neither am I sure how the Government's monetary policies, which have if anything borne more heavily on the banks than on other financial institutions, could strengthen the trading banks as a group.
(7) Section 52 of the Banking Act 1959 requires, inter alia, that a trading bank subject to the Act shall prepare and deliver to the Australian Statistician and the Reserve Bank a statement of profit and loss, in accordance with Form B in the Schedule to the Act, in respect of each year ending on a date prescribed in respect of the bank. From this and other information statutorily provided by the trading banks, the Australian Statistician is required under sub-section 58 (I) of the

Banking Act to prepare and publish in the Gazelle a statement showing, in respect of each trading bank, its liabilities, assets and profit and loss. The last such statement was published in Gazelle No. G 31 of 3 August 1982. The banks themselves publish profit statements in accordance with Companies Act and Stock Exchange listing requirements.
(8) Comparative analysis of bank profits is materially affected by the treatment of extraordinary items, intra-group dividends, determination of expenses and provisions, changes in corporate structure and ownership of subsidiaries, changes in accounting standards and other relevant factors.
Within the period covered by the question there have, in particular, been changes in disclosures practices by banks which have had significant effects on stated profits. This development followed my Press statement of 17 September 1978 of the Government's intention to amend the reporting forms prescribed under the Banking Act to bring the basis of reporting by banks closer to that of other companies. In particular, the balances of inner reserves, except for bad and doubtful debts, were in future to form part of shareholders' funds. These changes in disclosure had the effect of raising reported profits. Although these accounting adjustments were introduced at different times by the banks over their 1978 and 1979 reporting years, some impression of their significance can be obtained by comparing the reported profits for 1978 in the banks' 1978 annual reports with the profits reported for that year in the banks' 1979 annual reports.
Against that background it is apparent that a variety of calculations concerning profit growth could be made on the basis of different assumptions. The figures below show major trading bank profits as reported in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazelle. In assessing the figures I refer the honourable member to the respective Gazelles and to the banks' annual reports and accounts and relevant statements therein.

MAJOR TRADING BANKS Reported net profit for respecthe financial years ($000)")

1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

CTB ANZ Adelaide NSW
CBA
CBC National

4,480
11,846 5,138 23,216
7,063 6,726 16,479

8,328 12,744 5,674
25,584
9,717 7,572 21,024

7,481
22,992 6,239
30,689 12,656 5,395 24,026

16,460
48,613 6,631
52,391 15,662 7,859 29,627

36,889 68,767
2,239 63,214
25,778 19,151 47,622

39,291 81,830
65 79,482
28,914 26,075 55,458

24,205 107,040
46
110,440 36,443 31,276
77,312

Source: Commonwealth of Australia Gazelles-IO August, 1976,9 August 1977,9 May, 1978,24 April, 1979,4 November, 1980, 14July, 1981, 3 August, 1982.

(a) After tax and includes the receipt of dividends from related corporations. Several banks balance at 30 June, the re-
mainder at 30 September; the fieures cover profits in the twelve months to the respective reporting dates in the year concerned. The figures include extraordinary items in the first four years, and exclude them in the remaining 3 years.

(2) What evidence can he provide to support his answer to (I ).
(3) In assessing the relativities of the 2 systems is it necessary to take into account tax evasion and tax avoidance.

Taxation
(Question No. 4665)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 6 May 1982:
(I) Is the Federal Government package of taxes progressive as opposed to the impositions of State and local government income tax.

l\Ir Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) Local governments have never imposed an income tax in Australia and State Governments have not imposed such a tax since the introduction of uniform taxation in 1942. Accordingly, it is not possible to compare Commonwealth taxes with State and local government income tax.

2026 REPRESENTATIVES 13 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Holsworthy Army Base, New South Wales: Noise Levels of Gunfire
(Question No. 4756)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) How many complaints have been received in each of the last 5 years regarding the noise level of gunfire at the artillery range at Holsworthy, N.S.W.
(2) How are these complaints treated.
(3) How many claims for compensation in respect of detonations at Holsworthy have been received.
(4) How many have been successful.
(5) What are the criteria used in assessing these claims.
(6) Are detonations occurring at the Holsworthy range capable of causing (a) nuisance distress to people and pets and (b) damage to foundations, cement rendering and bathroom and kitchen tiles of domestic residences.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 220 telephone complaints have been received over the past 5 years and although no firm figures are available, it is estimated that no more than 12 written complaints are received annually.
The following numbers of telephone calls were received:
(a) 1978-46;
(b) 1979-49;
(c) 1980-54; (d) 1981-13;
(e) 1982-58 (to 27 August 1982).
(2) Complaints are treated in two ways:
(a) Telephone Callers. Details of telephone complaints are recorded by Duty Officers. Callers are informed of the factors which contribute to the intensity of the noise.
(b) Written Complaints. Each is acknowledged. Advice is provided on the necessity for training activities and the actions taken by Army to minimise disturbance to residents consistent with meeting training objectives.
(3) Eight claims for compensation have been received in respect of detonations at Holsworthy.
(4) Four claims have been successful.
(5) Each claim for compensation for alleged damages is investigated by an officer who is a Civil Engineer, attached to HQ 2 Military District. Completed investigations are referred to the Deputy Crown Solicitor for determination.
(6) The effects of detonations emanating from the Holsworthy range are, as previously stated, being investigated by the National Acoustics Laboratory. An investigation conducted in 1979 by the Bureau of Mineral Resources suggested that:
'the low readings of ground and air vibrations measured at locations within the nearby civil communities indicated that any annoyance suffered as a result of weapons firing was, essentially, acoustical'.
Also, technical assessments indicate that it is highly improbable that range detonations could cause damage to foundations especially at the distance the civilian dwellings are from impact areas. Damage to cement rendering and bathroom and kitchen tiles of domestic residences are more likely due to the expansion and contraction characteristics of the soil in the area which has a very high clay content.

Holsworthy Army Base, New South Wales: Noise Levels of Gunfire
(Question No. 4760)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) What were the main features of the National Acoustics Laboratory report on the noise levels of firing at Holsworthy Army Base, N.S.W.
(2) What action (a) has been taken and (b) is contemplated following receipt of the report.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The National Acoustics Laboratory report on noise levels of firing at Holsworthy Army Base, N.S.W., has not yet been received.
(2) No action has (a) been taken and (b) is contemplated until the report is received.
Holsworthy Artillery Range, New South Wales: Firing of Explosive Charges
(Question No. 4761)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
Are there any restrictions placed on the firing of explosive charges at the Holsworthy Artillery Range, N.S.W.; if so, what restrictions are placed on their (a) frequency and (b) duration.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows.
Yes. Firing of explosive charges at the Holsworthy Range, N.S.W., is restricted to the following periods:
(a) Monday to Saturday, 0700 hours to 2100 hours. (b) Sundays and Public Holidays, 0900 hours to 1900
hours. Within these time frames the duration of firing is not restricted.
Holsworthy Artillery Range, New South Wales: Bush Fires
(Question No. 4762)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) Is there any evidence to show that artillery fire at the Holsworthy Artillery Range, NSW, has caused bush fires (a) on the range and (b) in the surrounding countryside.
(2) If so, (a) when did each incident occur and (b) was there any damage to (i) Army or (ii) domestic property.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) There is evidence to indicate that artillery fire at the Holsworthy Artillery Range, NSW, may have caused bush fires on the range, and
(b) There is no evidence to suggest that artillery fire has caused bush fires in the surrounding countryside.
(2) (a) Fires started on the range, not necessarily in the impact area, on the following days when artillery were firing:
1978-16 August; 19 October; 30 November; 5, II, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19 December.
1979-22 February; 17 August; 27 September; 15 October.

Answers to Questions

13 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2027

1980-4,7 March; 4 August; 24 September; 10 October.
1981-11, 20, 24, 27 March; 2 April; 13 May; 13, 25 August; 10, 13,24 September; I, 5 October.
1982-11 March; 4,13 May; 24, 30 June; 8 July.
(b) Only one fire has spread off the range. This fire occurred spontaneously and linked with other fires burning in the area. Artillery were not being exercised on this day. There are no reports of damage to army or domestic property.
Independent Audit: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 4787)
Mr Leo McLeay as-ked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
A condition of grants to international conferences held in Australia is that a statement of income and expenditure for the conference, audited by a qualified public accountant, should be submitted to the Department of Administrative Services as soon as possible after the conference.
Organisations in receipt of grants-in-aid are required to submit an audited financial statement in respect of the year in which a grant was made to the Department of Administrative Services.


