House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 129, 1982 Tuesday, 14 September 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1349

Tuesday, 14 September 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I inform the House that the Attorney General (Senator Durack) is ill. The Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) is acting as Attorney-General. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) left yesterday to visit the Cocos (Keeling) Islands and Christmas Island for discussions. The Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) will represent Mr McVeigh in this chamber this week. Senator Chaney will represent the Acting Attorney-General in the Senate.
RIGHT HONOURABLE MEMBER FOR RICHMOND
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House)-Mr Speaker, may I presume to draw to your attention that today marks the twentyfifth year of the election to this place of the right honourable member for Richmond, the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony). I hope you find it agreeable to congratulate him on behalf of us all.
Mr SPEAKER-I find it agreeable to congratulate him and to commiserate with him. I think it is remarkable that he has remained apparently in full possession of his faculties after 25 years in this place. To those who are approaching their twenty-fifth anniversaries, and I think there are a few of them, I wish them well and that they may complete their 25 years of service.
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that we have present in the gallery this afternoon the delegates attending the Sixth A ustralasian and Pacific Regional Parliamentary Seminar. On behalf of the House I extend to the delegates a very warm welcome.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
TREASURER
Notice of Motion
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) -I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House censures the Treasurer for the gross and culpable incompetence he has displayed in the administration of the taxation laws and accordingly requires his immediate dismissal.

Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Sir James Killen)-by leaveagreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition moving forthwith the motion of censure of the Treasurer of which he has given notice for the next sitting.
Motion of Censure
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (1.49)-1 move:
That this House censures the Treasurer for the gross and culpable incompetence he has displayed in the administration of the taxation laws and accordingly requIres hIs ImmedIate dismissal.
For five years the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has been attempting to anaesthetise public concern at the extent and cost of tax avoidance and tax evasion in this country. The indisputable fact, confirmed by the annual reports of the Commissioner of Taxation and the income tax statistics, show that in that period tax avoidance and tax evasion in Australia skyrocketed. In spite of the Treasurer's reassurances to the contrary, the evidence is compelling that there is no abatement in activity in that illicit area of endeavour. This has been put into the crucible by the recent reports of McCabe and Lafranchi and of Costigan.
I put it to the House that there is an inescapable logic behind the McCabe-Lafranchi and Costigan reports. That inescapable logic is simply this: Someone within government-either political government or the Public Service government of this country--has been responsible for converting the administration of the tax laws of this country into an unparalleled shambles and presiding over an unequalled rort of the taxation system. It is clear, as part of this inescapable logic, that either the Treasurer and the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) are grossly culpable and should be sacked or the Commissioner of Taxation and the head of the Attorney-General's Department have been gravely negligent and ought to be dismissed. Perhaps all four should be discharged. What is equally compelling in its clearness is this: The four of them cannot go scot free.
What has the Government done in the face of this overwhelming disturbing evidence? It brings to bear its collective Bertie Wooster brain power. It impales three relatively small fish in the Public Service in Western Australia. It allows the Attorney-General to stumble through public defences. It hopes that the Treasurer can create a diversion now that he is back again bobbing up and down playing Kermit to the Liberal Party Muppet Show. It expresses satisfaction, impliedly, about the conduct of the heads of the Australian

1350 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

. Treasurer

Taxation Office and the Attorney-General's Department. Most of all, it hopes that it can brazen its way out of this problem. It is like witnessing mayhem on the football field and then having the culprits awarded the Brownlow Medal as the fairest and the best. This is unbelievable savagery against Australian society and Australian taxpayers. The man in the dock is the Treasurer.
It is indisputable that any moderately diligent and prudently curious Minister ought to have known the essential principles of what was occurring as disclosed by McCabe-Lafranchi and Costigan. That, I believe, is the point that has been well established already. I do not intend to go over it again today. What I intend to argue today is that the record available clearly establishes that this Treasurer did know. By his own words he hangs himself. His testimony is riddled with inconsistency. Did he know? Let us go over the record. On 13 January 1980 he said:
As soon as they
That is, the straw companies-
were brought to the Government's attention. the Government began a close study of the most effective means of countering them.
What does 'a close study' involve? It involves, first of all, considering existing laws and the deficiencies which have been established by an attempt to apply them. Was that done? It involves a careful analysis of available opinions, especially those opinions from senior counsel independent of the Public Service. Did the Taxation Office, the Attorney-General's Department and the Crown Solicitor's Office wipe those sorts of opinions, that sort of detailed advice that should have been provided in these instances? The Taxation Office could not have rejected them, as I will show in a few minutes. It is on record in the Costigan report as having always believed that existing law could have been applied and being confused and curious as to why it was not being applied. Where are all the working documents and reports in relation to these matters? This is a very serious issue before the Parliament. We cannot have some cavalier brush-off from the Treasurer or some of his colleagues croaking their way through an unimpressive and unconvincing performance in this Parliament. We are talking of tax rorts which have been responsible for probably $IO,OOOm to $15,000m, in deprived revenue, in tax evasion alone.
There can be no exculpation on the part of the Treasurer. He acknowledges that in 1978 he first became aware of the so-called bottom-of-theharbour companies. At that time the published evidence was extraordinarily disturbing and must have been brought to his attention because he sent an answer back to my friend the honourable

member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi). In that question on 10 October 1978 the honourable member for Hawker raised reported criminal infringements of the taxation law and the Crimes Act by a Mr Brian Maher. He 'lsked the Treasurer:
Is he satisfied that the Commissioner for Taxation is doing everything possible to ensure that Mr Maher, as well as his clients. are paying their fair share of the tax burden?
After waffling his way through a rather thin defence about confidentiality provisions in the tax legislation he concluded by giving this gratuitous and quite unconvincing comment:
The Commissioner informed me. however. that all available administrative means are used to enforce the taxation laws.
They were certainly effective! We discover from the Costigan report, in searing detail, that the administrative provisions were not being applied at all. The full force of the Crimes Act, the Income Tax Assessment Act, the Companies Act and other related pieces of legislation were not being provided and perchance it happens that senior officials of the Liberal Party in various States were involved in some of these sorts of schemes. I will come to that ifgain. I charge the Treasurer with prevaricating on this matter. On 27 June this year he said:
It was not until 1979 or 1980-
I am quoting him exactly--
that the full extent of such schemes
The bottom-of-the-habour schemes-
really became apparent to the Australian Taxation Office and the Government.
That is demonstrably untrue. That is not the assertion of an honest man because Mr Costigan said in his Royal Commission report, on page 27:
This scheme was first detected in a wide spread manner by the Australian Taxation Office in 1973.
Action was put in train, I note parenthetically, and opinions were obtained, the final one in June 1975. In November 1975 an instruction to proceed at law was issued. The Labor Government went out and this issue, as was the case with so much other action on tax evasion and avoidance, went into the deep freeze.
Government members interjecting-
Mr HAYDEN-Look at the record. On page 38 of the report Mr Costigan said:
The Taxation Office had warned that the case raised "far reaching implications for the collection of company tax generally".
That is, it was not a trivial matter. In the same vein the Treasurer sought to imply in his Press conference on Sunday that it was all a small change operation. He said in fact that reference to it was a footnote on an additional problem raised

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1351

in a memorandum to him by the Taxation Commissioner. That was some footnote! He is trying to dimini~h its significance by saying that it was worth only $300m to $350m as tax evasion. I guess that for the tax evasion industry that is small change but for the taxpayers of Australia it is an outrage.
Look what New South Wales has already uncovered. The Treasurer says that $300m to $350m was the accumulated cost. The New South Wales Attorney-General said that in that State authorities have located or identified in one area alone some 4,000 companies involved in bottomof-the-harbour operations and that one group alone evaded $450m tax in one year. That is more than the Treasurer is prepared to admit for the full period. If the Treasurer wants to argue about where the $IO,OOOm to $15,000m figures come from they come from a simple arithmetical exercise based on figures provided by Eric Risstrom of the Taxpayers Association. He said that tax evasion equalled $3.5 billion in one year. That figure started to skyrocket when Mr Howard came in as Treasurer in 1977. Five years; multiply $3.5 billion by five and that gives you more than $1O,OOOm to $15,000m. That is what he has been presiding over.
Did the Treasurer know of the legal opinions? On Sunday he said: 'I may have been referred to the fact of the legal opinions.' I repeat: He 'may have been referred to the fact'. He could not remember. In the Senate 22 instances have been listed, stretching from 1975 to the present, of legal opinions, of tax investigation reports and police investigation reports being submitted to the Government for action. He cannot remember! Referring to the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980 on 21 March 1981, he said:
This legislation was an entirely appropriate and necessary response to fraudulent conduct designed to prevent the collection of lawfully payable tax.
Those are the operative words~ 'lawfully payable tax'. Taxes could be lawfully payable only if there was adequate and effective provision under established law. For him to acknowledge that the taxes were lawfully payable and~again to quote him~ that 'there was fraudulent conduct designed to prevent the collection of lawfully payable tax' is for him to acknowledge in that statement~ Obviously he did not realise it~that existing law in fact was effective. It did establish a legal liability and a criminal obligation. How otherwise could he put the case? If it was anything but that it would not be tax evasion but tax avoidance, and he declared quite positively that it was tax evasion. There are, however, fundamental contradictions. On 22 July 1982 he said:

all the legal advice available to the Government was that prosecutions under the then existing legislation wou Id not succeed.
Here is what Costigan said in his published report a few weeks ago:
. . . there had been some investigation of the position in law by Legal Officers in the Taxation Office who generally could not understand why the existing law was not being used to redress the situation.
Whom are we going to believe~the Treasurer trying to wriggle his way out of a problem like a cockroach pinned to the floor and running around in circles, or the Royal Commission report of Costigan, who had the opportunity of talking to officials in the Taxation Office and establishing beyond any doubt the accuracy in this? Look at his complacency. In February 1978, talking about these bottom-of-the-harbour operations, he said that the Taxation Office advised him in these terms:
It could be merely the tip of the iceberg. There could be a lot more revenue involved.
Again a month or two later the Taxation Office is back to him. Then in May it recommended that a new criminal offence be created, a new criminal Act be enacted; that is, it went to him three times in four months and recommended the unprecendented step of establishing these offences as crimes under the Crimes Act~not an offence under the tax Act or some other sort of Act. One would have to be a blind, blithering fool if one did not conclude that this was a serious matter and that it was more than a footnote on a memorandum about other matters of greater concern. In his statement of 27 June, equivocating again, he said:
At about the same time-
That is 1978~
The Australian Taxation Office, having been unsuccessful in efforts to have prosecutions launched, put to me and I readily accepted that there ought to be moves towards measures of the kind which were ultimately embodied in the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act.
Let me direct honourable members' attention to the operative words there:
The Australian Taxation Office, having been unsuccessful in efforts to have prosecutions launched
Read that 50-page statement of 27 June, and read it carefully. It bears rereading. There was a thin defence being erected to foist all the blame on to the Crown law office. The Taxation Office~in hindsight we can see it clearly on reading the statement now alongside the Costigan report~ apprehended accurately what Costigan was going to report and there it was shovelling all the blame on to the Crown law office. It is not saying there that it tried and failed or that its diligent efforts were rewarded by the advice that they could not

1352 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

work and it accepted that, because the record shows otherwise. What it is saying is that the Crown law office failed in the discharge of its proper duties. Having declared on 27 June, however, that all efforts had been unsuccessful and having declared repeatedly in that statement that in any case the advice was that there could not be a successful embarkation of criminal action because of deficiencies in the law, the Treasurer had the gall to come into this Parliament two months later-eight weeks later-on 25 August and say this from the Taxation Office:.
In making this suggestion I mention that my officers have been pressing the Crown Solicitor to investigate whether prosecution action could be taken under the Crimes Act or the Companies Act against people involved in two cases of 'straw company' evasion.
Let me stress this last part of his statement. He went on:
Despite the possibility that such prosecutions may be able to be launched I think that the specific taxation offence of the kind indicated should exist.
I am not quibbling about whether the specific offence of that kind ought to exist. What I am arguing about is that in two months we discover a radically changed attitude. Up until two months before that statement he laughed the matter out of court. He said that we could not mobilise the existing law, that it would not work; that there was a stack of opinions. Here he is saying, 'may be able to be launched', and that the Acts could be applied. Let us look at the Attorney-General, Senator Durack, the chief law officer of the country. God help Australia! On Nationwide on 24 August 1982, after being firmly of the opinion that the existing law would not stand up, he said:
Now in the end, the Crown Solicitor's Office in Perth took the view that there was not sufficient evidence to go on with this case. There was COncern also in the Crown Solicitor's Office about the adequacy of the law at the time. Now, opinions we've had recently, I think, make us feel that that advice was wrong, or probably wrong.
The Attorney-General was right, and he was probably right all the time. Of course, the law could have been applied. Of course, it has its weaknesses but how does one justify two and a half years of inactivity in this area when not millions but billions of dollars were being ripped off decent law abiding Australians who had a deep implicit trust that this system worked. To quote the Attorney-General again, on PM on 3 September he said:
There are a number of opinions that have been expressed by Q.c.s that the existing law can be utilised and I'm not challenging that view.
Then he went on:
... but even he-
Being Mr Costigan-

did not say that the prosecution should be launched straight away.
What a flimsy defence it is to say that Costigan said that it could not be launched straight away. What Costigan said in his report was that because the Government had been bludging for so long while the community was being ripped off and he had established these facts, these facts had to be developed in a case that should be launched against the people involved. But these opinions of Queen's Counsel that the Attorney-General is talking about did not turn up on the breakfast table last week or the week before. They had been around, a long list of them, successively since 1975. The trouble with our Attorney-General is that he would not know a hawk from a handsaw. That is a great tragedy for Australia. On 27 June the Treasurer said:
I add that I had earlier been informed by the Commissioner of Taxation of action by his Office to raise assessments against companies that had been stripped of pre-tax profits before the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980 commenced to operate.
Now the 1980 legislation was not retrospective and that can mean only one thing. The Taxation Office acknowledged that this legislation could have been mobilised effectively all along. The Treasurer in his statement went on to say: 'The action is continuing'. What action is continuing? It is the action to use law predating that legislation of 1980 to effect assessments against companies that have been stripped of pre-tax profits; that is, the straw companies, the bottom-of-the-harbour companies. (Extension of time granted). Let us look at the inexcusable procrastination of the Treasurer. He acknowledges that he knew in early 1978 the necessity for this action, two and a half years before any effect occurred. When, at his Press conference on Sunday, he was asked why he did not take action about this matter he said:
No, I didn't. I have said I have not disguised the fact that it took two and a half years from the time the Taxation Office first raised the question of having a special offence. At the time they raised it they did not have a clear idea in their own minds of what form that special offence should take except that it should be a criminal penalty and should carry a gaol sentence.
And there was a 2t year period from then until the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act was introduced.
Where is the answer? Where is the explanation, the justification, for that two and a half years delay? He vaporised the concentration of the journalists assembled but he did not establish a defence. He knew for two and a half years that these offences were going on. He knew that massive defalcation of tax liability was taking place. Why in the name of goodness did he not in that time at least apply existing law and attempt to test it?

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1353

The point about all this is that there was a two and a half years delay after it was made abundantly clear to him that action should be taken. This was a serious matter. It was not a footnote tucked away at the end of a memorandum and hardly worthy of attention. It involved the Treasury being deprived of very large amounts of money. There are certain principles that the Treasurer has declared. On 18 April he put three key points. He said, firstly:
The general approach of the Government will be that as sufficient evidence emerges of a particular scheme of avoidance the Government will make an announcement detailing the scheme and foreshadowing its intention to legislate.
Secondly, he said:
The legislation will operate from the date of the announcement.
Thirdly, he said:
There will be priority to speedy legislation.
In case it is thought that this was a novel proposition, on 8 December 1978, expressing the same theme, the Treasurer said:
Legislation to counter the scheme would, when introduced, have effect from the date of announcement.
I ask these simple questions: Why in this instance did he depart from the principle? What was his motivation? Was it because there are senior Liberal Party officials who have been waxing fat, developing great wealth with no productive effort, by engaging in these schemes? How prolific is this sort of thing, divulged in Nationwide on I September this year:
My information reveals that between 1976 and 1978 the Taxation Department asked the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Sydney to advise whether an alleged incident of tax avoidance discovered by the Department provided sufficient evidence for prosecution.
That lawyer, I'm told, was Mr Lockhart, Q.c., who has since become a Judge of the Federal Court.
Mr Lockhart told them that they could proceed, and he recommended prosecution. It has ended up in the archives; in other words, in the rubbish tin. The statement further states:
In a similar incident revealed by Mr Costigan in 1978 another Queen's Counsel, Mr John Traill, received a brief from a Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office asking for an opinion on an alleged tax avoidance scheme. I've been told today it involved a company run by a prominent New South Wales Liberal politician. Mr Traill advised that prosecution should go ahead but no such action was subsequently taken.
Who was the prominent Liberal Party politician in New South Wales? The Leader of the Opposition, Mr McDonald. Is it correct that he made

contact with a government ministerial office and that that contact was successful? This is a pretty tawdry, shoddy set of circumstances. The Parliament deserves to have all of the information available. The Treasurer's defence, when he is queried about why there have been no prosecutions since the 1980 legislation, is to stand up here and say: 'That is because the legislation is successful. Bottom-of-the-harbour companies are dead'. But there were no prosecutions before 1980 either. Does that mean that that legislation was successful? Of course it does not! It is a lot of nonsense.
The Treasurer's sole defence is that he has introduced more anti-avoidance and anti-evasion legislation than has any previous Treasurer, and so he ought to have done. The statistics show a massive shift of the tax burden away from nonpay-as-you-earn income tax earners-the area where tax avoidance flourishes-on to pay-asyou-earn income tax earners. The statistics also show, contrary to what the Treasurer declared on Sunday, that the proportion of tax being raised in provisional tax is not going up in the way in which he claimed. It is at about the same level at which it has been ever since tax rorting became a flourishing industry under him. Similarly, they show that between 1975-76 and 1980-81 the reports of the Commissioner of Taxation indicate a 2,500 per cent increase in the number of identified participants in tax avoidance schemes declared to him alone. That is the Government's record. I seek leave to incorporate the tables in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows--
'AMOUNTS OUTSTANDING IN AVOIDANCE CASES UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE CHALLENGE'
From Report of Commissioner of Taxation

Year

Number of identified
participants in Tax Amount Avoidance Schemes involved

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81

$m

861

2,227

10,224

11,253

424

17,233

71 I

22,366

973

* Comparable figures for this year are not available.
Between 1975-76 and 1980-8 I (the latest year for which figures are available) the number of identified participants in tax avoidance schemes increased by almost 2,500 per cent.

1354 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

CATEGORIES OF INCOME TAX AS % OF TOTAL INCOME TAX

Provisional tax

Personal income tax PAYE NonPAYE

Companies

1975-76
1976-77 1977-78
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
1981-82 1982-83(e)

13.1

59.8

18.7

21.5

12.9

61.5

18.2

20.3

11.7

63.3

16.4

20.3

10.3

65.6

15.2

19.2

10.5

65.9

15.6

18.5

10.5

63.5

15.4

21.1

10.1

66.3

14.5

19.2

10.5

66.9

15.4

17.6

Notes: From 1975-76 to 1980-81 total tax collections from wage and salary earners (PAYE taxpayers) increased by 101% while total wages and salaries grew by only 72%.
On the other hand, tax collections from non-PA YE taxpayers (those with business, property and dividend incomes) grew by less than 56% over the same period while their incomes rose by 94%.
Consequently, the share of total personal income taxes paid by wage and salary earners has considerably increased. In 1981-82 it was 82% compared to 76% in 1975-76.

Mr HAYDEN-In incorporating those tables I acknowledge that the source has been the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) who has been raising this matter in the Parliament for several years. Why has the Government not acted on it? Who is to blame in all of this? Certainly, on the basis of the Costigan report, the head of the Attorney-General's Department has a case to answer, but no case has been launched against him. Certainly, if the Treasurer claims he is untainted in all of this, the Commissioner of Taxation is demolished and he should have a charge launched against him. More significant is the way in which both the Attorney-General and the Treasurer are seeking to backbite-to recriminate-one another in their efforts to shift the blame on to others. Look at the transcript of the television program Sunday on 5 September. It states:
But if the Government is committed to a crack-down on tax evasion surely the chief law officer is the chief instrument in such a drive, isn't he? I mean shouldn't you have taken a very personal interest in that?
Senator Durack--No, the question of the Tax Act is administered by the Treasurer, he is the Minister the Commissioner of Taxation goes to.
Then he goes on:
. we as a department, or a service department, we act on instructions from the Commissioner o.Taxation.
There are more gems like that. Yesterday, before the Estimates Committee, Mr O'Donovan said:
Let me say categorically that, before Mr Costigan's report was published, there was no instruction or request to my knowledge given in my office for a prosecution under the 1980 Act.
There you are. The transcript continues:
CHAIRMAN-From where would such an instruction
or req uest come?

Mr O'Donovan-In the ordinary course of events, they
would come from the Taxation Office.
Why have the instructions not been issued? The Treasurer himself has shown that he can be extraordinarily active also in seeking to shove the blame on to others. In his Press conference on Sunday he engaged in this with great vigour. The transcript states:
You are saying the Tax Office was doing what it could to facilitate prosecution, but there's never been a prosecution.
The Treasurer stated:
Yes, but you have to see that comment in the context of realising that the Taxation Office itself, the Taxation Commissioner, does not have the power to file any indictments . . He can only get prosecutions if he obtains the support of the Crown Law authorities
If honourable members look at page 8 and page 10 of the transcript they will see what has happened. Look again at the transcript of the program Sunday, pages 4 and 5:
But the laws were never fully tested, were theyO
Senator DURACKThey haven't been fully tested but they are now going to be fully tested.
That is our brave little fire chief. He presides over arson and wonders why householders do not applaud him when their houses are burnt down. Let us get something in sight here. This Government has presided over this scandal-a multi billion dollar scandal. It has presided over the corruption of the Narcotics Bureau, and the Minister who presided over that still sits in this House. It has presided over the rotten meat export scandal, and the Ministers responsible for that are still here. It covers up the Asia Dairy Industries Ltd malfeasance, in spite of the fact that it has had the report for five months, and the Minister is still here brazenly. We now discover the great health fraud emerging from within the ranks of the Government.

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1355

Where is this going to end? We have a government which is thoroughly corrupt and in these circumstances there can be no confidence in it. Even the Auditor-General declares, as Costigan declared, that action recommended by the Williams Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs two and a half years ago in relation to containers has not been acted on yet. This is a government that is steeped in its own infamy. It is too thick-hided to experience any real shame.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member's time has expired. Is the motion seconded?
Mr Lionel BowenI second the motion and reserve my right to speak.
Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Sir James Killen)-by leaveagreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Treasurer from speaking for a period not exceeding 30 minutes.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2. I9)-Although this is a censure motion against me, in a sense I welcome the opportunity that it provides to do three things. Firstly, I can answer charges that have been laid against me. Secondly, I can provide in some detail an account of my stewardship of the campaign against tax avoidance in Australia over the last few years. Thirdly, it provides an opportunity to try to put into perspective the debate about tax evasion and tax avoidance that has gone on over the past few weeks. A perspective certainly is needed. When one looks back over the personal abuse, the hyperbole, the muck-raking, the exaggeration and the downright misleading of the Australian community about basic facts, one sees that a degree of perspective is needed.
Fact No. I that has to be understood is that it was this Government that appointed the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union and it was the former Liberal Government in Victoria that appointed the McCabe-Lafranchi inquiry. Fact No.2 is that the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act has been extremely successful legislation. On all the available evidence, the legislation that was passed in December 1980 has been a conspicious success.
Opposition members-Ha, ha!
Mr HOWARD-Members opposite laugh. Indeed it is not surprising that is has been a conspicuous success. Let me quote no better authority on this subject as far as the Opposition is concerned--

Mr Armitage-Not another crooked accountant!
Mr HOWARD-No, it is Senator Evans, the shadow Attorney-General. I will quote what he said. It is very good. Members opposite ought to hear this. This is what Senator Evans said on 3 December 1980 when the Bill was being debated in the Senate:
This Bill deals in an unprecedented way but in a way which has a good chance of being unprecedentedly successful with what is unprecedentedly nauseous conduct.
What Senator Evans said then, of course, was prophetic. Fact No.2 that has to be got into perspective is that that legislation was effective in bringing to an end the practices that were described in the McCabe-Lafranchi report and in the Costigan report.
Another area in which perspective has to be restored is the deliberate attempt by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) to give the impression that $IO,OOOm to $15,000m was lost through the bottom-of-the-harbour tax avoidance schemes. Today he tried to slime that over by saying he was talking about evasion generally. But the impression he has sought to create is that $10 billion to $15 billion has been involved in the bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. On all the available evidence that charge should be rejected for the totally unsubstantiated exaggeration that it really is.
Mr Lionel BowenWhat is the figure?
Mr HOWARDI will tell members opposite if they will listen. The Australian Taxation Office has advised me that it knows of some 3,850 cases. It is at present examining another 600 cases which may involve strips of untaxed company profits carried out before the Act was passed in 1980. One possibility is that a number of those 600 cases may be strips of accumulated profits that have borne company tax-a different kind of thing. The Taxation Office feels confident from its analysis so far that about one-half of the 600 cases will turn out to be strips of untaxed profits. That would bring the number of cases to about 4,150. In respect of them the evaded tax on taxable company incomes is some $430m. The Opposition cannot have it both ways. It cannot now say that the amount involved is $1O,000m to $15,000m when on Budget night its members accused me of putting rubbery figures in the Budget because I said that the figure was $425m. They cannot have it both ways. They have to make up their minds as to which of those two figures they are going to use.
It has been estimated by the Taxation Office that it will not be practicable to collect, under the special legislation, some 10 per cent of the evaded

1356 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

company tax. This brings from $430m to $385m the total amount that is involved. The minute I have from the Taxation Office goes on to say that even if the total number of stripped cases was 6,000 and the average level of evasion was $100,000, the total amount of evaded primary tax would be about $600m. That, of course, is an enormous amount of money. That is a very large amount of money in anybody's language. But to suggest that it is about $1 O,OOOm to $15,000m is a totally unsubstantiated exaggeration.
Fact No.4: To restore the perspective is to remind the House that not only was legislation of unprecedented severity in this particular context passed by this Parliament in December 1980, but also the Government has foreshadowed its intention to introduce special legislation to recoup the tax that was evaded under these particular schemes. We have also indicated through the establishment of a special task force our intention to, if possible, bring about the prosecutions under the pre-1980 law of the people who were involved in promoting the schemes. In the course of his remarks the Leader of the Opposition asked me why I did not apply the statement procedure to the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Bill. I will tell him why I did not apply the statement procedure. In case he had not noticed, the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Bill was a criminal statute. It has long been the practice of any proper approach to justice and the rights of citizens not to make legislation by announcement in respect of criminal penalties, and criminal penalties have always applied from the date of royal assent. The practice that he referred to in my speech of 16 April at the Melbourne Chamber of Commerce was the practice that I outlined on that occasion regarding the striking down of artificial tax avoidance schemes.
That brings me to the second element of my remarks today; that is, to go back to tht: time when I became Treasurer at the end of 1977 and to try to sketch what happened in the avoidance area over the years that I have been responsible as Treasurer of this country. The end of 1977 was, in fact, for an entirely different reason, a very significant time as far as the fight against tax avoidance was concerned because it was at the end of 1977 that the High Court of Australia brought down its decision in Cridland's case. That effectively represented the death knell of the old section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act which had been used by the Taxation Office as its principal weapon in fighting tax avoidance over a period of 20 years, believing, as it did, that the principles enunciated by the Privy Council in Newton's case could be validly applied. Well one may say in

looking back: 'What a great pity it is that the principles enunciated by the Privy Council in Newton's case have not, in fact, been applied more persistently by the High Court of Australia'.
Be that as it may, early in 1978 the Government and the Taxation Office faced a particular problem because of the decision of the High Court which, in effect, said to the Government and to the Taxation Office: 'Stop thinking that you can apply section 260 any more, because you cannot'. The first priority that the Government then obviously had was to set about rewriting an effective general anti-avoidance section.
I think even my friend the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), if he looks back over the speeches he has made on tax avoidance over the last few years, would acknowledge that he constantly urged upon me the importance of rewriting section 260. I agreed with him in getting an effective general anti-avoidance section. But, that was a mammoth task. Not only did we have to rewrite it but also we had to rewrite it in a way that would be effective. In the meantime, it was necessary for the Government to legislate on an ad hoc basis against specific schemes as they emerged. On 8 February 1978 the Commissioner of Taxation advised the Acting Treasurer of the implications of the Cridland decision which opened the way for schemes exploiting the averaging provisions to proliferate with potentially large revenue losses. On 10 February he brought the attention of the Acting Treasurer to share trading schemes that had recently come under notice, were widespread and involved very large losses of reven ue.
On 31 March 1978 I received advice from the Commissioner of Taxation that in recent days he had become aware of reports from accountants and other sources that suggested there could be massive potential revenue losses from Curran schemes. The estimates from these particular sources varied from hundreds of millions of dollars to about $2,000m. As a result of the information that the Commissioner of Taxation brought to my attention-an upper limit of $2,000m involving potential losses from a Curran scheme-the Commissioner, with some reluctance, said to me: 'Even at this late stage I raise with you the possibility of whether the Government would consider dating the legislation to strike down the Curran scheme back to August of last year when your predecessor issued a general warning about tax avoidance.' He raised that with the full knowledge that, as a matter of general principle, the Government did not like using retrospectivity in legislation. But, notwithstanding that general reluctance on the part

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1357

of the Government, because of our concern at the massive potential amount of revenue involved under the Curran scheme, which was by far the most important threat to revenue at the time, because of the loophole that had been opened up by the High Court in its decision on Cridland's case, the Government decided on that occasion to date that legislation from August 1977. Does that represent the act of a government which has presided over the flourishing of tax avoidance? Does that represent the act of a government which is
indifferent to the effect of tax avoidance on the equity of the tax system? Does that represent the action of a government that is elected to represent vested interests? No; it represents the action of a government which is prepared, if the occasion arises, to take action which will fall where it may and will hurt where it may, irrespective of the people who are involved. It represents the action of a government which governs for the generality of the Australian community, and the Australian taxpayer. It represents the action of a government that is determined to protect and defend the overall equity of the Australian taxation system.
On 7 April I introduced legislation against the averaging, share trading and Curran schemes. I made it clear that the Curran amendments would go back to Budget day 1977. At the same time. I also indicated to the House that the current year loss scheme was an important area of avoidance and I foreshadowed remedial legislation. On 19 April 1978 I foreshadowed legislation against prepayment schemes. I pointed out that these schemes were being heavily promoted to clients who would no longer be able to take advantage of artificial losses created under Curran and other schemes. I added that large amounts of revenue were involved. On 24 May the Commissioner advised that there were indications of widespread resort to trust stripping schemes.
Mr Jacobi-That's right.
Mr HOWARD-That is right. He expressed the view that as the tax year drew to a close it was vital that the Government should act to close off that particular avenue against trust distributions. On 9 June 1978 the Commissioner advised me that the cost to revenue of the retention of carry forward losses generated by Curran, share trading and prepayment schemes entered into before the operative date of remedial legislation would be at least $30m. On II June 1978 I foreshadowed legislation against trust stripping schemes. I noted that very large amounts of tax were involved. On 15 June 1978 I had advice from the Commissioner of a further series of Curran claims for deductions totalling $210m. Shortly before, the Commissioner had drawn my attention to an attempt

in a single case to gain a Curran deduction of $IOOm. On 24 July 1978 the Commissioner advised that expenditure recoupment schemes and variations of trading stock schemes had been discovered and that the amounts of revenue at risk were very large indeed. As an example he cited transactions totalling $124m which had occurred through the bank account of one promoter over a recent period of three weeks. On I August 1978 the Commissioner advised that if the decision handed down the previous day by the Supreme Court of Victoria in the case of Nilsen Development Laboratories Pty Ltd was upheld on appeal the revenue cost in 1978-79 could be of the order of $600m. Action was taken to prevent that coming about.
I mention these figures and these actions. The pages go on detailing large numbers of announce ments and pieces of legislation that were foreshadowed by this Government throughout 1978, 1979 and 1980. Not only did we act against the artificial paper schemes but in the middle of 1979 we also acted against the excesses of family trusts. Later on we acted against unit trusts. All the time work was continuing on drawing a new general anti-avoidance section. That was brought into law in May 1981. I believe, and there is evidence available to suggest that my belief is properly based, that that general anti-avoidance section has been very effective. I believe that there is an improved and different attitude in the community. A different attitude is apparent from the High Court of Australia regarding the interpretation of tax statutes, and that is something that everybody should welcome because Court decisions so far as this issue is concerned are also of very considerable significance.
I now go to some of the specific allegations that were made against me by the Leader of the Opposition. I want to say something about the sequence of events leading up to the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act. As I have said on earlier occasions, the existence of bottom-of-the-harbour or company stripping operations was first alluded to early in 1978 in a minute to me from the Commissioner of Taxation which covered a number of other matters. In May 1978 the Commissioner of Taxation recommended to me that there ought to be a criminal offence dealing with this problem. He did not at that time have any developed view as to what form that offence should take, but he said that he believed it was necessary. I went to the Government and secured support for an examination to be carried out by the Taxation Office, the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs, and the Attorney-GeneraJ's Department.
Mr HurfordWhen did you go?

1358 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

Mr HOWARD-I went to it in June 1978. Authority was given in August 1978 for that to be carried out. So it was that in August 1978 there was an examination of whether a separate criminal offence would be appropriate. I assumed, in my belief properly, that that examination would include an examination of the existing law as well as an examination of whether it was necessary to insert this particular provision into the law. After those events occurred, apart from the reference in August to which I have referred, on 25 August I read to the House a reference in the Commissioner's minute of 24 May to the fact that he was pressing the Deputy Crown Solicitor for an opinion. That was the only reference that he made to what ultimately has become known as the Perth case. He made no other reference in that minute. He made no other reference in any later minutes. Those who claim that I knew about the Perth case are in effect saying that on the basis of that advice, in the minute of 24 May, I should have been immediately put on notice of the circumstances of the Perth case. That in effect is what they are arguing. I have very carefully checked with the Commissioner of Taxation; I have checked my own recollection and I have checked my own files. I can find no reference other than that. It has always been my belief, and it was a bona fide belief on my part, that the existing law was not adequate to the task and that the new law was necessary. Mr Speaker, you may recall that when the McCabe-Lafranchi report cameout--
Mr Keating--Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. This is a major switch in the Treasurer's defence. Statements have been made in this
House-~
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. There is a point of argument but no point of order.
Mr KeatingYou said the existing law was inadequate. You said you carefully examined it.
Mr SPEAKERThe honourable member for Blaxland will remain silent.
Mr HOWARD-I will repeat my comment in case the honourable member for Blaxland did not hear: It had always been my belief until the McCabe-Lafranchi report came out, which caused the Government to have another look at the situation, and it was a bona fide belief on my part, that the existing law was not adequate to the task and that the 1980 legislation was in fact necessary. The fact of the matter is that when the 1980 legislation was brought in I had tabled in this House a document that represented what I understood and what I was informed were the joint

views of the Taxation Office, the Attorney General's Department, the Crown Solicitor and the Parliamentary Counsel to the effect that the law that existed before the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Bill was inadequate to the task. That view was the view that I held until the McCabeLafranchi report came along and disputed the view of the law that the Government had had. As a result of that, in consultation with the Attorney General (Senator Durack), I asked the Solicitor General for a further examination to be done. The Solicitor-General has indicated a different view. There are, of course, many opinions around.
Mr Keating-You said the existing law was inadequate. You said that. You said you had carefully examined it.
Mr SPEAKER-~Order! I ask the Treasurer to resume his seat. I have not wished to interrupt the Treasurer while he is making his defence but I do want to point out to honourable members on the Opposition benches that the honourable gentleman is entitled to make his reply in silence. I ask, as a matter of fairness, that he be listened to in silence.
Mr HOWARD-Therefore, in consultation with the Attorney-General I asked the Solicitor General to have another look at the matter. The Solicitor-General has indicated that in his view grounds might exist for prosecution in respect of a particular case. That, of course, is the view that was expressed by Mr Costigan, although interestingly enough Mr Gleeson has advised that the evidence so far is not complete for a prosecution of the Perth case, which it was suggested by others was in fact ready for prosecution. At the end of the day the view expressed by the Solicitor General and the view expressed by Mr Costigan may be right. At the end of the day the view expressed, 1 think very eloquently by the CrownSolicitor before the Senate Estimates Committee yesterday, may well prove to be correct. But whatever the ultimate fate of those legal adjudications the fact is that in 1980 when that legislation was brought in it was my belief, and the belief of the Government, that that legislation was necessary. That was a bona fide belief. It was properly held on my behalf and it was a belief that led to the introduction of a statute which has been successful and which was absolutely necessary. I believe that if the Government had not introduced that 1980 legislation it would have been extremely recreant to the trust that it had at that particular time.
Let me go back to what I said at the beginning: It is necessary to restore a sense of perspective to this issue. There is no doubt that the allegations

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1359

made by Mr Costigan about negligence in the Perth office of the Crown Solicitor are serious allegations and should be properly investigated and properly adjudicated. There is no doubt that as a result of this whole experience the procedures between the Crown Solicitor's Office and client departments and procedures generally in both departments relating to certain matters need to be examined. But I want to say that, as far as I am concerned, the work that has been done by the Australian Taxation Office over the last few years has been work of high quality. I believe the Taxation Office has coped extremely well in a very difficult environment, an environment in which it has had to cope, as a result of court interpretations, with a very difficult situation. That is not to say that on every occasion the Taxation Office advice to me is advice that I accept. That is not to say that on every occasion the Government and the Taxation Office agree on everything. But I am not going to cast around in this House for scapegoats inside the Taxation Office.
As far as I am concerned the Taxation Office has done a job over the last few years with considerable ability and considerable integrity. I believe that, if one examines the record, what has been done by this Government in the campaign
against tax avoidance could not have been equalled by any other government. If the Leader of the Opposition and his colleagues dispute that particular proposition, let me seek leave to have incorporated into Hansard a table dealing with income years 1974 to 1980-81 and listing claims for deductions generated during particular income years under tax avoidance schemes. It shows a significant increase between 1976 and 1977, with a peak figure of $1,859m, falling away to $463m in 1978-79, $437m in 1979-80 and $122m in 1980-81. I believe that that pattern and those figures represent evidence of the success after a period of our campaign against tax avoidance arrangements.
Let me repeat: Instead of bottom-of-theharbour schemes having cost $10,000m to $15,000m, as the Leader of the Opposition has falsely implied to the Australian people, those schemes have cost, rather, a top figure on present advice $500m to $600m. Let me repeat that those particular schemes were effectively brought to an end by the legislation of December 1980. Secondly, the government is going to introduce special legislation to recoup the large amount of money that was evaded under those schemes. Thirdly, a special task force will be established to see whether it is possible to prosecute people under the previous law. Against that sort of background can it seriously be alleged that there are

further things that this Government can do in respect of those particular activities? When one goes to the record of what this Government has done since 1978-its action against individual paper schemes, its introduction of a new Part IVA, its strengthening in many other ways of the weaponry of the Taxation Office against tax avoidance practice-can the allegations contained in the Leader of the Opposition's censure motion seriously be sustained? I say to the House that over the past four years there has been no more genuine or consistent opponent of tax avoidance practices in this country than I have been. I believe, along with the overwhelming majority of my colleagues, that tax avoidance practices ought to be opposed totally and utterly by this government.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (2.50)-The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has endeavoured today to make a defence of himself which, it goes without saying, does not bear substance or examination. Let us come right to the point. We are talking about crime. We are not just talking about tax in terms of money; we are talking about criminal behaviour. Not once did the Treasurer address his mind to that fact except to say that in May 1978 there was some discussion with the Commissioner of Taxation as to whether there should have been criminal liability. Why did the Treasurer not admit in the course of his defence that he had ample opinions, many opinions, in the Australian Taxation Office which he should have known about, that criminal law should be applied? He tries to shelter under the suggestion that perhaps the offences were not major; that the funds concerned amounted to a few hundred million dollars. Imagine a Treasurer saying to the people of Australia: 'Why should I worry about it? It is only a few hundred million dollars'. We are talking about massive crime. Why does the Treasurer not identify that crime and direct his mind to what Mr Costigan said? It is stated in the Costigan report:
The Taxation Office had warned that the case-
He was talking about the Perth case-
"raised far reaching implications for the collection of company tax" generally.
Mr Costigan made this point:
The amount of money likely to be lost to the revenue of the Commonwealth was of enormous amounts and even today I do not believe that any sensible estimate can be made of its extent save to say that, it is measured in hundreds if not thousands of millions of dollars.
The Treasurer has got up here today and said: 'Look, you are really overestimating it'. I suggest

1360 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

that the Treasurer look at the facts. He should look at how much he has got in tax out of the petrol pumps since he has been Treasurer. Indirect taxes on petroleum amounted, since he became Treasurer, to a total of $13.3 billion. He has increased indirect taxes on oil and LPG from 2 per cent to nearly 8 per cent of total taxation revenue. He should look at the revenue received from company taxes. It has dropped from 15 per cent to below 12 per cent. Companies have formed in massive numbers and he is collecting from them less tax than ever. How blind is he that he was not aware of these elementary facts? He should look at the report of his own Commissioner of Taxation which states that the number of people identified in tax avoidance escalated 100 per cent between 1979 and 1981. The Treasurer has the audacity to walk into this House and say that everything is all right. Certainly he has passed laws but he has not got one prosecution. He has not collected one dollar. That is the position. He should not shake his head; the opinions given to him clearly show that he could have made one prosecution. He should look at the facts set out in the McCabe-Lafranchi report. Let us address our minds to the McCabe-Lafranchi report. When that report came out the Treasurer
said on the television and everywhere else that the situation had been over-exaggerated and that McCabe and Lafranchi really did not understand the problem. It was only when the Costigan report came out that the Treasurer had to address his mind to the fact that corruption was indeed taking place and that criminals were involved; whether they were in his Department or outside of it, certainly nobody was being prosecuted.
Why does he not look at the McCabe-Lafranchi report which clearly says that only three persons
out of 16 sham directors were interviewed by the Taxation Office? Why is that? The Treasurer should look at this aspect. When McCabe and Lafranchi were trying to find out who wrote the correspondence between Maher and Sears-that was relevant because it would show conspiracyand when they wanted to get from the Perth Office the copy of a letter in the possession of that office, the Taxation Office refused to hand the letter to them. Why was the Taxation Office so sensitive about these matters? Why did the Treasurer come into this House today and admit that he first knew about the criminal operations relating to this matter in May 1978? Why is he still doing nothing about it? He should not pretend that his legislation of 1980 was directed at the bottom-of the-harbour schemes. It was not. In fact there is some doubt as to whether the companies at which that Act is directed can really be identified with

sham and bogus companies, which the bottom-of the-harbour companies are. These companies do not exist in law. They are fraudulent. They have no tax liability and they have no real directors. they are shams. Why does the Treasurer put so much emphasis on those companies when he has admitted that he knows of an opinion that was expressed in September 1978 which clearly said that he could have applied the existing law?
The issue is very clear. Every pay-as-you-earn taxpayer has had to pay more tax because of this Government's failure to apply the law. The McCabe-Lafranchi report clearly shows that it has addressed its mind to the performance of the Australian Taxation Office. It referred to the companies Stirling Court Pty Ltd and Kierad Pty Ltd. We should not hide behind the facts. Both of those companies were directly associated with major office holders of the Liberal party in Western Australia. Mr Costigan stated in his report that the liquidators of those companies made valiant efforts to try to get some help from the Taxation Department. They wrote letter after letter trying to get some information but they did not get anywhere. Why was the Taxation Department so unable to assist them by guaranteeing that
there would be a prosecution? Why is it that it took until July or August this year for the Treasurer even to consult with the Solicitor General? After the Attorney-General, (Senator Durack), the Solicitor-General is the second most senior legal officer in the Government. We have clear evidence today of the incompetence of the Attorney-General's Department. It is interesting to note that a statement was made this year after some six, seven, or eight years have gone by. Some seven years went by before the Government consulted the Solicitor-General. Why did it not ask the Solicitor-General about the position? The Treasurer admitted in a statement which he made in July that when he asked the Solicitor-General about the position he immediately said: 'Yes, there are grounds for prosecution'. Why did not the Treasurer do something about it before July? Why did he not do what the McCabe-Lafranchi report suggested he should have done? If the Treasurer had prosecuted he would have stopped Maher from getting any nerve. 'Nerve' is the word used. I wish to put on record-it is pretty well known-that members of the Government, for example in Perth, would know all the leading identities in Perth. The Attorney-General would also know all the leading identities in Perth. Is it to be assumed that they never discussed this matter relating to their tax problems amongst themselves? Why is it that only three out of the 16 sham directors were interviewed? Why is it that

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1361

Mr Gleedman was able to give such outrageous opinions within the office and nothing was ever done? Why did we get the nonsense yesterday in the Senate Estimates Committee that Costigan was misled when he said that the file was lost and that it was eventually found in the bottom drawer? The explanation that was given by Mr Neaves yesterday was that it was found in the top drawer. That was the only difference.
Let us look at the facts of the situation. Let us look again at what Mr Costigan has said, address our minds to the Perth case and to Mr Gleedman's inability to handle it. It is very interesting to find that, on the top of page 43 of the report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, Mr Costigan states:
The only new evidence which came to light during 1976 was a conversation between a taxation officer in another State and one of the proposed defendants, who in a public bar told him that he had effectively disposed of the company records relating to the matter.
That statement was given in evidence. A taxation officer was able to give the Treasurer that information in 1976. Those records had then been effectively disposed of to the bottom of the harbour. If this Treasurer wishes to have a look at his conduct and that of his Department he should look at the earlier report of Mr Costigan presented last year where he states:
I have had discussions with the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation for New South Wales in Sydney, and with the Commissioner of Taxation and two First Assistant Commissioners of Taxation in Canberra.
Honourable members should bear in mind that it was Mr Costigan who had these discussions. Surely the Treasurer could have had these discussions-as he must have. The report goes on to state:
I was informed by the Commissioner in Canberra that his office had been aware for a considerable time that promoters of schemes of the kind I have outlined have been using criminals in the way suggested. The Taxation Office has informed me it has a great deal of information which has caused it to conclude that criminals were involved in these tax schemes.
When have we ever heard that from the Treasurer? We have not heard it once in the course of his statements. Surely, if the Treasurer had discussed these matters with the heads of his Department-as he must do and is obliged to do-he would have been put on alert when he knew that revenue was dropping, company registrations were increasing, company taxation returns were dropping and taxation revenue was dropping. The Treasurer came in heavily on indirect tax to make up the leeway. The Government came in heavily on indirect tax to make up the leeway, with $13.3 billion in the crude oil levy

alone. Is it any wonder the rest of Australia is mystified about why the Government could not take any action? Let us look at another aspect of Costigan's report last year. He said he was going to question somebody in Melbourne whom he could identify as obviously being involved in some tax evasion scheme. He mentioned substantial amounts of cash being withdrawn from a bank account. He alerted the Minister, through the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman), that somebody from the Taxation Office ought to be present at the examination. Nobody came. He made the point that nobody came. No officer of the Taxation Office was present in court.
He said that in advance of the examination he had advised indirectly both the Minister for Administrative Services, the Treasurer and the Commissioner of Taxation so that the officers would be ready to listen to the evidence.l'I0body came.
It is well known that there seems to be a lot of corruption in high places. It is directly related, in our view, in terms of the public interest, to people who perhaps could claim protection because they have an affiliation with the Liberal Party-not the painters and dockers, because they have no protection, but the people who got the benefit of the money. It is well known in another area that some of them have boasted that when the tax investigation officers went to interview them they ordered them out of the premises, saying; 'Why do you think I pay $50,000 a year to the Liberal Party?' This is the real issue in this case. Government members should look at the records of the tax investigators and see what notes they made about these accusations. Does it add up to the fact that the Government is phoney? Is it posturing, passing a set of unnecessary laws? The honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) was quite right when he asked the other day the reason for the Special Prosecutors Bill. Is the Government adopting a stance, a posture, that it cannot do anything about it?
I understand that yesterday during the Senate Estimates Committee hearing Mr Menzies gave the Government away completely by saying that he had never received any instructions that there needed to be any alteration in the law. The Treasurer comes in here today with the excuse that he had to do something about it. He has had 22 legal opinions, including the two mentioned by my colleague the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy) in the previous debate. He was advised by the Law Society of Victoria that there were opinions from Forsythe and others that the existing law was adequate. He was advised by learned Queen's Counsel in September 1978, also from Owen Dixon chambers in Melbourne, that

1362 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

the existing law was adequate. What is his Government's explanation and the explanation of those Government members who will follow in this debate for there not being one prosecution for fraud? That is what should happen. Every lawyer worth his salt, other than those in the Department of the Treasury and the Attorney-General's Department, recommended it and nothing was done. It is absolute negligence. It savours of corruption when these people in high places, as I am now aware, have been boasting that they were not worried about tax investigations; they paid their subscriptions in other places. Can honourable members imagine in Perth, for example, these high officers of the Liberal Party not having discussions with other people in Perth, whether in the Attorney-General's Department or the Taxation Office?
I asked a question of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) the other day about obtaining an assets and liability statement from those officers to see whether there is corruption. The silly answer I got was to leave it to Mr Costigan. These are responsible people in responsible positions. If corruption seeps into that area the Treasurer cannot possibly get the revenue he wants. The liability and the obligation rest solely with the Treasurer.
I make these points: Would any normal person in Australia think that this Government should not have been on notice as to the criminal activity where Mr Costigan can find it? Should it not have been on notice when Mr Todman, for example, one of the obviously correct officers of the Perth office, was demanding that something be done? One would think some of that information would seep through to the Treasurer. Would the Department of the Treasury not have drawn the attention of the Treasurer to the sharp rise in the registration of companies and the relative fall in the number of companies paying tax? Of course it would! How can the Government continue to assert that it sees no evil and hears no evil, when what it speaks always seems to be evil? The real issue here is the law. On ministerial responsibility, according to Jennings:
Each Minister is responsible to parliament for the conduct of his Department. The act of every civil servant is by convention regarded as the act of his Minister.
On that the Treasurer fails. On that he is not entitled to hold office, neither is the Attorney General. Each of those Ministers in public discussion is blaming the other. The public is sick and tired of this Government for its ineptitude, for its corruption. It is about time that the Treasurer was removed from office, just to teach the lesson.

Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.5)-1 am very proud to stand beside my colleague the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and defend him against the unworthy and unjustified attacks by the Australian Labor Party.
Mr Armitage-Are you going to talk about--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Chifley will remain silent.
Mr Armitage-Are you going to talk about your family trust?
Mr SPEAKER-The Deputy Prime Minister will resume his seat. The honourable member for Chifley has interjected no fewer than a dozen times today. I now warn him to cease interjecting.
Mr ANTHONYMr Speaker, I reject this censure motion completely. It cannot be sustained in any shape or form. It falls completely flat. It is absolutely hollow. Why? It is because the Treasurer of this country has a standing, has integrity and has a competence in the area of tax avoidance which no previous Treasurer of this country has had. The name of this Treasurer is a household word. John Howard is known as the man who has been chasing the tax dodgers of this country. He has created an awareness of those who have been defrauding the Government of taxes. He has brought about tax reforms which practically has brought to a halt-we hope completely to a halt-the various tax devices that have been used. If honourable members want to look at the record they should get a list of the 20-odd pieces of legislation covering 50-odd schemes which have been introduced during the period in which he has been Treasurer, as well as a number of other pieces of legislation that we have put on notice will be introduced into this Parliament and action taken.
Honourable members must remember that the record of the Labor Party shows that these tax avoidance schemes started to emerge back in 1973. There is nothing on the record to show that for two to 2t years of the Labor Government, of which the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) was a senior member and for a while the Treasurer, did anything in that area. The Labor Government overlooked tax avoidance. Today Opposition members are trying to substantiate a case with hindsight, making all sorts of assumptions that this should have been done or that should have been done. Those charges were very competently answered by the Treasurer himself. He showed quite categorically what the Government has done. He referred to the introduction of the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act, which broke

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1363

new ground in getting at tax avoiders. He created a precedent in introducing that legislation. That alone is one the greatest measures that has been adopted to put people on notice that they had better be careful in devising any new sorts of tax avoidance schemes. If honourable members were to ask any accountant today they would be told that the opportunities for working out a new device is very much more difficult now than it ever was before. This Government, led by the Treasurer, has rigorously and relentlessly pursued tax avoiders with a whole series of different forms of legislation. The Treasurer has recognised loopholes in legislation and he has done his level best to close all those loopholes. We hope they are closed.
Mr CunninghamYou hope. You know darned well that they are not.
Mr ANTHONY-It has not been easy for the Treasurer to do that. I say 'hope'; no man is so wise that he can look into the future and know that everything is absolute. But we have done our absolute best. The Treasurer, against enormous difficulties, with pressure from vested interests, with pressure from within his own party and from elsewhere, has seen his goal and has gone straight forward and brought down the legislation I mentioned. Today he is acknowledged throughout the Australian community to be a man of high standing in the whole area of tax avoidance. No one can take that away from him. That is why this censure debate today is so hollow. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) opened his case by saying: 'We are chasing crime.' We are talking about crime, massive crime. It is all about crime. We are not running away from crime. One thing that is most noticeable in this whole debate around the Costigan report on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union is the lack of reference to the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. There has been a certain amount of zeal and vigour by the Opposition--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The right honourable member will resume his seat. There is continual interjection from a number of members on the Opposition bench, from the honourable member for Hindmarsh, the honourable member for Batman, the honourable member for Kalgoorlie and the honourable member for Cunningham. The continual noise is not satisfactory in this national Parliament. I ask them to cease their interjections.
Mr ANTHONy-it is most noticea/:lle that the Opposition has avoided this part of the Costigan report. This censure motion today is just another

chapter, another episode of what we will hear about the Costigan report. I do not criticise the Australian Labor Party for wanting to debate the Costigan report. It is a very important and very serious document that everybody has to give attention to. This Government is not being reluctant in giving attention to it. The Costigan report is a result of an initiative of this Government and the Victorian Government to look into the activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. Why? Because another royal commission prior to this, the Sweeney Royal Commission into Alleged Payments to Maritime Unions, made reference to the criminal activities that were going on in the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. There was a series of articles in the Bulletin by a Mr David Richards which highlighted their activities back in 1980. These articles contained massive revelations of what was going on amongst the painters and dockers in this country in almost every area of crime. So a Royal Commission was set up.
I want to say how grateful the Government and, I believe, the Australian people afe to Mr Costigan for taking on this very dangerous job. Anybody else who dared to look into the activities of the painters and dockers was lucky ever to tell the tale. That is what we are talking about. Mr Costigan has issued two published reports so far. These reports have uncovered a number of matters of great interest to the Australian public. Firstly, they uncovered the inactivity and the inexcusable behaviour of the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Perth. Secondly, they uncovered the fact that through bottom-of-the-harbour schemes there has been a large avoidance of taxation. Thirdly, they uncovered the fact that a nationwide crime syndicate is operating within the painters and dockers organisation of this country. Those are the things that have been revealed.
This Government has taken action in relation to the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Perth. It has taken action under the Public Service Act to suspend two members and further action will be taken.
Opposition members-Ha, hal
Mr ANTHONY-Members of the Opposition say: 'Ha, ha.' They want to override the Public Service Act and just do things in a slap-happy way. The Government has decided to appoint a special investigator in the Perth office. We have brought legislation into this House for a Special Prosecutor to be part of a task force to further follow up and recover moneys from all of those people who might have been involved in bottomof-the-harbour schemes. This is as a result of the

1364 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

actions of this Government. When Mr Costigan said he needed further power we opened up the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act. This had not been done before. We did it because we felt there was a need to get to the bottom of whatever vice or avoidance existed. We have this information as a result of the concurrence of this Government in trying to get to the bottom of crime wherever it occurs in this country. Those are the actions of the Government. Of course, where it has been shown that tax avoidance schemes have been operating amendments to the law have been made. But what about the painters and dockers? What is the Labor Party saying about them?
Opposition members interjecting~
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to honourable members on the Opposition benches that because they have a disagreement with what the honourable member with the call is saying it does not justify continual interjection. I indicate that I will have to take action to ensure that all honourable members, when they get the call in this House, can be heard.
Mr ANTHONY--I have mentioned that we are taking tax measures to recover money. In fact, we have already put on notice that we will bring in legislation that will have a retrospective aspect to it. The Government does not do that with any ease. It does not do it with the same ease or casualness with which the Labor Party seems to talk about retrospectivity. It talks about it as though it can create a liability on somebody who might in the past have caused something since made a breach or crime. We are bringing in an act of retrospectivity where a liability already existed. We will pursue it to recover moneys that have been involved in bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. That shows the determination of this Government to follow through. But where is the determination of the Labor Party to follow through with the painters and dockers? The evidence on the painters and dockers that is appearing is quite frightening. I refer to the second report of Mr Costigan. I ask honourable members to listen to what he said. It is frightening to every Australian. He said:
It would not be expected. and it is not the fact. that the criminal activities of the members of the union are restricted to any particular sphere of crime. In this report I have referred to crimes of violence, theft, extortion, intimidation, fraud, illegal gambling and trafficking in drugs.
Mr Howe-Tell us what he said about the big boys.
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Batman.

Mr ANTHONY-The report continued:
I have not dealt with some other major areas of activity. There is before me evidence of wide scale racketeering, loan sharking and active participation in organised prostitution. I doubt whether there are any forms of criminal activity in which there are not some active participation.
Mr Costigan went on to say that this is prevalent in South Australia, Tasmania, Melbourne and Brisbane. He expects that the centre of it might be in Sydney. When we get evidence of that dimension, surely it would be frightening to every decent Australian if the Government of this country did not pay some attention to it. I do not criticise the Opposition for wanting to examine the activities and the functions of the Australian Taxation Office, the Crown Solicitor's Office or anyone else. But in all fairness and justice I hope that the Labor Party does not exclude its interest from wanting to get action in this area also. The reluctance of the Labor Party is understandable. We all know that it is the political wing of the trade union movement of this country. When the trade union movement speaks, the Labor Party jumps. The painters and the dockers are associated with the Australian Council of Trade Unions and they are infiltrated into the heart of the ALP. Opposition members know it. What about the comments of one of their colleagues in the Senate? What about the comments of Senator Georges, who said: 'We do a good job. Any criminal, whether petty or otherwise, who comes out of gaol finds it difficult to get a job, but we look after them'. That is a great service that the painters and dockers give! But the test of the Labor Party will be how genuine it is in getting at real crime-not a furphy such as trying today to get at the Treasurer, who has a record and a standing unequalled by any Treasurer in this country. I am proud to stand beside him.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.20)-The struggling efforts of the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) are barely worthy of comment but let me comment on just one aspect. We note with interest his quotation that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) was acting against the vested interests in his own party. I suppose that follows logically from the fact that recently we heard the Victorian Secretary of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union say that 95 per cent of his members voted Liberal because, as he said: 'We crooks have got to stick together'. Of course, that figures. We understand the kind of context in which the Deputy Prime Minister put his remark in respect of the Treasurer's actions.
The Treasurer's speech, however, was also a deplorable attempt to defend himself. He spent two-thirds of his speech telling us what he had done in

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1365

attacking tax avoidance schemes in this country. We acknowledge that he has closed more tax avoidance doors after more tax avoiders have bolted than any previous Treasurer in history. The point is that all the schemes he has attacked have been attacked in such a way that the tax avoiders have got away with it and have gone on to new schemes. He has been fighting a losing battle, with more and more tax avoidance occurring all the time. Simply to come along with a list of legislation which simply shuts the door after the horses have bolted is no proof at all that he has been thoroughly convincing in his actions in respect of tax avoidance.
It is also worthy of note that the Treasurer, in his speech, made no real attempt to defend himself against the attacks that have been made on him, and the charges that have been made against him by us in regard to his administration. I repeat to the Treasurer what those charges are. They are that he has engaged in misrepresentation; that he has been grossly negligent; that he has been thoroughly inconsistent in some of his explanations; that he has been complacent in his handling of this whole matter; and that he has failed to accept responsibility which is duly his for the shambles which has occurred in this nation in respect of the bottom-of-the-harbour scheme. There are numerous examples of misrepresentation. A number of these stem from the conflict between the Treasurer's reply to the McCabeLafranchi report and the Costigan report. For instance, whilst Costigan exposes the incredible and inexcusable delay in the handling of the test case, the Treasurer, in his McCabe-Lafranchi reply, excused this delay. He said that it was necessary to have more discussion. He said that the preparation of tht: brief was a labour intensive exercise. The damn brief was lying in a drawer for five years! He was clearly apologising and excusing an action which the Costigan report showed was inexcusable. The Treasurer said in his reply to the McCabe-Lafranchi report that all the available evidence was that the existing provisions could not be used.
Mr Cadman--Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Is it in order for there to be are-run of a speech made on television the previous night?
The DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-- There is no point of order.
Mr WILLIS-I am glad that the honourable member was watching. As I was saying, the Treasurer said in his reply to the McCabeLafranchi report that all the available evidence was that the existing provisions could not be used. That plainly was not the case. Costigan shows

that there were outside expert opinions. Thirdly, the Treasurer stated in his McCabe-Lafranchi reply that the Australian Taxation Office had proceeded as fast as resources and priorities had allowed in regard to investigators and taking whatever recovery action was left open to it. Costigan shows that the Taxation Office did not co-operate at all for seven years with a liquidator who was appointed in 1975. So much for the Taxation Office proceeding as fast as resources and priorities allowed to take all the action left open to it to get back the money! It did nothing for seven years in respect of that liquidator. As Costigan said, if it had acted in that regard it would have had a substantial disincentive effect for those involved in the scheme.
The Treasurer also said in his McCabeLafranchi reply that it was not until 1979-80 that the full extent of the schemes became apparent to the Taxation Office or the Government. He implied that there was no reason to be concerned until then. Let us compare that with the Costigan report. Costigan said that the Taxation Office realised in September 1974 that the scheme could have far reaching implications for the collection of company tax generally. If the Taxation Office knew that in September 1974, how come the Treasurer said in his response to the McCabeLafranchi report that it was not until 1979 or 1980 that the full extent of the schemes became apparent to the Taxation Office and that, therefore, there was no real reason to be concerned until that time? The Taxation Office knew years and years before that this scheme had important ramifications. Also, McCabe and Lafranchi showed in their report that the investigative sections of the Western Australian, Queensland, Victorian and New South Wales branches of the Taxation Office were aware of the proliferation of schemes throughout the relevant period. So there was knowledge in the Taxation Office of the widely-spread nature of these schemes. The implication that had for revenue was known well before 1979-80.
Misrepresentation has come from the Treasurer also in respect of the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act. He relied on them in his speech to this House on 25 August as a reason for not knowing what was going on. But in his reply to the McCabe-Lafranchi report he claimed that he knew what there was to know and so too, could McCabe and Lafranchi have known if they had approached the Taxation Commissioner. The Treasurer was trying to have it each way. He was saying that he was really to be excused for not knowing because of the secrecy provisions but that if McCabe and Lafranchi had

I366 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

gone to the Taxation Commissioner he could have given them the full story. The Treasurer cannot have it both ways. Clearly, the secrecy provisions did not prevent the Treasurer being extensively briefed to make his response to the McCabeLafranchi report.
The Treasurer claimed also that the investigative resources of the Taxation Office were under great strain when major tax company stripping activity referred to in the McCabe-Lafranchi report occurred in 1977 and 1978 because of the greatly increased tax avoidance activity. He did not say that a reason for that great strain on the investigative resources of the Taxation Office at that time was that there was less of the resources. While these schemes were mushrooming and the Taxation Office was coping with an enormous number of tax avoidance schemes and its resources were greatly strained the Treasurer was busily reducing the resources. The number of investigators went down year by year. What an incredible situation that is. From 1976-77 to 1980-81 the number of staff employed in the investigations section of the Taxation Office fell by 55. The greatest falls occurred during the years when the bottom-of-the-harbour schemes were exploding. In 1977 the number of investigations staff was reduced by 54. Another 37 were taken away in 1978. This occurred from an overall figure of just over 1,000. So, the number of investigations as a proportion of tax returns was reduced by 12 per cent in those two years. The Taxation Commissioner has admitted that the staff shortages have hindered the efforts to detect tax evasion and have actually resulted in revenue losses. In 1978 the Taxation Commissioner said:
The necessity to deploy staff for these basic purposes caused some curtailment of enforcement activities and this must be regarded as having brought about at least deferment, if not loss, of some tax revenue.
Of course, with hindsight I am sure that he would increase that amount. We can see that it was not just a matter of coping with more tax avoidance; it was a matter of the resources being strained because the Taxation Office was reducing the investigations staff at a time when tax avoidance was clearly rampant in various ways, as it still is.
The Treasurer claimed also at his Press conference last Sunday that the bottom-of-the-harbour scheme was killed off by the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act. This was one of the two fundamental facts on which he started off that Press conference. He repeated that claim here today. The evidence is that that is not so. In his reply to McCabe-Lafranchi the Treasurer admitted that five cases of these schemes had occurred since 3 December 1980. The Minister for Employment

and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) who was representing the Treasurer in the debate on 7 September, said that there were seven such cases. During the Senate Estimates Committee hearing yesterday the Attorney-General's Department admitted that there were nine such cases. The Taxation Commissioner said in a letter which was read out by the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, again representing the Treasurer in the debate on 7 September, that there were some 1,600 cases in which the Taxation Office had not identified the year of the tax strip. Indeed, it is quite likely that the increase in the number of identified cases will show that many more cases will be found to have occurred after 3 December. The Treasurer just blithely goes on asserting that these schemes were all stopped at that time.
I refer to the revenue involved in the schemes. The Treasurer claimed at his Press conference that when he was first told of the scheme in early 1978 only $6m to $10m was involved. Commissioner Costigan says that in 1975 the Taxation Office had identified $30m to $40m as a result of a study of 250 companies. That is well before the scheme really got going. Of course, now the Treasurer says that in the order of $430m is involved. So he has clearly misrepresented the situation. The Treasurer said at his Press conference that $300m to $350m was involved. In the space of three days he went from an estimate of $300m to $350m to an estimate of $430m with a possible high of $600m-not a bad increase of $300m or so in three days. Of course, the McCabe-Lafranchi report found $200m in respect of one promoter. Costigan talked of possibly thousands of millions of dollars. New South Wales Attorney-General Walker in one examination alone of a group of companies found $450m involved. The figures that the Treasurer is talking about are peanuts compared to the real level.
The Treasurer has misrepresented the situation also in regard to the Australian Labor Party's role. He said that we did nothing about the Curran schemes. Of course, what Labor did after the Curran scheme was found in operation was to say that it would legislate against it. Sure, we did not do that by the time we went out of office. But many times the Treasurer has made an announcement of an intention to legislate. He has taken more than 12 months actually to legislate. Of course, in reality the Government then took another 2+ years to legislate against the Curran scheme. The allegation that Labor has done nothing about tax avoidance is thoroughly untrue. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a list of actions taken by the

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1367

Labor Government against tax avoidance schemes.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
THE LABOR GOVERNMENT (1972175) AND TAX AVOIDANCE
The previous Labor Government took wide ranging action against tax avoidance, including:
elimination of Norfolk Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands and Christmas Islands as tax havens for the avoidance of personal and company tax. 1973-S.7A.
dividends and interest paid to Papua and New Guinea were made subject to withholding tax to prevent use of PNG to avoid withholding taxes. Payments of dividends to artificial companies in PNG and other tax havens was ended. 197374-S.7, S.128, S.160.
introduction of the system of tax clearance certificates and the use of exchange control by th~ Reserve Bank to limit the use of tax havens for tax avoidance. 1973-- Taxation Administration Act S.14, Banking Act S.39B.
restrictions on the purchase and use of companies with accumulated bad debts 1973-S.63.
restrictions on the purchase and use of companies with accumulated losses 1973-S.80.
restrictions on the carry forward of excess distributions by private companies to avoid undistributed profits tax 1973--S.IOS.
subscriptions to psuedo-exploration companies ended as a form of tax avoidance. 1973-S.77.
avoidance of withholding tax on interest payable to overseas residents through an overseas branch of an Australian company was stopped 1973-74S.12S.
Mr WILLIS-That is a quite extensive list. It gives the lie to the repeated claim which I have exposed many times but which keeps coming up. The Treasurer is guilty also of negligence-firstly, in regard to the Taxation Office failing to take appropriate action. Of course, by the end of 1975 the prosecution in the test case was ready to go ahead but nothing happened for 2-!- years before the Taxation Office came to the Treasurer, as he says, in early 1978 and said: 'We will have to take some other action about it'. But the Taxation Office clearly did not pursue the matter vigorously. It should have been at the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office all the time. If that had failed it ought to have gone to the Treasurer of the time-now the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch)-and pressured him into taking some action. Apparently, this action did not occur but maybe it did. Also, the Taxation Office failed to investigate the scheme fully. It investigated only 2,000 or 3,000 companies that McCabe and Lafranchi were looking at.
The Taxation Office in not briefing the Treasurer in regard to the opinion of outside experts favouring prosecution and its initial decision to prosecute in 1975 was being grossly deficient, if that, in fact, is what happened. The Treasurer has been grossly negligent also in failing to demand full details in 1978 when he was first

told of the need for criminal penalties. He must have known something of the failed prosecutions because he said in his McCabe-Lafranchi reply which is on page 1064 of Hansard:
At about the same time, the Australian Taxation Office, having been unsuccessful in efforts to have prosecutions launched, put to me and I readily accepted that there ought to be moves towards measures of the kind which were ultimately embodied in the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act.
He said there that he knew of a failure to launch prosecutions. In the light of that he accepted that action needed to be taken. To accept readily the need for new legislation without making inquiries as to this failure in respect of the launching of prosecutions amounts to gross negligence by the Treasurer. If he, in fact, knew that there had been this failure to launch prosecutions then he should have gone into the details as to why there had been that failure. On his own admission he did not do so. At his Press conference on Sunday he said that the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act was rough legislation. Surely he should have examined the existing law thoroughly, especially since he says that the reason for the 2t year delay between his knowing of the scheme and the actuality of legislation was his Cabinet colleagues' reluctance to accept the need for new legislation. In these circumstances he had a duty to ascertain fully what use was to be made of existing legislation. The fact that he did not do that meant that the Cabinet proceeded to consider this matter without knowing the full background and gave authorisation, as the Treasurer now admits today, to examine criminal actions for bottom-of-the-harbour schemes without knowing the full facts of the matter. This raises the question: Who is running Australia-the bureaucracy or the Cabinet? It could well be that the bureaucrats decided for whatever reason that new legislation was needed. To examine that, they kept from their incurious Ministers the knowledge of several expert opinions that existing legislation could be used. If the Treasurer had diligently investigated the background of this matter this apparent deception of Cabinet would not have occurred. The Treasurer is also negligent because of his failure to take action to get back the lost tax revenue until the McCabe-Lafranchi report was published. This is an incredible act of neglect on his part. He was also negligent in failing to take action to prosecute anyone in the scheme until the publication of the Costigan report. He did nothing about these important measures until he was forced into doing so by very strong public reaction to the publicity surrounding those reports. Clearly, the Treasurer has been grossly negligent in many aspects of his duties. He has also been guilty of complacency in

1368 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

many ways, on which I do not have time to elaborate now, and that complacency compounds his offence.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (3.35)-It is perfectly plain that if the report of the Costigan Royal Commission into the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union had not come before the House this censure motion would not be heard now. Therefore it is necessary to look at two thingsfirst of all, it is necessary to look at the nature of a royal commission, and secondly, to examine somewhat critically, I am sorry to say, some aspects of the report. A royal commission is a commission of an inquisitorial nature. It is fundamentally different from proceedings in a court and lacks many of the safeguards that courts have. Its reports need to be treated with care. They need to be treated with care because of the absence of the fundamental safeguards which are available in courts. Now, they are not holy writ. Mr Costigan's report does not represent holy writ. There is no substitute in this community of ours for proper trial of issues and a proper opportunity to examine and defend. I say this without being critical of the use of royal commissions. They are most useful for certain purposes, but they are not, I repeat, holy writ.
In the case of the Costigan report it is unavoidable, although distasteful, to have to say something of a rather critical nature about the work to date. I will begin with interim report No.3. I remind this House that every report put out by a royal commission is important. There is no distinction between an interim report and a final report in terms of the degree of care that is brought to bear on the work. It will be recalled that on pages 12 and 13 of the interim report No. 3 Mr Costigan was somewhat critical of the Commissioner of Taxation. I think part of that has already been referred to by one of the Opposition speakers. The Commissioner of Taxation took issue with some of the things said by Mr Costigan. I will quote from a statement made by the Commissioner, who said:
Contrary to what might be assumed from the report. I was not told in advance of the nature of the disclosures to be made about the people mentioned in the report as having false bank accounts, nor was I told of the names of these people.
Later he stated:
I challenge most strongly the Royal Commissioner's conclusion that tax officers failed to attend hearings either on any specific day or generally because of a fear of physical danger to them. I entirely disagree with that finding. In fact, tax officers have been present at hearings of the Commission and

from time to time carry out investigations involving the criminal element.
I point to those statements by the Commissioner of Taxation to raise the question: Is everything Mr Costigan says to be accepted without question? Certainly in this instance it was not. I refer again to report No. 3 and to that part where Mr Costigan refers to losses to revenue. This has featured very largely in speeches from members of the Opposition. At page 5 of the report Mr Costigan states:
The amounts involved are very large indeed, amounting to many hundreds of millions of dollars per year or more.
I put it to the House that the best that can be said of that is that it was an intelligent but uninformed guess. I will refer honourable members to parts of the later report where Costigan takes up this same matter. Of course, he is there dealing with a subject of great importance and one would need to know, in due course, what it was that led him to express that view. In the fourth report, volume I, he takes up this matter on page 24, where he states:
So far as the taxpayer who was the subject of the particular scheme is concerned, let me say there were hundreds, if not thousands
Was it hundreds or was it thousands-
of companies to which a scheme of the same kind has been applied over the past 12 years.
Mr Costigan then takes up his theme four pages later. He states:
It is now believed-
He does not say by whom, I am sorry to say-
that the number of companies treated in this manner over the past ten years should be measured in the thousands.
We are on the same subject here, but from 12 years we have moved down to 10 years, and from hundreds or thousands of companies we are now measuring thousands. Mr Costigan continues:
The amount lost to revenue cannot be measured accurately without fully investigating each case
If we accept that then we certainly cannot accept the kind of absurd proposition put forward by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) based on an obvious mis-statement of what Mr Risstrom has said. Later in the same report Mr Costigan states on page 39:
The amount of money likely to be lost to the revenue of the Commonwealth was enormous amounts and even today I do not believe any sensible estimate can be made of its extent save to say that it is measured in hundreds if not thousands of millions of dollars.
Are we talking about hundreds or thousands of millions of dollars? Is there not a great difference? Is that not a subject on which one needs to be pretty precise for the purposes of a censure motion and for the purposes of the kinds of figures

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1369

which are being nonsensically put forward by the Opposition? Taking up the same theme later in the report, on page 89 Mr Costigan actually sets out in a list the number of companies involved, which come to pretty much the same figure as that which the Treasurer (Mr Howard) put to this House. They number 3,717. Apparently Mr Costigan there decided that we are dealing with thousands of companies. As I have said, that accords with what the Treasurer said. Mr Costigan also said on page 90 of the report:
It is difficult to assess the actual cost to the revenue of the operation of these specific schemes. The difficulty arises since the taxable income of many of these companies is unknown.
If the taxable income is unknown, how can one possibly say whether one is dealing in hundreds or thousands of millions of dollars of lost revenue? One cannot; it is as simple as that. On page 91 Mr Costigan referred to som.: reasons which make this even more difficult. He said:
Figures such as these--
The figures he referred to earlier-
suggest that there has been a marked trend in the use of private companies to avoid the payment of tax. To a very real degree this may be explained by the use of the private company as trustee, thus leaving the taxable income in the hands of the trust as distinct from the company.
He is referring to the number of companies that were being used. If he had checked with the Corporate Affairs Office of Victoria and referred to the Victorian figures he would have found an increase in company registrations. Here I refer to an article in the Age of 25 November 1981, which stated that there had been an increase in the number of companies registered in Victoria in the past 7 years. The Corporate Affairs office spokesman is recorded as believing that at least 90 per cent of the companies on its register are trust companies. That is a very good reason for the increase in the number of companies. Again that illustrates the point that it is not possible, on Mr Costigan's own reasoning, to come to any assessment of what was lost or what has been lost thus far. He was unable to come to any assessment, and the Treasurer has put in answer to that a very clear assessment by the Taxation Office. If one looks at the report itself, other aspects of it must cause disquiet in the mind of any reasonable person when examining whether what Mr Costigan says should be accepted without challenge and whether it should not properly be said: That is his report, those are his opinions. There are regrettably errors in useful work but those errors cast doubt on the processes of reasoning used by him and on other of the statements which he has made and which have been used to found the Opposition's case'. Let us look at some errors which Mr Costigan himself recently admitted in a Press

statement. First of all, he said that his statement on page 116 of the report that Mr Taylor was convicted of the murder of Harding was wrong. Mr Taylor was acquitted of that murder. It is very difficult to get that sort of fact wrong. I hold in my hand a certificate dated 10 September 1982 from the Acting Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of Victoria which records that Kevin James Taylor was adjudged not guilty of the charge of murder of Garry Leslie Harding. If he cannot get that statement clearly into the report without error, must we not ask how well prepared, how closely researched, the rest of the report was?
Let us go to the next little error. He said that in a paragraph which appears on page 115 it is stated that Maloney was murdered by O'Driscollapparently the name should be Driscoll and not the Irish-but what is more important, that it is true that Driscoll was convicted of this murder, which is what he said. However, the conviction was upset on appeal and he was acquitted at a new trial-a not unimportant fact I should have said and-
Mr Barry JonesBut irrelevant to the censure motion.
Mr SPENDER-It is absolutely relevant to the central issue of how much reliance can be placed on Mr Costigan's report for the purpose of this exercise. Time and again we have heard reference to the report and quotations from the report as though it was undisputed holy writ. I am sorry to say that it cannot be and should not be accepted as anything approaching holy writ and, because of the reliance placed on it by the Opposition, it must be examined.
We know as well that Mr Costigan stated that Raymond Kane was murdered. He said that on page 116. His brother would be glad to learn that it was not Raymond Kane but Leslie Kane. On page 116 he also said that 'some men were apprehended and placed on trial for his murder but they were acquitted. His body was never recovered'. Let us go to the next error he made, again reflecting upon the accuracy of that part of his report and the kind of concentration that he may have brought to other parts of his report. In paragraph 5.21 he stated that Bennet was murdered when at the city court on committal proceedings for another murder. He was in fact on committal proceedings for armed robbery. His next misstatement was that Stone was murdered. In fact he was not. These are not minor errors. These are errors on matters of fact which one would have thought were perfectly indisputable since all one had to do was to go to the court record and transcribe it accurately into the report.

1370 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

I put it to anybody who approaches the Costigan report with an open mind that, while no doubt much of it can be said to be valuable work, it cannot be relied on for the purposes of assessing whether the actions of the Treasurer have in any way been in accordance with what is contained in this motion. It is impossible to place any reliance upon that kind of material, and anyone who cares to look at it with an objective mind knows it. Another example is the findings made on the so called escort agency matter. It is to me a matter of great concern that findings unfavourable to a man should be made on the basis of a prostitution charge as it was put, with what would appear to be complete absence of evidence.
I conclude by saying this: I look forward to Mr Costigan's further reports. I hope that in the further reports that come to the House individuals are not identified. I hope that we remember that these reports are no more than expressions of opinion and nothing else. I think we should remember as well that the administration of the laws of this Commonwealth is a State responsibility as well as a Federal one. If there are in New South Wales 4,000 companies which meet the description of Mr Walker, it is Mr Walker's responsibility to examine very closely what has been done in respect of those companies.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (3.51)-Those listening outside would not understand, after listening to the speech of the honourable member for North Sydney (Mr Spender), that actually what he was supposed to be doing was defending the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in a motion of censure moved against him by the Opposition for the gross and culpable incompetence he has displayed in administration of the taxation laws and for which we require his immediate dismissal. I have never seen so much slipping, sliding and fudging as has come from the Treasurer in recent weeks ever since presentation of the McCabe-Lafranchi report. Arguing with the Treasurer is like wrestling with a column of smoke. He lays so many trails. We have gone up and down all of those trails and been all through the webs, but we finally got there. We are homing in on all those massive inconsistencies in his statements. As far as we are concerned, he did not respond to those inconsistencies today in his speech.
I want to make a couple of things quite clear: From the time of the presentation of the McCabeLafranchi report the Treasurer has done nothing but attempt to bucket that report. First of all, he

called it a political stunt. He attacked the Victorian Premier and said that he was merely seeking to use the tax avoidance industry for political profit by rehashing old news. He did everything to deprecate the McCabe-Lafranchi report which was a serious contribution to the tax debate in this country. Nobody would disagree that the McCabe-Lafranchi report was a serious contribution to the tax debate, but the Treasurer tried to put it down. When the Costigan report came down it was unbuckable and the Treasurer knew that he could not pursue the line he pursued in his Press statement of 27 June in reply to McCabeLafranchi. He then took up the one escape clause that he found in the Costigan report and grasped it. That was the reference to section 16-the secrecy provisions-of the tax Act. The Treasurer, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) all zeroed in on that one clause to exonerate themselves. I will repeat what the Treasurer said on that day. Referring to the Leader of the Opposition, he said:
He is saying that we knew all the time what was going on, yet one of the major findings in the Costigan report is that the Income Tax Assessment Act is so structured that we cannot find out what is going on.
He repeated that. That was his defence on the day before he leftto go abroad. He now, of course, understands that it is just patently stupid to argue that there is no communication between the Australian Taxation Office and the Treasurer, because he even had this to say:
A standing arrangement exists whereby the Commissioner of Taxation draws to my attention particular schemes of tax avoidance as soon as sufficient evidence of those schemes comes to his notice. On every occasion on which a scheme has been brought to my attention by the Commissioner in this way, action has been taken to eliminate the scheme.
He said that on 4 April 1979 as reported in Hansard. In other words, there has been complete communication. What Costigan was referring to was the fact that no names could be mentioned. We understood that and we said that, but no, that was the defence. Of course, that is now like Tricky Dick Nixon's statement - that is no longer operative. The defence of 26 August is out. That is now officially cancelled, because on Sunday at a Press conference the Treasurer had this to say:
. . . the secrecy provisions prevented the Commissioner of Taxation from giving advice to me on remedial legislation; I mean, if it's self-evidently true that they don't, because if that had been the case it would not have been possible for the Government to have passed so much remedial legislation over the past few weeks.
In other words he is debunking that defence; that is out. He has bagged McCabe and Lafranchi and he has bagged Costigan. The basis of his attempt to discredit Costigan is now over; we are now back

1 reasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1371

to McCabe and Lafranchi. He stated about the McCabe-Lafranchi report that when we get to the core of the matter there has been a two and a half year delay. He has said that there is no news in the McCabe-Lafranchi report, no news at all. He said that the Government knew all that but there has been a two and a half year delay. He made one of his stupid concessions. He concedes the obvious and then we are supposed to say: 'Oh, well, that is a concession; the Treasurer is very profound in his statements'. He said:
It can be seen that the period between when the Commissioner of Taxation proposed to me action of the kind. and the time of the introduction of the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Bill 1980, was a lengthy one.
I have never sought to hide this fact.
What a big concession. He never sought to hide the fact that we cannot understand why there was a two-and-a-half-year gap. Of course, he could not hide that fact; we understood that there was a two-and-a-half-year gap. He said it was a lengthy one. That is the core of the issue. The Treasurer sat on his hands for two and a half years while this matter was being debated. In the same Press statement he said:
Turning now to the main topic today ---
He was referring to quotations from the Australian Society of Accountants-
the discussion of the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980, I would like to assure you that it was only after a long and careful examination that I was convinced of the necessity of the legislation.
So we have had a two-and-a-half-year wait only to get the legislation in. The Treasurer says that he knew all about the situation and that there was no news in the McCabe-Lafranchi report. He said the reason for the delay was the need for new legislation. In other words the whole basis of his defence is that the existing legislation is inadequate and that we need new laws. That is the alibi that the Treasurer has finally come back to, He has conceded that there is a free flow of information between the Taxation Office and the Government and himself. He has now conceded that the major loophole in the form of the Costigan report is not available to him. He is now back to the McCabe-Lafranchi report. As can be seen from his statement of 27 June the real question is why there has been a two-and-a-half-year delay. The issue is all about the bringing in of new legislation. The Treasurer went on to say:
I had an examination carried out by officers of the Taxation Department, the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs and the Attorney-Genera!'s Department.
I want this next statement noted by the House--
Their advice to me was that the schemes could not effectively be countered by the application of existing laws which

they found to be deficient for the purpose for one reason or another.
I shall read that statement again:
Their advice to me was that the schemes could not effectively be countered by the application of existing laws which they found to be deficient for the purpose for one reason or another.
That was said on 27 June. I have quoted from page 21 of his Press statement on 27 June. As late as Sunday he said this at his Press conference:
I had prepared a response to that and that response was as I was told at the time the joint work of the Crown Solicitor's Office. some people in the Attorney-Generals Department, the Tax Office, the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs which then contained the business law section which is now back in AGs. and parliamentary counsel and they, so I was told. looked again at all the existing law and came to the view that prosecutions couldn't effectively be brought under the existing law.
The Treasurer slid out today with another major inconsistency in his statement because of the evidence given by Mr Andrew Menzies in Senate Estimates Committee A yesterday. Mr Menzies was quizzed by Senator Evans on the question of his involvement in the ad hoc group. The following question was put:
Was attention devoted by that ad hoc group of officials to the adequacy of the existing law?
Mr Menzies said:
Not really. We were told at the outset by the Taxation officials, and this was to some extent supported by the Crown Solicitor's officers, that there was a case for re-making the law, providing new remedies. I did not think it necessary for me or my division to go into that question.
In other words, he does not think it necessary to go into the question of the adequacy of the existing laws. Senator Evans pursued him. He said:
So you made no analysis of any particular prosecution and did not ask for any papers or opinions that might have been in existence as to the likelihood of success of prosecutions under existing law?
Mr Menzies said:
No, I did not concern myself with that.
The Treasurer made a statement on 21 August. Where was the advice tendered? Let him table that advice. He said:
Their advice to me was that the schemes could not effectively be countered by the application of existing laws
Now there are two ad hoc bodies. Both say that they did not look at the existing laws because the advice from the Taxation Office was that it was not a goer in any way, shape or form; that they had to go to new legislation; that existing law was not even to be looked at. Yet the Treasurer said that the advice was given to him. I ask him to table that advice.
Mr Howard-I have already done so.

1372 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

Mr KEATING-We have not seen it.
Mr Howard-It was tabled on 4 September. You have a look at it.
Mr KEATING--All right. I suggest that the Treasurer bring it back and let me have a look at it. Firstly, who gave the Treasurer the advice? Let us see the advice. The other thing is this--
Mr Howard-It was read into Hansard.
Mr KEATINGThat is all right. I know that the Treasurer is wriggling on the hook and well he might. Well he damn well might. He said he looked again. There was no looking again. His officers never looked in the bloody first place and he knows it. The Treasurer sat on the legislative committee of Cabinet with the now Mr Justice Ellicott, the great legal doyen of the Liberal Party. What did the members of that committee say about the existing law? They are not mute. These are people with experience in the law. They are members of the Liberal Party who are conversant with the law. What was their view about the existing law? Did they sit there mute at the legislative committee of Cabinet while this stuff was trotted up to them or did they actually make a Cabinetstyle decision about the veracity of documents presented to them? Quite obviously the fact of the matter is that for two and a half years while this matter was left to languish, while the issue was being bounced around the Liberal Party, the tax avoidance industry proliferated out of control under the bottom-of-the-harbour schemes.
The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) said today that the Treasurer had fought against the vested interests of his own Party. He said that in the House today. That is what happened. Of course, what finally damns the Treasurer was what he said in his statement in June. He said: 'There is no public pressure on me'. He said that inadvertently in reference to the attitudes which prevailed at the time. He placed importance on the following statement:
. . strong public attitudes towards tax avoidance were not evident at that time.
He went on to say:
The point is that public attitudes against tax avoidance were only in their formative stages.
He also said:
It is clearly important to recognise the considerably different state of public opinion.
The point is that there was no pressure on him and he was determined not to be the Peter Rae of the 1980s. He was determined not to be destroyed within the Liberal party in the way in which Rae was destroyed by his inquiry into the securities industry. This Treasurer was determined not to be

destroyed by an attack upon tax avoidance which has become rampant in Australia, which has taken over and which has been pilfering the public purse to an enormous degree. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) has already spoken about the volumes of money involved, and the need to bring in the petrol tax and the impact of that upon the inflation rate and upon interest rates. Who has paid all of this revenue? It has been paid out of the pockets of ordinary working men and women in Australia through the pay-asyou-earn tax system while those involved in tax avoidance have got off scot-free.
The Treasurer says that he brought in the crimes taxation amendment legislation of 1980, but there have been no prosecutions under that legislation. It is now 1982, two years later. There are 14 cases regarding which the Taxation office says there is sufficient evidence and Costigan says--
Mr Howard-Nine cases.
Mr KEATING-Well, nine cases. If one has the legislation and there is no prosecution the thing will mushroom again. The mere existence of the legislation matters nothing. What have we got since the honourable gentleman became Treasurer? I will tell the House what we have got. We have got years of procrastination. That is what we have got from him. When we finally got down to the issue we found that it was all about the Treasurer fighting the people in his party about bringing in a new law because he was advised that the existing law was inadequate. But we find from the officers who sat on the bureacratic bodies involved that there was no examination of the existing law.
The things the Treasurer said to us in his statements are wrong. They are untrue. He is obliged to tell us and to show us where he was advised, what advisings were given to him and who gave him the advisings. He is obliged to give us copies of the advisings and tell us who the officers were. He is obliged to corroborate Mr Menzies' statement to the Senate Estimates Committee yesterday with the advisings which he gave us. We are now clear about the fact that there was no test of the quality of existing legislation. The two and a half years wait was a sham delay while the Treasurer fought it out with all the Liberal Party participants in the tax avoidance industry. The Treasurer knows that that is what it is all about. We are supposed to have respect for him as the man who has stopped the tax avoidance industry. In his time it has mushroomed more than at any other time or under any other Treasurer in Australia. It is a self-evident fact that the

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1373

Treasurer has failed to stem it. Thousands more companies are to be mentioned in connection with these bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. A New South Wales investigation has yet to come and there are other things. We have had massive tax avoidance. The Treasurer's sole defence was that he knew that his delay was a lengthy one. He did not hide the fact that he waited for two and a half years before he acted. He said that new legislation was needed. Recently the Senate was told that he never even looked at the old legislation. If the Treasurer says that that is nonsense he is now in a position where he should prove it. He should produce the evidence to show us that it is nonsense. He has a right to defend his reputation. We will listen to him. We believe that at this point he deserves the censure of the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (4.6)-Having listened to the mischievous bunkum from the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating), I think it is worth establishing very clearly that the burden of whatever thrust there was in his statement has been totally destroyed already by what the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has had to say. In particular the honourable member for Blaxland seeks desperately to establish some kind of inconsistency about the matter of whether new legislation was needed. This matter was dealt with in a report that was tabled by the Treasurer in the House of Representatives on 4 December 1980. For the benefit of the honourable member for Blaxland, whose memory is incredibly short in these matters, the advice came from the Government's official advisers. It was provided to the Treasurer by the Commissioner of Taxation and it reflected the advice of those advisers. It deals with two legal opinions supplied by the Law Institute in 1980 about the bottom-of-the-harbour legislation which went through back in 1980 and blocked all these measures, introducing for the first time a criminal penalty in the tax law of Australia. I submit that this is some evidence of the Government's determination to stamp out tax evasion. These legal opinions suggest that legislation may not be necessary. The tabled advice from the Government's advisers was this:
Both sets of legal opinions seek to dispute that there is a need for further legislation to deal with straw company tax evasion and suggest that adequate remedies are already available under existing criminal law, taxation law and laws applying generally, to companies in both the State and Commonwealth jurisdictions.

This advice is very firmly contradicted by the views of the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor, the Acting First Parliamentary Counsel and his officers, senior advisers of the Attorney General's Department, the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs and the Taxation Office.
For the benefit of the honourable member for Blaxland who has this convenient memory, everyone who was involved has participated in this advice which was tabled in this House and which, as usual, is ignored by the honourable member for Blaxland because it does not fit into his version of history. Those officers, including the ones mentioned by the honourable member for Blaxland who have carefully examined what might be the scope of existing law to overcome these practices are unanimous in their view that no effective and adequate legal sanction is currently available. This matter was tabled in this House. That is what was said in that statement. Yet we have the bunkum presented by the honourable member for Blaxland, pretending falsely in this House that this did not happen although it has been clearly stated. The statement goes on:
Persons known to be operating the schemes do so quite openly and must be taken to share this view.
That is, that adequate legal sanction is not currently available. The statement continues:
It can be safely assumed that their apparent confidence is founded on the basis of legal opinions.
Any credibility that the honourable member for Blaxland has is totally destroyed when he comes into this House and falsely maintains propositions which he knows to be untrue.
Let us have a look at the activities of his beloved leader, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). The Leader of the Opposition said that there was $10 billion to $15 billion in tax evasion, suggesting that this relates to the bottom-of-theharbour schemes. He repeated that today by stating: 'Billions of dollars have been lost in these schemes'. Let us see how totally untrue that statement is. If I may paraphrase what the honourable member for Blaxland said I can say: What a lie it is. What a disgraceful and despicable lie it is for the Leader of the Opposition to come out with that sort of nonsense. As the report of the Commissioner of Taxation clearly indicates, nowhere near that number could be established. All we have to do is to look at the declared profits of Australian companies-public and private--to see what nonsense it is. A total of $2 billion in private company taxable income was reported by the Commissioner of Taxation in the financial year 1979-80-the total of all taxable income. Is the Leader of the Opposition trying to say that five times the total of the taxable income of private companies is the amount by which these companies have cheated the revenue? They did

1374 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Treasurer

not earn that much. They earned one-fifth of the total at the moderate end he is talking about. What utter bunkum!
The total amount of taxable income earned by all companies, including public companies, in that financial year, was $12.8 billion-the total of profit. For heaven's sake, is the Leader of the Opposition seriously suggesting that it is possible that tax was evaded in this one scheme to an extent that exceeded the total income, the total revenue, of all companies in Australia, including public companies? It is absolutely and irrefutably nonsense for him so to say. The reality is that the Commissioner of Taxation has reported to the Treasurer that the total amount identifiable in these bottom-of-the-harbour devices is about $350m. We can see who is being mischievous and dishonest. It is incredible for the Leader of the Opposition to pretend that those magic numbers exist when he knows that they exceed the total income of all companies, public and private.
Mr Hunt-Totally dishonest.
Mr BAUME-Exactly. It is total political dishonesty. Let us examine whether the Treasurer in any way should be subject to criticism for not having taken action earlier. It has been alleged by some of the greater wits of the Opposition that he should have taken action earlier because he should have known the extent of this activity. It is evident and known that when the Commissioner of Taxation advised the Treasurer in 1978 that this was a problem which needed action-one would hope of the criminal kind-the amount he identified as the total cost to revenue was about $IOm a year. That was at a time when the Government was concentrating very properly indeed on blocking schemes that involved thousands of millions of dollars of revenue. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard some statistics indicating particulars of deduction claims involving tax avoidance. The table was supplied by the Commissioner of Taxation.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

PARTICULARS OF DEDUCTION CLAIMS INVOLVING TAX AVOIDANCE

Income year

Claims for deductions generated
during year

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78

$m 1.2 47.9
151.9
1859.3

Income year
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 (incomplete)

Claims for deductions generated
during year
$m 463.8
437.7
122.6

Source: Commissioner of Taxation, 10 September 1982.
Mr BAUME-I thank the House. This table dramatically shows how this Government blocked off claims which were of real substance, not the fanciful imaginings of the Opposition. This substance is that in 1977-78 income year the claims generated under schemes that were blocked by this Government amounted to $1.8 billion. Does the fact that the Government blocked these schemes represent lack of activity by this Government? In 1980-8\, the latest year for which figures are available-although it certainly is incomplete-as a result of the Government's activities this amount was chopped to $122m. This Government has made an outstanding achievement in ensuring that those schemes were blocked. Members of the Opposition have no grounds to allege that this revenue has been lost. It has not. The Commissioner of Taxation is pursuing it under laws already existing and laws introduced by this Government, in particular under Part IVA of the Taxation Act. He is pursuing them under existing sections of the law in the hope that the High Court may take a view different from the view it took in the past, to some sections of the law.
The reality is that whether or not those laws were required, the laws introduced by the Government blocked this evident evasion and avoidance procedure, and no member of the Opposition can pretend that they have not. What intrigues me about this whole tax debate is the suggestion that somehow all these wicked things are still going on. Honourable members opposite continue to make that allegation and provide no evidence except the yawning chasm of their empty mouths. There is no evidence from the honourable members opposite and they know it. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table showing the statistics of pre-tax profit stripsthat is, bottom-of-the-harbour strips--as evidenced by page 89 of the Costigan Royal Commission report.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows--

Treasurer

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1375

COSTIGAN STATISTICS OF PRE-TAX PROFIT STRIPS
Year to June1973~~ 27 companies throughout Australia 1974-- 65 companies throughout Australia 1975 117 companies throughout Australia 1976 104 companies throughout Australia 1977 ~- 507 companies throughout Australia 1978 242 companies throughout Australia 1979622 companies throughout Australia 1980-- 1,412 companies throughout Australia 1981 121 companies throughout Australia
Mr BAUMEThat table shows that there is no doubt that these strips slowly built up to a peak. The statistics show that in the year to June 1980-that is, before the legislation was introduced-I,412 companies were stripped, according to Costigan. But the financial year to June 1981-that is a year half way through which the government introduced its December 1980 prohibition on this activity-shows very clearly the effectiveness of that legislation. In fact in the year to June 1981 instead of 1,412 evident strips there were 121. Since then they have effectively been killed. However, the Opposition has said that there are still some around because the Senate was told about them. I want to indicate exactly what the reality is of those schemes that are still around. There is no doubt that one can legislate against murder but people will still try to get away with it.
Mr Lionel BowenBut you convict them; at least you convict them.
Mr BAUME-What an intelligent comment from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. He wants to convict them before they commit an offence.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Oh no!
Mr BAUME-Oh yes! I shall provide the detail. The Commissioner stated:
In the seven identified cases it was first necessary to carry out taxation investigations to establish the companies' income tax liabilities. That having been done income tax assessments had to be raised and we judged it appropriate to then wait until the due date for payment of the assessments arrived.
In other words, there is an incredible determination by the Government to stick to the law, quite contrary to the view expressed by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). The Commissioner further stated:
In five of the cases the due date for payment for his benefit was 7 September 1982, for the other two 10 September 1982.
Final notices for payment were sent on 8 September 1982 and 10 September respectively. The assessed tax not having been paid on those dates
Which the Deputy Leader of the Opposition might recognise was last week-
The seven cases were referred on 10 September 1982 for police investigation. We have done this even though the time

for lodging objections against the assessments has not yet expired.

For heaven's sake is that a lack of diligence? Can we be accused of having done something improperly by following exactly the requirements of the law?

Mr Hunt-They want a star chamber.

Mr BAUME-Exactly; the Opposition wants a star chamber, as the Minister for Transport said. It is appalling that those honourable members opposite want to declare people guilty before they have had a chance even to submit a tax return. The time expired only last Friday. I put it to the
House that the assault on the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is based on total bunkum. We have seen in the past that the attempts to prove inconsistency are absolute nonsense and have not been established. We have seen the Leader of the Opposition falsely maintain that there is something like $10 billion to $15 billion in evasion involved in this kind of scheme. Even to allege it is evasion generally is pie in the sky. He repeated today that billions of dollars were involved without any evidence and in total conflict with the detailed material provided by the Commissioner of Taxation--

Mr Porter-He has misled the House.

Mr BAUME-He has deliberately misled the House. If anyone stands censured in this place, it is the Leader of the Opposition for seeking to mislead the House. The Australian Labor Party has sought to mislead the people of Australia that these things are still going on. The legislation introduced by the Treasurer has killed tax avoidance and tax evasion stone dead. Yet the Press is misled to write that tax avoidance reached a peak in 1980. It was effectively stopped in the main in 1978 and the evasion that these people were then pushed into, because they could not get around
the Treasurer's anti-avoidance legislation, was killed off in 1980. That is two years ago. For honourable members opposite to pretend that this is still going on is mischievous and dishonest nonsense.

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Hayden's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

45

Noes

61

Majority

16

Armitage, J. L Beazley. K. C.

AYES

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)

1376 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

General

Blcv.ctt. ~ Bnv.cn. Lionel
Brov. n. John
Bro'Wn. Robert Camphell.G Cas~. M. H. Charle~. D. E Chlld.J. Cohen. 8. Cros:-"M. D. Cunningham. B. T D:'lfling. E. E Da\\'klO~. J. S DutTy. ~l.J hee. R. V. Hav.ke. R. J. L Ha~den, \V.G, Holdlng.;\, C Hoy,.e. B.I Hurford. C J. Jacohi. R

AYES

Jones. Barr) Keating, P. J Kelly. R.J. Kent. L. Kerin. J. C. \1cLea). Leo (Teller) Maher. M. J. Mddren. J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morri...on. \\' L. Mountford. J. G Scholc<;, G. G. D. Scott. J. [ . Theophanou'l. A. C. Uren. T. Wallis.LG West,S.], Wi!li~. R. Young. M, J.

~OES

Adermann. A. E Anthon).J. [) Baume. M. E Bime). R. J. Bourchlcr. J. W Braith\\aite. R 1\
Brown. N. A. Bunge). M. H. Burr. \1 A. C.ldman.A.G Cameron. Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron. Ian Carlton,J.J. Chapman. H. G. P. Colem:.lrl, W. P.
Connolly. D. M. Coy,.<ln, D. B. De:.1n, A. G. Drummond, P. H. Fife. W. C. FI~her, P. S. (Teller) Gde~, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Gnx)m,R.J. Hall, Steete Hams, G. \1cD. Hicks, N.J Hodges.J.e Hodgman. W. M. Ho\.\-ard,J. W.

Hunt. R.J. D. Hyde. J. M. Jarm<ln,A. W
Jull. D. F.
Killen. Sir James Lloyd. B. Lusher, S. A. M<lcKellar. \1. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. M<lcphee.1. M. Moore.J. C Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O-Keefe. F. L Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R Rocher, A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury. M. E. (Teller) Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair, I. McC Spender, J. M. Street. A. A Tamhling. G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R.I White. P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Question so resolved in the negative.

NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES: FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 6 of the National Water Resources (Financial Assistance) Act 1978, I present copies of relevant documents concerning financial assistance to Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania in respect of projects in conjunction with the development and management of water resources.
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Debate (on motion by Mr Jacobi) adjourned.

COMMONWEALTH SCHOOLS COMMISSION
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the Commonwealth Schools Commission containing its funding recommendations for 1983 and the report of the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission containing its funding recommendations for 1983, together with a statement relating to the reports made by the Minister for Education.
SNOWY MOUNTAINS ENGINEERING CORPORA TION
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) - Pursuant to section 36 of the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation Act 1970, I present the annual report of the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation for 1981-82.
REPATRIATION COMMISSION
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Pursuant to section 122 of the Repatriation Act 1920, I present the annual report of the Repatriation Commission for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
Mr HODGES (Petrie-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs) --- For the information of honourable members. I present a report prepared by the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs on the Evaluation of post-arrival programs and services, together with a summary volume of the main report. The report was released to honourable members during the parliamentary recess. I also present copies of the summary volume translated into 12 languages, namely, Arabic, Croatian, Dutch, German, Greek, Italian, Maltese, Polish, Serbian, Spanish, Turkish and Vietnamese.
DEATH OF MR W. M. JACK
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that, notwithstanding that the matter is not listed on the blue daily program sheet, I have just been informed of the death of Mr W. M. Jack, the honourable member for North Sydney from 1949 to 1966. It is a matter that would be listed for me to notify the House tomorrow, but as the matter has come to my attention now I mention it now. I am sure that all honourable members present in the chamber will express their respect by standing in their places.
Honourable members having stood in their places-

Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1377

Mr Speaker. I thank the House.
COMMUNIQUES OF THE FOURTH AND FIFTH MEETINGS OF THE GREAT BARRIER REEF MINISTERIAL COUNCIL
Ministerial Statement
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members. I table the communique of the fifth meeting of the Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council. I also table the Press release of the former Minister for Home Affairs and Environment arising from the fourth meeting of the Council on 28 September 1981. Mr Speaker, I seek leave to make a short statement.
Leave granted.
Mr THOMSON-Honourable members will recall the appointment of the Honourable Tom McVeigh on 7 May this year as the Minister with portfolio responsibilities for Great Barrier Reef matters. The Fifth meeting of the Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council was held on 14 May and as draft zoning plan for the Cairns and Cormorant Pass sections of the marine park were released last week for public comment, I believe honourable members should have their attention drawn to Council's discussions. The Great Barrier Reef is a highly significant element of Australia's part of the world heritage. Accordingly I think it appropriate to inform honourable members of the increasing co-operation between the Commonwealth and Queensland governments in safeguarding one of the wonders of the world.
I am satisfied that the authority exercised jointly by the Commonwealth and Queensland governments through the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act and through the Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council, which is responsible for intergovernment co-ordination and development of policies to protect the reef, is effective. Since 1975, the whole of the reef has been protected under the provisions of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act and Australia has become a world leader in conservation management of the marine environment. This in part has been achieved by the Government's policy of carefully proclaiming sections of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park progressively.
Honourable members will note that we have budgeted $2.95m in 1982-83 for the operations of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. This is a significant increase of approximately 30 per cent over the 1981-82 appropriation. The Government has also decided that the program of declaration and zoning of further sections of the marine park should be accelerated. To this end

the provision of $170,000 in the Authority's appropriation for 1982-83, which provides for coordination and management of research relevant to accelerated declaration, zoning and manage, ment of the marine park, pays due regard to the financial and human resource pressures under which both the Commonwealth and Queensland governments are operating. The accelerated program of declaration is a matter that Council will address at its meeting on 5 November 1982.
The Cairns section of the marine park covers an area of 36,000 square kilometres adjacent to the Queensland coast from north of Cooktown to Tully. The draft zoning plans for the Cairns and Cormorant Pass sections were drawn up following a public participation program that ran from December 1981 to April this year. The invaluable information provided by the public in their representations together with research data gathered by the Marine Park Authority was used in drawing up the draft zoning plans for these two new sections of the marine park. The marine park concept for the Great Barrier Reef provides for all commercial and recreational usages except mining, while ensuring that all activities are managed through a zoning system which ensures the proper conservation of the natural qualities of the reef. Arrangements have been made for all honourable members to receive copies of the draft zoning plans. I trust that all will accept the invitation of 26 August to visit the display and attend the formal presentation of the draft zoning plans tomorrow, Wednesday, 15 September. I present the following paper:
Press release on the Fourth meeting and communique of the Fifth Meeting of the Great Barrier Reef Ministerial CouncilMinisterial Statement, 14 September 1982.
Mr WEST (Cunningham)-by leave-The statement we have just heard read to this House by the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) representing the missing Minister for Home Affairs and the Environment (Mr McVeigh) is a combination of falsehood and waffle which attemps to create the illusion that the Federal Government is in fact protecting the Great Barrier Reef.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I interrupt the honourable gentleman. He should withdraw the term 'falsehood'.
Mr WEST-Mr Speaker, I withdraw. I will say that the Federal Government is attempting to mislead the House and the nation to create the illusion that this Government is in fact protecting the reef, when it is not. It claims that the whole of the Great Barrier Reef is now protected under the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act, but that is totally false. Only those sections actually declared

1378 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Great Barrier ReefMinisterial Council

'marine park', that is, the Capricornia and Cairns and Cormorant Pass sections, are currently protected by the Act. The Minister knows that. Declaration of the park has occurred at a snail's pace. In seven years only two sections occupying only 14 per cent of the reef have actually been declared as marine park.
The Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council has been a means by which the Queensland Government has delayed park declaration. The Ministerial Council has been very effective in carrying out that role as designated by the Queensland Premier. While the park lies undeclared, the reef can be mined or drilled for oil and development can proceed with little or no controls. It is clear from the fifth meeting of the Ministerial Council that Queensland will be declaring its own marine parks in the Barrier Reef area and that the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park will not be declared, if this Government has its way, over the entire reef region.
The Queensland Marine Park Act 1982 was passed by the State Government in April this year in response to a portion of the Cairns section being declared to the low water mark on the Queensland coast. It is intended to replace the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act in part of the 3-mile territorial sea around the islands and along the coast. The Queensland Government will argue that the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park need not be declared in, say, the Whitsunday Island group since the Queensland Marine Park Act could declare parks to cover that area. This would be an atrocious situation. There would be two agencies running two sets of marine parks with different goals for the reef.
Since mining and oil drilling is permissible in Queensland marine parks, all reef areas not included in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park could be subject to oil drilling. Uncontrolled development could proceed in all non-park areas. The Federal Government's claim that there will be accelerated park declaration is not proven. Queensland has not agreed to this. The issue of what area is next for declaration has not been decided. It has been almost a year since the Cairns section was declared and the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority has not been advised of which area it should survey. Should it be the section off Townsville, off the Whitsunday Islands or north of the Cairns section or where?
In June 1979 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Queensland Premier agreed that the day to day management of the Marine Park would be carried out by the Queensland agency, that is, the Queensland National Parks and

Wildlife Service. While 14 staff additional to the existing four to five national park staff will manage the Capricornia section at a cost of $540,000 for this financial year, it is disturbing to see that the Commonwealth has totally opted out of the area of day to day management. The Queensland National Parks and Wildlife Service has sufficient resources to manage Capricornia but its past record in managing its own island national parks is abysmal. For instance, 27 Barrier Reef islands in the Cairns section have Queensland national park status, yet only two are ever visited by Queensland national park rangers and one of those, Michaelmas Cay, is visited only twice a year. The Commonwealth should have retained some federal officers to assist with day to day management of the marine park to ensure that regulations were being properly enforced.
The entire Great Barrier Reef region must be declared marine park post haste under the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act. Zoning of sections could then proceed sequentially in the knowledge that the entire reef is protected from oil drilling. This would ensure that any development on the Barrier Reef was controlled and co-ordinated. At the moment 86 per cent of the reef region is unprotected and development is taking place under Queensland administration with little or no control. The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority has no jurisdiction outside the park already declared. The Queensland Government continues to abrogate its responsibility in implementing environmentally unsound controls and guidelines for development. An example of such uncontrolled development of the reef outside the marine park is Hamilton Island in the Whitsunday group. An airstrip was built across a bay of the island covering a coral reef. This was done without the permission of the Federal Department of Transport. Presumably, the Queensland Government gave approval for the project.
The Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) claimed that increased funds have been provided this year to accelerate park declaration. He did not mention that the staff levels of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority this financial year will finally reach the staff ceilings agreed to in 1980-81 before being cut back. This House will examine the past inactions of this Government in relation to the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park and will not accept the platitudes of this ministerial statement. This Government acts only when forced to. I repeat that after eight years, since the original introduction of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority Act, only 14 per cent of the area designated in that Act between the Papua New Guinea border and the area

Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Council

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1379

south of Gladstone has been declared as park. Yet in 1979 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) gave the Queensland Premier the veto power over park declaration. In 1980 the Government handed control of the 3-mile territorial sea around all the islands and reefs to the Queensland Government, giving it the right to allow oil drilling therein. In 1981 the Government opened up the Coral Sea to oil drilling, right to the edge of the Great Barrier Reef. The Prime Minister excluded 70 per cent of the 3-mile territorial sea from the Cairns section of the park.
What will this Government do next with regard to the Great Barrier Reef? I tell the Minister what it should do. Firstly, it should declare the whole park immediately. Having declared it, it should then increase the finance available to the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority so that it can expand its staff and get on with the job of carefully and sequentially producing the various zoning plans for each section which will have been already declared in to to a marine park. Only in this way can we properly defend the park against the stated intentions of the Queensland Government. Only in this way can this Government prove to the people of Australia that our greatest natural environmental asset, the Great Barrier Reef, will be protected against the depredations of people such as the Premier of Queensland for all time and for future generations.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL (No.4) 1982
Assent reported.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
Motion (by Sir James Killen) agreed to:
That leave of ahsence for two months be given to the Minister for Industry and Commerce, on the ground of ill health, and for three months to the honourable member for Cook, on the ground of public business overseas.
Motion (by Mr Willis) agreed to:
That leave of absence for three months be given to the honourable member for Capricornia, on the ground of public business overseas.
TAXATION
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The totally unsatisfactory explanation given by the Treasurer of the Government's and the Taxation Office's failure to pursue vigilantly action against those involved in the 'Bottom-of-the-Harbour' tax evasion scheme.

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for Gellibrand.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) agreed to:
That business of the day be called on.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens undersigned respectfully showeth:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance 'of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian Postal Service truly meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any proposal that Australia's Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward be diminished will destroy the concept of the National Postal Service.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the National Postal Service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Proposed Student Loans Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representative in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the introduction of a comprehensive student loans scheme will:
I. Restrict Access to Education. People from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from studying by the prospect of incurring large debts. These people, if they enrol, will be forced to amass loan debts. Richer students do not face this handicap.
2. Undermine the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme. TEAS should cover the basic living costs of students. Currently the scheme only assists 38 per cent of full-time students and the maximum level of TEAS is a mere $49.67. Government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced.
3. Disadvantage Women. Women students would be disadvantaged by a loans scheme as they have a lesser ability to repay loan debts, because On average, women earn less and have a higher unemployment rate.
4. Disadvantage Mature-Aged Students. Usually mature age students forego income to study and already have large financial commitments. They could not return to study if it meant incurring substantial debts.
5. Distort Educational Choices. Mounting loan debts would force students into studying shorter courses or not continuing with post-graduate study.

1380 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Petitions

6. Result in Massive Attrition Rates. Students will attempt to undertake extensive part-time work or overload courses to minimise their loans. Increased failure rates will result forcing students to 'drop-out' rather than continuing study and increase their debts.
7. Cause Administrative and Financial Difficulties. Overseas experience shows high default rates will occur on student loans. Government money will be channelled away from TEAS to paying off banks. The government will also bear the administrative burden of pursuing defaulters.
Therefore, the proposed student loans scheme will have disasterous effects on tertiary education, which we believe benefits the whole community, not just the individual student.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Respresentatives will reject the introduction of a student loans scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives. Australian Parliament assembled. This humble petition of citizens of Australia showeth that:
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the increasing levels of direct and indirect taxation.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the increasingly inequitable distribution of these taxes through the social wage.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the apparently uncontrolled increases in interest rates and the shrinking access to loan capital.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the neglect of pension levels and the absence of real relativity with average wages.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at diminishing government spending on Health, its consequential effect on the quality, cost and availability of Health Services and the absence of meaningful expenditure for the prevention of disease and injury.
We the undersigned citizens of Australia by this humble petition respectfully pray that the Australian Government introduce tax indexation on personal income tax scales and the tax free threshold.
Introduce:
I. Broadly based wealth tax exempting small wealth holdings.
2. Capital gains tax exempting owner occupied homes.
3. The closing of tax loopholes which enable company and high earner tax avoidance.
4. A resources tax or excess profit tax.
The Australian Government raise the single pensions and benefits to 30 per cent of average weekly earnings over the next three years.
The Australian Government institute wider controls over interest rates charged by all lending institutions and pass legislation which will allow for a fixed percentage of all available loan capital to be held in reserve for the purpose of owner occupied home loans.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrYoung.
Petition received,

Armidale College of Advanced Education and University of New England
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of Citizens of the City of Armidale and surrounding Shires including Dumaresq, Guyra, Uralla and Walcha.
Respectfully express our dismay at the Federal Government's announced intention to terminate funding for the Armidale College of Advanced Education and the University of New England unless these institutions are amalgamated. We are particularly concerned that the Government's undertaking to examine this merger on its own merits has not been honoured.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government refrain from forcing the amalgamation of the Armidale College of Advanced Education and the University of New England, unless it can be demonstrated that academic and financial benefits are both achievable and worthwhile.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Burke respectfully showeth that:
I. the automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of may thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. if imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the Industry of their work opportunities.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this Industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.
EXPORT MARKET DEVELOPMENT GRANTS AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 26 August, on motion by Mr Anthony:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4.51)-The Opposition does not oppose the Export Market Development Grants Amendment Bill 1982, but I want to express a number of disappointments that we have in relation to it. I set the scene for the debate on this Bill by saying why we of the Australian Labor Party believe that export help is so important. Firstly, let us focus on the fact that in the last financial year, from I July 1981 to 30 June 1982, an adverse balance of trade was suffered by this country in the nature of $9,000m, The rundown in our reserves was even greater than that because we have a sorry record of invisibles being

Export Market Development Grants Bill

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1381

so adversely against it. In other words, when it comes to freight, insurance and so on we are paying out so much more than we receive back. But we have a disastrous trade situation to start off with before we look at the balance of payments situation created by the adverse effect of the invisibles. The only way that we save ourselves from penury and further devaluations of our currency is by the strong inflow of foreign capital which, itself, is causing such problems for our future because more of our assets are being owned by people overseas and there are more obligations for us to payout dividends from year to year to people living overseas. Thereby, the dog is chasing its tail. The balance of payments situation is made more difficult in future years by more of our assets being foreign owned because of foreign capital flowing into the country. That is one good reason straight away why we need to export. We need to do something about the adverse balance of trade.
There is a second good reason that comes immediately to my mind; that is, that export help of the sort provided by this Bill is also a way of stimulating the manufacturing sector. I need to set the scene for that by stating my personal view that a government worth its salt has to find about two million jobs in this country over the next decade. We know that there will be an increase of about one million in our work force because of the balance between those leaving school and coming into the work force over and above those who are leaving the work force. At the moment about 120,000 people are entering the work force each year. This number will tail off at the end of the decade, even if immigration stays at the present level, to perhaps 60,000 or 70,000 as far as we can tell at present. On average there will be an increase in the work force of about 100.000 each year over the decade. If we multiply that figure by 10 we will see that we need one million new jobs. Already at least half a million people are unemployed and a higher figure is announced each day. Mr Deputy Speaker, you may not have heard the tragic news from Newcastle and Port Kembla. Another 2,500 job losses in the steel industry were announced by the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd steel division today. That is just another manifestation of the depression conditions in which we are living. I am referring in that case only to raw steel job losses. There will be more job losses down the line because of the multiplier effect on the businesses in the region where that great steel industry is operating. There will be further job losses in the steel industry itself because if raw steel is not being produced fewer jobs will be available in the mills concerned. The position is a depressing one,,,

I come back to the fact that I am underestimating the unemployment situation when I talk about half a million unemployed. There are so many hidden unemployed who do not register for unemployment bendll because one income is already coming into the household. We need at least another half a million jobs for the unemployed. There is the effect alsu of a continuing shedding of labour in the chase for productivity which is required to keep existing manufacturing industries competitive. It is only a wild guess, but I believe a conservative one, that anuther half a million jobs will be shed over the next decade in existing manufacturing indw,try while we chase that competitiveness. If one adds up the need for an increase in the workforce of one million, the half a million unemployed and the half a million jobs that will be shed one comes to a need for two million new jobs.
Even if we took the most optimistic picture that can be painted in the days of the imagined boom--as seen by Labor's political opponents while they were leading up to the 1980 election -we would have to come to the conclusion that only about! 0 per cent to 15 per cent of the new jobs that we require in this country would have come from the resources industries which were the subject of that energy resources
boom picture. or course, new jobs will be found in
the services industries. But basically. the services industries freight, tourism and so onare very much related to more basic pursuits such as resources industries and so on. These are not sufficient to give rise to new jobs in services industries to the extent that will be needed if we are to find two million new jobs.
We come back to manufacluring industry as the sector that so badly needs stimulus if we are [0 achieve the goal that Labor hopes to achieve in its period of government wpich, I hope. will come in a very short while. Manufacturing activity is stimulated by a number of mechanisms. We can look to the tarilT. In some cases ,orne would want an increase in protection: in other cases they would want a decrease in protection to stimulate new activity in the manufacturing sector. I do not look upon the taTilT as a satisbctory mechanism. Let us look al snlne other mechanisms. One of them is research and devc!op;ncnt allowances: another is depreciation alk;wance, or investment allowances, but a third is very definitely the one that we are dealing with teday export market development allowances. l\ lot of these new jobs in manufacturing must be found hy stimulating the manufacturing exports. We have great opportunities in our region in particular in South East and East Asia--where the standard of living is

1382 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Export Market Development Grants Bill

growing faster than in any other region of the world. If we can only get our people stimulated into getting out into those export markets then we will find new job opportunities created through manufacturing activity.
I come back to summarising the setting of the scene for this Bill. Export market help is vital if we are to get the necessary amount of exports to do something about the very tragic, disastrous, adverse balance of trade that I mentioned. We need this export market help also if we are to stimulate new manufacturing activity to create some of those two million new jobs that we need particularly in the manufacturing sector.
Basically, I have said that although the Opposition supports this Bill it has disappointments. I now tell the House why. The first disappointment that I have is that the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) was misleading us in his second reading speech when he suggested that the changes in this Bill to the Export Market Development Grants Scheme were providing a new impetus. He said that the proposed amendments were themselves giving rise to a new scheme and a new impetus to that scheme.
A few facts might help here to put that into a better perspective. The first fact is that this Export Market Development Grants Scheme is not new. It was brought in by the Labor Government eight years ago in 1974. So, there is not a valid claim for anything new in what is being done in respect to this scheme. The second comment I make is that one of the clauses in the Bill doubles the ceiling up to which grants are payable from $100,000 to $200,000. This is only restoring the values that existed eight years ago in 1974. There is nothing new. There is no new impetus of any great extent in that doubling of the ceiling. I mention that because the Minister in his second reading speech, of course, said that the increase in the ceiling was only bringing values back to what they were when the Scheme was first introduced. I am not suggesting that he was misleading us to that effect but the Minister cannot claim that just because he has increased that ceiling a new impetus will result. The new impetus, therefore, only repairs the damage done to exporters arising from a seven-year erosion in the real value of the export incentives.
What do we conclude from all of this? What we have here, I believe, is really a cynical attempt to pass off a number of cost cutting monetarist amendments. They are important in themselvesthey at least help to offset some of the erosion that has taken place-but in an attempt to pass off

those amendments the Government is adding absolutely nothing of significance which might properly be called new. It is with deepfelt concern for the hard pressed Australian exporter that I make those points.
What is the real picture? How have exporters fared in the manufacturing sector? What is the proper perspective to put on the record of the Fraser Government over these last six and a half years of the eight years since this scheme first was introduced? In 1971-72 the proportion of total exports accounted for by manufacturing stood at 24 per cent. By 1980-81, however, this had fallen to 20.2 per cent. But the proportion accounted for by the higher technology, the elaborately transformed part of the manufacturing sector, has fared even worse. If we average the trend for higher technology we will see that the manufacturing share of 13.7 per cent in the period 1971-72 to 1974-75 fell to 10.6 per cent in the following years to 1980-81. I have taken precisely the years of the Fraser Administration. It is in those years that the erosion in the real value of this Export Market Development Grants Scheme took place. In a moment I will deal at greater length with some further aspects of this scheme.
In order to gauge the Government's overall commitment to Australia's exporters, it is useful to consider some of the other schemes which are already in operation but which, frankly, are performing rather badly when it comes to giving adequate help to exporters. I will mention a few in passing. I have drawn my evidence from the lAC's report of February this year on export incentives. Although the report is dated 28 February, from memory I do not think we of the general public saw it then. The report was presented at that stage but it did not become available to us until the Government had made its decision in July this year on the export help that it was going to give. I have noted from that report that the development import finance facility is of key importance in developing exports. The facility aims to assist the export of non-defence capital equipment to ASEAN countries. The funds available in 1981-82 amounted to a meagre $1.6m. Small as that sum is, according to the lAC the facility has not been fully used. I raise this matter with the Minister in the hope he may be replying in this debate. I ask why that help for the exporters of this nation is not being fully used.
In passing I also note another aspect of export help that is given to exporters of this nation. This relates to the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation. I am not an expert on matters related to EFIC though I am seeking to learn more about

Export Market Development Grants Bill

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1383

that organisation and its means of helping exporters. I gauge from talks I have had with Australian exporters that a great deal more help is given to exporters of other nations through insurance schemes of this sort than is available to Australian exporters throughEFlC. I ask the Government to comment on this claim and to see whether, indeed, there is some additional help that can be given to Australian exporters through the EFIC scheme.
Another scheme commented on in the lAC report is the Australian Overseas Projects Corporation established in 1978 and which, according to the lAC, remains four years later in the 'formative phase'. By December 1981 it had completed only one project-a pasture livestock farm in central China. I gleaned that information from the lAC report on export incentives. So much for that commitment of the Government to Australian manufactured exports. Perhaps this is the time to raise the question of why the Australian Overseas Projects Corporation has not done more for exporters than it would seem from what I have gleaned from the lAC report.
The next point I make concerns the uneven distribution of export assistance. Manufacturing receives 90.8 per cent of all assistance under the Export Market Development Grants Scheme and the Export Expansion Grants Scheme. Exports under the Exports Expansion Grants Scheme-to be phased out in 1983-accounts for more than 75 per cent of the export assistance to manufacturing. For rural, mining and other industries the proportions are much more evenly balanced. Indeed, in the case of the mining industry these are reversed. Clearly the decision to bring the Export Expansion Grant Scheme to a halt will severely penalise key sectors of manufacturing industry, namely, those that particularly use the Export Expansion Grants Scheme. In particular, I refer from my studies to the food, textile, furniture, basic metal products and to miscellaneous manufacturing.
Has the Government discussed with these sectors the implication of the abrupt ending of the Export Expansion Grants Scheme? There is no way in the world that the Export Market Development Grants Scheme-the scheme that is the subject of this Bill-will be a substitute for what was available to those sectors of manufacturing under the now to be phased out Export Expansion Grants Scheme. In the grant years 1979-80, manufacturing industry received a total of $153.7m under the scheme. The total allocation to all industries was a little more than that, $162.7m. Compare this with the estimated budgetary cost

of the revised, updated Export Market Development Grants Scheme of $36m in 1983-84 and the true picture begins to emerge. The Government is attempting to dress up a simple monetarist costcutting exercise. That is what is taking place here with the phasing out of export expansion grants and just a little updating in order to offset the erosion that has taken place in the value of money granted by the Export Market Development Grants Scheme. The Government is attempting to dress up that cost-cuting exercise as one which is giving a lot more to exporters. It is not.
It will be seen from the figures I have given that, indeed, the assistance to exporters will decline markedly in the next financial year. Whatever one might think about the merits of the old Export Expansion Grants Scheme I ask whether the Government stopped to consider the hundreds of companies and thousands of jobs which are at stake under the operation of that scheme. I realise that we have obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Multilateral Trade Negotiation codes and so on which meant that there were pressures to phase out the old EEG Scheme. Perhaps more consideration should have been given to the effect on particular export sectors of this phasing out. The phasing out should have been done more gradually. I wonder whether the Government has considered the budgetary cost of the additional unemployment which may result now from the phasing out of the Export Expansion Grants Scheme because certainly the extra budgetary cost should be offset by what is saved on that phasing out. I repeat: We acknowledge that there are problems with the EEG Scheme and not the least of these are those international pressures that I mentioned and the fact that problems exist, in all cases, with performance based schemes.
Surely a better approach would have been to phase out the scheme more gradually over, say, a period of three years to five years rather than doing so at the end of the current financial year. I am sure that a gradual phasing out would have met the international obligations that we have. Many of our international critics operate more covert means of industry assistance anyway than the ones that we operate in this country. The Minister's second reading speech makes great play of the fact that:
The majority of EMDG claimants are firms producing technologically advanced products which . . . rely heavily on innovative marketing and promotion . . .
I agree with that statement. The machinery and equipment sector claimed more in Export Marketing Development Grants in 1979-80 than all other non-manufacturing sectors combined. What

1384 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Export Market Development Grants Bill

the Minister did not say in that second reading speech was that this same sector still relies more heavily on the phased out Export Expansion Grants Scheme than it does on the Export Market Development Grants Scheme-by more than $I.3m in 1979-80. The principal criticism-it is a grave one-that we have of the package of amendments is that it gives no thought to the impact which the decision to bring the Export Expansion Grants Scheme to an abrupt halt in 1983 will have. Equally it brings no thoughts to the way in which other schemes might be better used. I am referring to EFIC. I am referring to the Australian Overseas Projects Corporation in particular. Finally, those areas which are subject to improvement in this Export Market Development Grants Amendment Bill are only returned to their pre-Fraser values. Once again, in asserting that the Opposition does not oppose this Bill I record those disappointments. I hope that there will be a response from the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson), who is at the table, at the end of this debate to the many questions I have raised about this measure.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (5.16)-It is pleasing to know that the Opposition is not opposing the Export Market Development Grants Amendment Bill, but of course it could not do otherwise because it is necessary for the promotion of our trade with overseas nations. This year's Federal Budget appropriates $105m for the payment of export market development grants and $150m for the payment of export expansion grants. On 19 July this year the Government announced that it proposed to introduce a number of extended benefits to the EMDG scheme which would operate from I July 1982 and that the EEG scheme would be allowed to lapse on 30 June 1983. Over the years export incentive grants have played an important part in Australia's export income and, of course, have assisted the economy of this country in a great way.
This Bill is to increase the benefits under the Export Market Development Grants Scheme, to alter provisions relating to the tourism and construction industries, and to extend the operation of the scheme to 30 June 1988. The extension of this scheme to 1988 will give exporters the opportunity of arranging their business so that they can cope with further sales overseas. The Government decided that it would substantially amend the Export Market Development Grants Act so that it could stimulate the market development of Australian exporters and that the Export Expansion Grants Scheme should lapse on 30 June 1983.

Way back in December 1981 an Industries Assistance Commission report recommended the termination of the Export Expansion Grants Scheme at the end of 1982-83 and that the Export Market Development Grants Scheme should end at 30 June 1985. Honourable members can imagine the reaction to this announcement from the tourism, manufacturing, mining and construction industries and from professional consultancy organisations. They were absolutely up in arms that such action should be contemplated. Had this action been ratified by the Government, it could have seriously affected our overseas trade. Export incentive grants have not only benefited trading firms but have also provided Australia with valuable export income.
I mention an overseas firm that has established here in Australia and desires to use the benefit of this legislation. I refer to Mitsubishi, which may export Australian built cars to take advantage of the motor industry's export facilitation scheme. The export of cars built in Adelaide was among a broad portfolio of possibilities being investigated by this company. It has been interesting to learn that there will be no opposition in the United Kingdom if Mitsubishi Australia goes ahead with plans to send Adelaide-built Sigmas to take advantage of the Federal Government's export credit scheme. The executive of the British Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders stated that it was highly unlikely that there would be any objection to the move as long as the imported cars were 85 per cent Australian content or Australian made. Mitsubishi sees exports of completely built up cars to the United Kingdom as a way of taking full advantage of the Federal Government's export compensation scheme. So far Mitsubishi Australia's managing director has refused to confirm or deny the export plan, despite reports in the British and Australian Press. This is an example of how the export incentive scheme can help Australian manufacturers overseas.
No doubt our manufacturers of agricultural machinery must look to overseas markets to expand their business, particularly in the Middle East, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the United Arab Emirates, which are starting to develop their agricultural industries. This incentive legislation should assist our agricultural machinery manufacturers to exploit and expand in those markets. Meaningful incentives have to be provided if the development of export industries is to be fostered. We heard from the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) about unemployment. If we can increase our exports, there must be increased employment in this country. We heard from the honourable member for Adelaide that

Export Market Development Grants Bill

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1385

new employment opportunities must be provided. The Metal Trades Industry Association national export group has welcomed this legislation and exporters no longer have to be concerned with the extra element of uncertainty in management planning created by speculation on the future of assistance to our vital export industries. They have plenty of opportunity now. They know that the operation of the legislation is being extended to 1988. This gives them the opportunity to plan. It gives them the opportunity to increase production and to go overseas to see what opportunities there are for their products.
The decision to implement immediately the introduction of an improved Export Market Development Grants Scheme to be maintained until 1988 is a most positive and progressive step. The introduction in the legislation of the sustenance allowance of $50 a day following sustained industry support for this proposal will enable exporters to match more adequately the promotional activity of overseas competitors in Third World markets. The increased ceiling of EMDG grants to $200,000 picks up a key industry recommendation to the lAC. Despite what the honourable member for Adelaide said, this is a huge amount and it will be most welcome by exporters. Overall the export incentives assistance measures, combined with the decisions on depreciation and protection, will support exporters in their struggle to develop world markets. This is not easy at present with high interest rates overseas, but they are gradually coming down and this should assist our exports.
Many companies in Australia still have not taken the opportunity to find export markets. The machinery is provided by this Government, and it is a great pity that they do not take advantage of this legislation, which is so good and valuable. There are many opportunities to export and Australian companies must wake up and take advantage of the opportunities that exist under this Act. The legislation will be of great benefit not only to those companies but also to the economy of Australia. The Government has done all that is possible to make known to industry the facilities that are available so that industry can take advantage of financial assistance to gain overseas trade. Another form of assistance has been brought in by the party which I represent. I refer to the Exports Finance and Insurance Corporation. It has done a great job in helping our companies to export. It has provided them with insurance cover and has proved to be of extreme value and great assistance to them. The Government has announced that claim forms for the 1981-82 grant year which was

concluded on 30 June last have been made available from 1 July 1982 through the offices of the Department of Trade and Resources in the various capital cities.
The Bill before the House could have been better drafted by the parliamentary draftsman-it is a little clumsy-but nevertheless it makes it clear that this Government is keen to provide assistance to companies which are prepared to take advantage of it and to wake up and expand their activities for the benefit of all concerned. I have mentioned that the opportunity exists for our agricultural manufacturers to become involved in the export of tillage and cropping machines. Having come back from the Middle East in February of this year I can say that there is no doubt that there are great opportunities in that area to expand our trade, particularly in agricultural machinery and also in agricultural know how. I am delighted to support this Bill. I feel sure that it has the support not only of members of the Opposition but also of members on this side of the House who have brought the Bill into being.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Anthony) read a third time.
STATES (TAX SHARING AND HEALTH GRANTS) AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1982 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 26 August, on motion by Sir James Killen:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (5.28)-This Bill implements the new tax sharing relativities forced upon the States at the last Premiers Conference. It provides for the phasing in of the modified 1982 Grants Commission recommendations for altered per capita factors which have the effect of diverting finance from Western Australia, South Australia and Tasmania to the more populous States. The Bill implements the procedures whereby the Government's new relativities will be phased in over the next three years at the rate of 33t per cent a year. It also sets out to assure the States that their general revenue or tax sharing grants will not increase by less than 2 per cent in real terms for 1982-83 and then by less than one per cent in real terms over the next two years.

1386 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982 States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

This Bill relates to the total of general revenue assistance to the States arrived at under the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act which superseded the States (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act of 1976.
The formula by which the total of revenue assistance is struck has a long, chequered and complex history since uniform tax collections by the Commonwealth were introduced in 1942. We have seen reimbursement to the States based upon a simple population movement, annual wage increases, a betterment factor and the abortive new federalism, or new feudalism, policy of this Government wherein the States received 39.87 per cent of the previous year's income tax receipts. That, of course, was stage I of the new federalism of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). After a year in limbo-last financial year-the Government has now moved to reimburse the States by granting a set percentage of total taxes instead of a percentage of personal income tax collections. The percentage for 1982-83 is the total tax sharing grant paid to the States under last year's interim arrangements expressed as a percentage of total tax collections for 1980-81 and then applied as a percentage to last year's total collections. The relevant percentage worked out at 20.72 per cent.
There is a case for State tax sharing to be based on a percentage of total taxes, although personal income tax, particularly pay-as-you-earn tax, has been the growth area rather than company taxes and non-pay-as-you-earn receipts, which have been non-growth areas due to this Government's culpable, criminal and incompetent lack of surveillance and negligence in prosecuting the company crooks and Liberal Party supporters who have evaded tax through the bottom-of-theharbour tax schemes. Incredibly, as has been well documented, if these schemes had been arrested six years ago full tax indexation could have continued. The sales tax increases would have been unnecessary, or, alternatively, the States could have reaped a huge extra bonanza between them.
However, I suppose that the total tax formula at least gives the States a share of all recent growth taxes such as the oil levy and does not place the States at risk of losing revenue as a result of decisions made by the Commonwealth to reduce or restructure income tax scales.
While we do not oppose the switch to a percentage of total taxes we condemn the farce of retaining so-called stage 2 of the 1976 tax sharing legislation wherein the States are supposed to have the right to impose personal income tax surcharges or to extend rebates. Obviously, no State

is going to accept this gratuitous right and the Government should end the charade by removing it from the Statutes.
The 1976 agreement included an understanding that there would be a review of the tax sharing system as a whole and of per capita relativities before the end of 1980-81. As a result of that review of the tax sharing system as a whole it was agreed that from 1982-83 onwards the States tax sharing grants would be expressed as a proportion of the previous year's total tax receipts rather than, as I have said, a proportion of income tax receipts. But it should be noted that until 1980-81 many States received funding under guarantee arrangements which ensured that they received no less than they would have received under the Whitlam formula. Many States were for many years dependent on that formula for increases in their real grants. When the guarantee came to an end after June 1981 the Fraser Government arbitrarily reduced tax sharing grants to the States. In 1981-82 the States tax sharing grants were increased by only 9 per cent, representing a fall of 2.6 per cent or a real fall of over 4 per cent. Certain specific purpose grants were terminated and offset by special additions to State tax sharing grants. However, these are entirely offset against each other and do nothing to influence the net income of the Commonwealth's arbitrary cuts last financial year.
If the existing legislation had been maintained the increase would have been 16.6 per cent. The Commonwealth's dictatorial approach caused a sharp reduction in tax sharing funds for the States last year. This undermines the financial position of the States in all future years because the future tax sharing grants are to be based on the proportion of grants received in 1981-82 to the previous year's total tax receipts. As I have said, that proportion works out to be 20.72 per cent.
With regard to the State distribution, which is what this Bill is all about, we have seen how the Commonwealth Grants Commission brought down a new set of factors in 1981 which would have extended an extra $116m to New South Wales, $128m to Queensland and $55m to Victoria and which would have reduced the amounts paid to South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania by a total of $300m. This was politically unpalatable to the present Federal Government. The Grants Commission was told to go back and try again. But after telling it to try again the Federal Government took until October 1981 to give the Commission new terms of reference. This caused a delay of four months in what was already a tight schedule. A further delay was caused by the failure to reappoint three members of the

States(TaxSharingandHealthGrants)Bill 14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1387

Commission until the end of January this year, leaving only four months for the full Commission to prepare its revised report. Despite these severe constraints the Commission was able to present a report by the end of May this year.
Not only were the terms of reference for the 1982 review delayed but also they were muddled and confused. They were muddled and confused because of the decision to combine the review of tax sharing relativities with a review of the distribution of the new identified health grants in a way which neither clearly integrated the two forms of grants nor clearly separated them. It included the Northern Territory in the health grants relativities but not in the tax sharing relativities. The Commission was asked also to indicate the effects of using various alternative methods of assessing needs which these States might propose.
When the Commission reported back in May 1982 this year it is with surprise that we found that New South Wales suffered a reduction from the first report's recommendation. The first report recommended a per capita factor of 1.048. This was reduced to 1.018 in the 1982 report. Whereas it was first thought that New South Wales would increase its percentage of the tax sharing grants before the 1981 review it now appears that, after three years, it will have declined from a per capita factor of 1.027 to 1.018 while Queensland increased its per capita factor from 1.39 to 1.535.
The main reasons for the changes between the two assessments were as follows: Changes in methodology, and updating of data involving, among other things, a longer review period~four rather than three years-and new procedures for assessing revenue, expenditure and business undertaking needs; changes in the health funding arrangements; and revisions to State populations following the 1981 census. These things accounted for a substantial increase in Queensland's assessed share and to the fall in the shares of New South Wales and Victoria.
The population dispersion factor no doubt is important and the per capita cost of providing State services could be higher in the States with a larger proportion of the popUlation outside the capital. This may not necessarily be so, however, where a State has a large proportion of its population outside the capital but which popUlation is still concentrated in large regional cities and towns, such as Queensland, where more than 40 per cent of the non-Brisbane population is in cities of more than 30,000 to 35,000 people.
In introducing this Bill the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) skipped over the Federal Government's rejection of the 1982 report. The

Government went to the Premiers Conference with a rl!ally artificially contrived scheme. The effect of the relativities proposed by the Commonwealth is to improve significantly the position of all the non-Labor States compared with the two most populous Labor States, New South Wales and Victoria. The Grants Commission assessment did not suggest that any State should be worse off as a result of its assessment-not just by that simple fact anyway. The whole basis of the Commission's review was to establish relativities, not to determine the amount of tax sharing funds
which a State should receive, either in total or separately. In particular the Commission did not say or imply that funds should be taken away from some States and given to others. Since this report was published one of the Commissioners, Professor Mathews, one of the foremost tax experts
in Australia, has commented as follows:
What could be inferred from the assessments was that, if the tax sharing grant by, say, Tasmania was necessary for that State to perform its functions adequately, increased grants were necessary for the other States in varying proportions if they were to be able to provide comparable services without imposing higher taxes and charges . . . It follows that the question of tax sharing relativities or horizontal fiscal balance cannot be divorced from the question of vertical fiscal balance or the division of tax revenues between the Commonwealth and the States in general. One might therefore have expected a response from the Commonwealth which accepted a significant degree of financial responsibility for easing this transition from one set of relativities to another. Presumably because of its obsession with the need for expenditure restraint, this was not to be.
The Commonwealth's convoluted complex system for setting the State relativities involved dividing the total tax sharing grant of 27.2 per cent of the previous year's total Commonwealth tax collection into two parts. Firstly, the 20.32 per cent of the previous year's Commonwealth tax collections is to take the form of a basic pool. The remaining 0.397 per cent is to form a supplementary tax sharing pool which is to be used to enable real payments to each of the States to be increased by 2 per cent in real terms this year and one per cent in the next two years. The arrangements are to be phased in over three years. The amount to be set aside in the second pool totalled about $150m this year. This amount represents the escalated value of the $60m provided by the Commonwealth to the three most populous States in 1981-82 to compensate then for the failure of the Government to introduce the Grants Commission tax sharing relativities in that year. It has allowed for an escalation in value since then.
This supplementary tax sharing pool is to be distributed among the States in the first instance to ensure that each of them receives its guaranteed minimum share. But this is the fundamental point: All that this complex formula really means

1388 REPRESFI\iTATIVES 14 September 1982 States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

or is that the whole I he financial responsibility for
the introduction of these arbitrary relativities is to be borne by the States themselves. The Commonwealth has~ added llothing to contribute to the introduction of (he !lew relativities.
Predictably, South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania were the main States which required the u:;e uf (he secondary guarantee formula thal I have just descriped. Obviously the States uf Sc'dh Au,trdia, \Veslern Australia and Tasmania can be reas~llred that their revenuesharing grant:'. will he increased by at least one per cent in reai tam'; over the next three yearsor 2 per cent this year and one per cent over the next two Years. Thal lines not alter the salient fact that
O
they will receive rdativel\ less than they would ha';c done under the repealed relativiti~s. Certainlv this would be true at the end III three vears as n,;thing can diwui,e the fact that after J9S4-85 Ta,mani;\ relati~it) will have fallen from 1.98 per cent under the Did relativities to 1.64 per cent and that of Western Australia from 1.57 per c:ent to 145 per C~j11.
There is nu memi"n it] this Bill of any guarantee to ma;ntain grants in real terms let alone a real increase after 1984-95. This really leads to the basic deficiency in the legislation. This relates to the fact that it covers only revenue sharing or tax sharing and not the whole ambit of government assistance to the Slate,. If the Fraser Government continues its old tricks of reducing specific purpose grants both in volume and in specific areas, as it has already done in respect of health grants for both capital and r~current purposes, the total volume of finance availahle to the States will decrease despite the guarantee in the general revenue or tax sharing provisions as provided in this Bill. This trend is t:xemplified by the fact that althllugh the end result of the 1982-83 formula was to ~ncrease lax sharing grants by 16.2 per cent to over $7.7 hillion, the lotJl funds available to the Stales, including specific grants dnd Loan Council borrowings, rose by only ! 3.8 per cent. What is required is a guarantee not only of tax sharing revenues hut also of lOlal funds. Only a Federal Lahor G()vernment wii! avoid the political hyprocrisy of pretending to improve the States' overall !IlEPcial po<;itioll hy illcreasing the result frorn gent:fa! re\'eI~Ue :i~~i~,;"tdnt'e and t.hen going ahcad and cut bClc" in SpecI!E: pu"pnse grants and burrc'l\\'ing upprovab.
If honourable member, doubt that I am saying they ~,hl)llid look at the situation. In all States exc~l't South Australia and Tasmania the specific purpO'it: p~l[lh for recurrent expenditure in public hospitai" c'urnmunity health centres and school

dental schemes have been incorporated into a so called identified health grant which will eventually be included in general revenue assistance, Of course the States have been forced to impose charges for out-patient services and hospital beds. We now see hospital charges of $120 a day and hospital insurance rates of $40 per month. The end result has been to reduce the amount payable to the States for public hospitals, health centres and school dental services from $1.23 billion in 1980-81 to $1.15 billion in 1982 and $1,0 I billion in 1982-83, a reduction in real terms of approximately $265m. The Government has drastically cut the Loan Council borrowing programs also for capital works from $ 1.43 billion in 1977-78 to $1,37 billion in 1982-83, That is a very substantial real cut The larger State semi-government authorities received $1,3 billion in 1980-81 and again 1981-82. That figure represents no growth. Of course this financial year the $878m approved in this area reflects the permission granted to State electricity authorities to borrow outside the Loan Council at market interest rates- -another concession, I might add, of very doubtful value indeed to the States, The much boomed special infrastructure borrowing program of 1978-79 has declined rapidly with approvals falling from $806m last year to $168m this financial year.
Tasmania provides a particularly interesting example of what I am talking about It is faced with a fall in tax sharing relativities from almost 2 to 1.646 over the next three years. Its guarantee of a one per cent real increase of revenue sharing will then have finished, so Tasmania will be a considerable long run loser. In addition, the ludicrous decision of the State Government and the Hydro Electric Commission to expend up to $1 billion on a I 78-megawatt dam, for which there will be no power output demand, according to the Federal Department of National Development and Energy will ensure ever increasing pressure on State finances in this deteriorating situation for the smaller State of Tasmania and escalating interest rates now that it must borrow outside the Loan Council.
1 predict tremendous pressure from the HEC in Tasmania on the State Government to divert increasing amounts from general purpose capital funds to dam construction, thus further depriving capital construction in other vital areas such as housing and transport This year Tasmania received $32m in capital grants and $64m worth of borrowing approvals for its general purpose capital funds. This should be for general purposes, not dam construction. The Federal Government must query how much of this money would be

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 14 September 1982 REPRESENT.;\TIVFS 1389

diverted to the HEC. The HEC has already consumed all the larger authorities borrowing program of $34.4m for 1981-82. If we compare that with the situation in New South Wales we will see that the relevant New South Wales figures for that year were $158m to the electricity authority and $294m for other large authority programs.
I repeat: Tasmania delivered all of its $34.4m to the HEC. In 1982-83 New South Wales will receive $323.7m for its larger authority programs, excluding State Electricity Commission approvals, as it will now borrow outside the Loan Council for SEC capital. This also applies to Tasmania; that, it has to borrow outside the Loan Council. Tasmania's large authority borrowing program this year involves the magnificant sum of $2m. Similarly, the special infrastructure finance program is no longer relevant to Tasmania. It is off the program because the Franklin scheme was not added. This adds up to a pressing need for an approved decision making process prior to Loan Council programs being approved and for the Loan Council to have its own secretariat. This secretariat should be required to meet before the Premiers Conference and the Loan Council should be required to take account of Federal Government macro-economic, social and environmental policies.
The Government does not seem to understand or want to understand that the only true guarantee of financial equity and justice to the States is for the Commonwealth--obviously only a Federal Labor government would do thisto extend a guarantee concerning the real total value of general tax sharing assistance plus speciflc purpose grants and general purpose capital grants, but not of course Loan Council borrowing approvals because they can be expected to fluctuate from year to year. The Government is pretending to offer the States a guarantee in real terms for one section only of Federal funding to the Statesthat is, general revenue assistance. At the same time it is cutting back in block and specific grants in many vital areas such as health and, as I have proved, it is cutting back the level of real funding to the States. For that reason, whilst not opposing this Bill, I move:
That all words after "That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
"whilst not opposing the Bill, the House is of the 'lpini<lll that the Bill deprives the States of funds necessary to 111eel their needs, as identified by the Grants Commi"lllll, and fails to adequately address the issue of fiscal cqua lisa lion' .
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage) Is the amendment seconded?

Dr Blewett 1 second the amendment and reserve my right to speak later.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Daws()n) (5.53)- I believe the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Bill (No.2) marks a very important stage in the federalism policy \,'hich the Government introduced in 1976. Far from proving the failure which the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) mentioned, I believe that this Bill proves the GO\ crnmcnl \; ft~soHnding success. The nonsense within the amendment is just another indication of how the Opposition wants to buy votes with promises it will never be able to fulfil. I think the amendment must be disregarded completely by those who look at this Bill as a new concept in finances not only with the States but also with local government. It is a part orthe new federalism policy.
The Bill seeks to redress the Jisadv~lntage sutTered by the three popubus States Victuria. New South Wales and Q"tl(:ensbnd over 111l1re recent years and tries to give them equity within the system for this year and the ne:\l t\\O years. The new arrangements will be phased in over that period. At the same time the Bill gU~Hantees no loss to any of the States. It actually guarantees a ~ per cent real in<..:rease for this ye::r :md .j ol~e per cent real increase for the years theri.~aCj.tr. 1 alll afraid that the Opposition"s ario':li11ent is fairly thin when it [rie, to persuade lb (helt Ciilvnne is disadvantaged by the Commnnwe,dth being able to give the States moneys without any tics whahoever. That is the beauty of the federalism policy.
You will reeaiL Mr Dcput\ SpeakeL that about four years ago legislation \\as Illtwduced intu thiS House to make Sllf<.' thal. w,de! the !elkndism policy, the Slates could t~it}l:;r ,,''':["<;,\,<;; ur (iecre:t,e the impact of taxes through ,heir ,;wn ,'ctiOI)';. They could discount taxes or impose additional taxes as a surcharge. It i~ interesting. that. whilst on various occasions the States have complained about not getting sufficient fundsI believe they will always do that none of the six States has ever taken up that option. I beliC've that what we are doing by way or this legislation wil! j urt her improve our federalism p()l:c:~ The Hill, h) 111aking an adjustment on the basis of populalion over a period of three years, seeks to redress the imbalance that has existed with respect to Victoria, New South \Vales and Queensland. Of c,)urse, my State of Queensland deserves spe,j,li I1lCllliOll and credit for the pupu]atluJ; ltH)Vt:l!lenl lrurn the
other Statc~ to that ih)rthcl'!": ,')LltC in 1~1L-~. '-'vnh--
out a doubt it ha:-. the fd:-.tt.:~l g:rU\\ :nf~ pupulatiun of any State. I musl say iii th<tt regard lh~!\ :t has been to Queensland's advantage that l\ew South Wales and Victoria now have Labor governments.

1390 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982 States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

As one of my colleagues said, Mr Bjelke-Petersen is the best Premier in Australia.
Under the formula contained in this Bill the basic tax sharing pool will be $7,624m. A supplementary tax sharing pool of a further $149m will be provided in the first year, 1982-83. The full impact of this legislation will be realised over three years. It must be said that until there is 100 per cent relativity, disadvantage will continue to exist. Certainly my State of Queensland will be the major beneficiary of this Bill for the current financial year, 1982-83, during which time it will receive a 21.5 per cent increase compared with the average increase of 16.2 per cent. In fact, it is interesting to note on looking at the figures that although all the other States will get real increases, none of their increases will reach the average percentage. That is due to the Queensland figure. Perhaps the large increase for Queensland is an indication of the disadvantage it has suffered in past years.
Those increases, together with the additional loan borrowings agreed to by the Australian Loan Council, will add substantially to the funds availble to the States. Those funds certainly will be eaten up very quickly in the three eastern States by the extra services required there-police,
hospital, health, education and transport services. Many of those services are criticised in Queensland because of the financial impossibility of the State maintaining those services through the grants made to it. Certainly a limitation is placed upon police services. The loans will also help Queensland to develop harbours, mining facilities and power houses. In fact, I am sure that some of the funds to be made available under this legislation will be appropriated in the knowledge that they will contribute towards a very exciting future for my State of Queensland.
The previous speaker in this debate, the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West), mentioned some of the disadvantages involved in some of the other grants provided for specific purposes. I mention one measure which is part of the Budget of which all States will be major beneficiaries; that is, the Bicentennial Road Development Program. The funds provided under that program will be shared by local government, State government and the Commonwealth Government. I am sure that if there is a program that will capture the imagination of the Australian people it is that program, which is designed to ensure an adequate road system by our bicentenary in 1988. That will involve a further sharing of the $2,500m that will be raised by way of levy. A proportion of that will go to local government and State government.

Mr Cowan-You worked very hard for that.
Mr BRAITHWAITE-I thank the honourable member for that acknowledgment. I just hope that a lot of the Commonwealth funds will be spent on the Bruce Highway through the electorate of Dawson and through my neighbouring electorates of Herbert and Leichhardt. The cooperative federalism policy affects another area of government, that is, local government. In the last twelve months the tax sharing grants have increased from 2 per cent to 21 per cent. I do not think there would be any complaints by either local government or State government that the Commonwealth Government had not done its share under its federalism policy to build the amount up to that extent.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr BRAITHWAITE-Speaking on the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Bill before the suspension of the sitting, I had observed that there is to be a real increase of 2 per cent in the immediate year and an increase of one per cent in the following two years. I mentioned that the local government share of an increase of about 21 per cent on last year's amount represents, a 10 per cent or II per cent real increase. It concerns me that there is continuing pressure for a real increase, not just increases to take account of inflation. To maintain a real increase we must also maintain pressure on the taxation revenues and ensure that they are in excess of inflation if other services the Government undertakes are to be maintained. This is a serious matter. If we are to give real increases in all these services it is the taxpayer who in the long run will pay. It would also mean we were providing bigger government and not smaller government, as we would want. Australians generally should be concerned about this matter, as should the States and local government. In other words, I think it is time that all levels of government learned to live within their means.
The previous speaker, the honourable member for Cunningham, could not deliver his speech without referring to tax avoidance and tax evasion. I reiterate what the Treasurer (Mr Howard) said in the House today. Throughout this debate, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has misdirected the Australian public to make them believe that the blame for the amount that has been lost through tax avoidance and evasion belongs entirely with those on the upper end of the scale, with companies and so on. That is grossly misleading. It is also a reason for us to correct the record. Tax avoidance, and tax evasion are entirely different. I believe that tax avoidance,

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1391

through the measures taken in the 1980s, is really dead. The report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union refers to avoidance schemes which have been entered into. The Government has avoidance under control. Our revenue base is more secure, we can guarantee levels of monetary assistance to the States and local governments.
We should be putting more emphasis on tax evasion. I have seen reports-one a report of the Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd; I am not sure about the report of Mr Risstrom-which indicate an annual loss to the Australian economy of undeclared income of $12 billion to $18 billion. When this is related to tax collection, the amount involved is $5 billion to $8 billion. If that money were to be collected, the ability of the Commonwealth to give more to the States and local government would be a reality. However, I do not think we should be looking only at extra funds to distribute. If we are going to give somebody an opportunity of sharing in the tax which is being evaded and avoided, it should be the honest taxpayers. It is high time that we thought in terms of reducing their commitment to cover these defalcations through evasion. As I said, tax evasion should be firmly planted in the minds of the Australian people as not being the monopoly of those on higher incomes or of companies. Tax evasion is part of the province of those people who evade their proper responsibilities, and we have seen this even in the union situation. I believe that the painters and dockers can be blamed in this regard, and it is interesting to note that they are strong supporters of the Australian Labor Party.
Tax evasion is a system that works in the cash economy. For example, a person works casually for a cash payment and does not reveal this to the Commissioner of Taxation, or a person assumes a second name so that his total tax commitment will not be so great. There are seasonal workers and the professionals in society who barter their services instead of taking an amount as a reward for service. There are tradesmen who lower their prices if they can get cash in hand for weekend work. In fact, it is ironical that the whole building industry is rife with this sort of tax evasion, yet they are the ones who complained last year when we tried to introduce indirect taxation through a 2t per cent sales tax. I suggest that the 2t per cent sales tax collected within the building industry would be only a portion of the amount we as a government lose through tax evasion by tradesmen and other people who do not provide correct figures to the Commissioner of Taxation. I have heard within my own area that there are businesses which cream 20 per cent off the top of

their sales and into their pockets. This is never revealed to the Commissioner of Taxation. This is what tax evasion is all about. If we could collect this extra $5 billion to $6 billion per year we could relieve the burden on the honest taxpayer. We could also probably give more for the services which this country demands.
I believe that we should not be looking only at the $500m that we will not collect this year because of tax evasion. The problem is more serious than that. As a government we are not here to protect the guilty, we are here to protect the people who pay the proper amount of tax. They contribute to the services provided by the Government and they are the people we are here to protect. I see nothing whatsoever wrong with every adult Australian being issued with an identification card on which appears a photograph, a fingerprint and a number. This would not only serve as a work permit but would also assist them if they wanted to get a grant, a pension, or something from the Government by way of a handout. It is high time we looked at this situation. I believe that in that way we could probably achieve a better result than we can by just patching. I understand that tax evasion in Australia represents about 20 per cent of incomes. That is a tremendous amount, and it has an effect on all the statistics which are important to a country like ours. In Italy I believe the relevant figure is 40 per cent. It is time we looked carefully at the situation and clarified in the minds of t..he Australian people that tax evasion is an art which is practised by a lot of Australians on lower incomes as well as those in the higher income bracket.
In connection with contribution by the Federal Government to the State and local governments, I have already advised my local councils, who have been able to share in that 21 per cent increase, that in 1983-84 they can look forward to a smaller increase of about lO per cent, being the percentage increase in the Government's personal tax collection in the next 12 months. This represents an increase from $21 billion to $23 billion, or only lO per cent. Next year local governments will be lucky if they get the inflationary increase rather than the real increase they have had this year. There is a limit to how much this Government can contribute to other governments. We have to make sure that they can maintain their services at a reasonable and efficient level. More money is not necessarily a guarantee of the extension of an efficient service. Too often it lends itself to inefficiency. The honourable member for Cunningham suggests that more money could be collected and handed out down the line, but we have to be very careful about how money is distributed.

1392 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982 States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

On behalf of the National Country Party, I fully support this Bill. I believe it is a high mark in the federalism policy that we introduced in 1976. I am sure that my own State of Queensland and certain local governments are only too willing to participate in the increases we have been able to maintain over the years in office. I fully support the Bill.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (8.10)- The honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite) waxed enthusiastic about the contribution of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Bill (No.2) 1982 to the finances of Queensland. Such confidence by any Queenslander is utterly misplaced. It ignores entirely the impact of the health grants which are

authorised under this legislation and the deleterious impact that they will have on the finances of Queensland. This Bill authorises the continuation of or establishes the second stage in the reactionary health package introduced by this Government in September 1981. The health grants referred to in this measure are those grants provided by the Commonwealth payments to the States for, first of all, hospitals plus smaller payments for community health services, women's refuges and school dental programs. These are all now included in this single health grant payment to the States. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which illustrates these grants and what has happened to them over the last two years.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Table 9 shows the basis of calculations of the estimated identifiable health grants for the States and the Northern Territory for 1982-83.
Table 9
ESTIMATES OF IDENTIFIED HEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES AND THE NORTHERN TERRITORY, 1982-83
($ million)

New
South Wales
(a)

Victoria (a)

Queensland (a)

South Australia
(b)

Western

Australia Tasmania

(a)

(b)

Six Northern

State Territory Australia

Total

(a)

(I) Cost Sharing Grants in respect
of 1980-81 (2) Plus21 percentescalation(c)

504.3 105.9

336.5 70.7

193.8 40.7

7.8 157.7

1.6

33.1

4.3 1,204.4 0.9 252.9

25.7 1,230.1 5.4 258.3

(3) Basic Health Grant for
1982-83. Rows (I) + (2) (d)
(4) Assessed additional raising revenue raising capacity from specified hospital charges in 1982-83 (e)

610.2 171.1

407.1 106.6

234.5 141.5

9.5 190.8 50.7

5.2 1,457.3

31.1 1,488.4

469.9

7.6 477.5

(5) Estimated grants 1982-83.

Row (3) less Row (4)

439.1 300.5 93.0

9.5 140.1

5.2 987.4

23.5 1,010.9

(a) The identified health grants to New South Wales,Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory
replace specific purpose payments formerly made for hospital operating costs, community health and school dental programs.
(b) The identified health grants to South Australia and Tasmania replace specific purpose payments formerly made for community health and school dental programs. Specific purpose payments for hospitals under cQst-sharing agreements are shown in Chapter IV. Commonwealth assessments of revenue-raising potential from specified hospital charges are not therefore relevant to the determination of the identified health grants to these States.
(c) The percentage by which the 1980-81 grant is to be increased, calculated in accordance with sub-section 16 (3) of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
(d) Totals of components may not add due to rounding. (e) Commonwealth's assessment of additional revenue which could be raised in 1982-83 from the imposition of inpatients' fees of $80 per day for shared ward accommodation and $110 per day for private ward accommodation; and outpatients' charge
of $15 per occasion of service; and by charging compensable patients an amount equal to the average daily bed-day cost in the previous year.

Dr BLEWETT-This Government's contempt
for the Australian people is such that it believes that if it bamboozles and confuses them sufficiently they will not understand what is being done to them. Therefore, it isimportant that people understand the principles that lie behind these health grants. First of all, the grants are

based on the cost sharing figures for 1980-81, two
years ago when cost sharing was operating. Then an inflation factor of 21 per cent is added for the next two years. We could say that is quite generous. There are the basic payments of 1980-81 and an inflation factor of 21 per cent. Then comes the rub. There is a deduction, a

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1393

taking away, from the grants. The basis of this is the Commonwealth's calculation of how much money the States will raise as they are now compelled in their public hospitals, through the imposition of means tests, to charge all but the very poor. The Commonwealth calculates-it is a very generous calculation as I will point out-how much the States should therefore raise and that is taken away from their grants. Perhaps more importantly, last year the deduction was softened by being only 60 per cent of the total amount the States were expected to raise. This year the squeeze is fully on. It will be fully apparent in the public hospitals systems of this country. The squeeze is now 100 per cent, that is, the whole deduction is now being made.
The effect of that deduction means that every State in the Commonwealth will have less money from the Commonwealth for its hospitals than it had two years ago. If we forget inflation entirely and go back two years the effect of this policy will mean that the payment from the Commonwealth Government to every State will be less than it was two years ago despite the Government's admitted inflation factor of 21 per cent since that date. For instance, New South Wales will get $65m less than it got two years ago. Victoria will get $36m less than it got two years ago. Queensland-I notice that the honourable member for Dawson has left the chamber but he should be told-will get $IOlm less than it got two years ago. The Northern Territory will get $2m less. Perhaps that is a small sum but given its much smaller budget it is a significant proportion. Those are the figures without any allowance for inflation. They are simple calculations which can very easily be done by anyone.
The table which I have had incorporated in Hansard shows that if we make an allowance for the inflation that has taken place New South Wales will be paid $171m less this year for its hospitals than it would have been paid if the cost sharing system had been maintained. Victoria will be paid $106m less than it would have got if the old system had prevailed and an allowance had been made for inflation. Queensland is again a classic case. I will have a few more things to say to Queenslanders before we finish. It will receive $141 m less than it would have received if the old scheme, allowing for inflation, had continued. Western Australia will receive $51 m less than it would have got if the old scheme had been continued and inflation had been allowed for.
It will be noted that two States have been left out. Tasmania and South Australia were fortunate enough to have had Labor governments in 1975. Those Labor governments were sensible

enough to sign a IO-year agreement with the Commonwealth Government to cost share their hospital funding. That enabled them, as I will point out later, to escape the full rigours of the new system. This Government of course, would not allow those States to escape entirely but the two States which had Labor governments which were sensible enough to make those agreements 10 years ago-it is perhaps a pity that the Liberal governments of those States are now benefitting from the agreements-have been marginally protected from the full rigours of the system now being applied.
Let us look at tbe tragic decline that has taken place in the public hospitals in this country over the last year. There has been a pruning of services, a cutting back of public provision, shortages of staffing which will become more apparent in the coming year, creeping charges for all forms of public health services and the brutal cost cutting that has been imposed upon the States by what the honourable member for Dawson was pleased to call the triumph of new federalism in this society. I think we will see next week when budgets are brought down by the State governments what they think of the triumph of the new federalism which is supposedly embodied in this Bill. All these cuts and shortages and the compulsion being applied--
Mr Hodges-Come back to the bottomless pit.
Dr BLEWETTI will come back to what Mr User Pays from Petrie says in a moment. All these cuts stem from the massive Commonwealth retreat from responsibility for hospital funding. Despite what the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) and others say about the Jamison Committee of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals endorsing this decision, they will see if they read the Jamison Committee report that it did not endorse the abdication by the Commonwealth Government from the hospital system.
The conditions in the public hospital system were bad enough last year but they will undoubtedly get much worse this year. Last year the actual cut in what the States would have got if inflation had been applied was $253m. That is why the State hospital systems were struggling. That is why we have problems in New South Wales, Tasmania, the Northern Territory and Victoria. There was a $253m cut last year. It will get worse this year. I will come to that in a moment. There was a massive single cut in one year.
The situation was made much worse by what I have called the MacKellar miscalculation, that is, the Government miscalculated how much the

1394 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982 States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

States would be able to raise through the imposition of means tests and charges for in-patient and out-patient services. Our calculations, confirmed by most State treasuries, suggest that the overestimate was as follows: New South Wales fell short by $32m or 25 per cent of what the Commonwealth calculated; Victoria fell short by $30m or 38 per cent; the Northern Territory fell short by $4m or 36 per cent; and Tasmania fell short by $4m or 20 per cent. All told, the miscalculation was nearly $100m. When we consider the problems the public hospitals were having last year and will continue to have, we need to add that $100m miscalculation to the $253m that was the formal cut-an addition which the States had to find. So far as we can see, the overestimatethis is a government which never explains-seems to have arisen from a quite mistaken assumption about the public to private in-patient shift implicit in the latest hospital scheme and from cavalier assumptions about the revenue potential of out-patient departments. Of course, the Minister

of the day, who is no longer with us as a Minister, on 13 May 1981 said:
If the estimates are grossly wrong and adjustments are necessary, the Commonwealth stands ready to make those adjustments.
Let me say quite frankly to this House and to this country that that pledge has never been honoured. The evidence of that will be even clearer next week.
The hospital situation will get worse this year because, piled on top of the cut of $253m last year and the $100m error in calculation-the MacKellar miscalculation-this year there is a further actual cut of $156m. Again, I am not looking at inflation. I am saying what was paid last year and what will be paid this year. The cut this year is $156m. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a second table which illustrates simply the actual money cut State by State as a result of the measure that we are now discussing.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows--

HEALTH GRANTS TO THE STATES 1981-82,1982-83* ($ thousands)

1981-82 1982-83

NSW 477,736 439,109

Vic. 325,936 300,549

Qld 165,155 92,970

SA 130,286 128,512

WA 155,039 140,083

Tas. 47,191 47,982

NT 27,679 23,522

Aust. 1,329,022 1,172,727

Change

-38,627 -25,387 -72,185 -1,774 -14,956 +791 -4,157 -156,295

* Including hospital cost sharing payments to South Australia and Tasmania. Source: Budget Paper No.7, Table 103.

Dr BLEWETT-What I have done in that table is compare the actual payments made State by State last year and this year under the health grants. I have included South Australia and Tasmania with their cost sharing grants so that a comparison could be made. Honourable members will see that those calculations are drawn from the Government's Budget Papers. If we look at what has happened we see a total further cut right . across the States of $156m. Of course, the States will have to find more than $156m because they will have to find additional money to cover inflation.
It is very interesting, if one looks at this table, to find that the cost sharing States-those two sensible Labor States which made an agreement with the Commonwealth Government-have survived best in this year's operation. Indeed, Tasmania has had a slight increase. I am not sure whether that is anything to do with the fact that Tasmania has five marginal seats, all of which are likely to go down the gurgler with this Government. That may explain why Tasmania is the one State which has got at least a marginal increase. I agree that it

is only small-about $700,000. Every other State has a reduction in its grant. South Australiaagain one of the cost sharing States-has had only a minimal fall in its grant. The reduction in real terms for most of the other States-that is, New South Wales, Victoria, Western Australia and the Northern Territory-is about 20 per cent.
The startling and massive reduction-I draw the attention of all Queensland members to thisfor Queensland is $72m this year; that is, almost half the total reduction of $156m falls on a single State-Queensland. This. is the penalty to be imposed on Queensland and Queenslanders for defying the Federal Government's user pays principle. As we are all aware, Queensland is the one State which has refused to impose a means test and refused to make those charges in its public hospitals. Therefore, of course, it is the State which will suffer the heaviest cut because it provides so many public beds. It is time for Queensland conservative members of parliament to begin to recognise these facts. Although they vote enthusiastically for the user pays principle in this Parliament, when they move north of the

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1395

border they become peculiarly mute about what they are doing to the public hospital system. Let it be said now that every Queensland Federal Liberal member of parliament and every Queensland National Country member of parliament voted last June to destroy the Queensland free hospital system directly by compelling Queenslanders to impose means tests and in-patient and out-patient charges. The intention of the Government was to compel all States to do this. It was avowed in speech after speech by the then Minister for Health that the Government wanted to impose the user pays philosophy, that it wanted to make charges in the public hospital system. This was actively seconded by the honourable member for Petrie when he used to playa role in health politics. Indeed, we might call him Mr User Pays.
If the Government could not do this openly it would do it by stealth. It would be done by imposing financial penalties on Queensland which must ultimately, if the Government continues to impose cuts of $70m a year, destroy Queensland's public free hospital system. Cuts of the order of $72m imposed on Queensland leave the Queensland Government only three choices. Firstly, it can find the necessary extra funds. When we allow for inflation the Queensland Government will have to find something like $IOOm extra out of State funds this year simply to maintain the hospital system at its present levelnot to improve the gaps, not to provide more for the hospital system. It can find those necessary extra funds by cuts in other services-education, its road system or its welfare payments. We will be able to detail, I hope, when the Queensland Budget comes out, some of the areas which show comparatively where Queensland's cuts are being made in order to sustain that hospital system.
Mr Hodges-Tell us about the general purpose grants.
Dr BLEWETT-I will just deal with that interjection from the honourable member for Petrie. Of course Queensland has benefited somewhat more from the general purpose grants which are paid right across the board for all sorts of services. It has to cope, however, with a specific $72m reduction in relation to its hospital funding. The Queensland Government can make some use of its bit of extra money. Instead of giving funds to services right across the board, which was the intended use of that extra money that money can be used to fund its hospitals at the expense of other services in that State. A second option for Queensland is that it can cut health services in Queensland in order to reduce the financial gap. One of the responses the Queensland Government can make is to reduce hospital services in

order to reduce the amount of money it has to find.
Mr Bourchier-What about that word 'efficiency'?
Dr BLEWETT-I agree that it is an efficient system. Public hospital systems without means tests are the most efficient sorts of systems we can have. I am glad to have the honourable member for Bendigo acknowledge what we on this side of the House have continually argued-that an efficient public hospital system like the public hospital system in Queensland is an example to the rest of the nation.
Mr Bourchier-Come on!
Dr BLEWETT-I am simply taking the honourable member up on his absurd interjection.
Mr Bourchier-What about inefficiency?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! I suggest that the honourable gentleman on my right resist helping the honourable member for Bonython.
Dr BLEWETT-The third solution to Queensland's problem is simply to bow to the Comonwealth Government and end the great experiment of 40 years; that is, it can impose means tests and charge for in-patient'and out-patient services. That is the ultimate solution. In the end, if this Federal Government continues in office, that will be the only solution available to Queensland.
If Queenslanders have been brought to the financial rack, let us note how all other Australians have been brought to the rack by the impact of this system. The health costing arrangements may have saved the Commonwealth some funds-although even that is pretty dubious when one looks at tax rebate benefits and the medical benefits allowed for-but they have added enormously to the health costs of the community. For instance, 1981-82 has seen the greatet escalation in health charges in any single year in the history of this country. Let us look at hospital charges. In August 1981 access to hospitals was free to all those prepared to accept public hospital and medical services. Today that is true of only the narrowly means tested people. The only ones that can get that free service are the holders of pensioner health benefit cards and other health care cards. Twelve months ago any Australian was entitled to that. Of course, we should note also that the people in Queensland can still get that service. In August a year ago the standard basic charge for public hospital accommodation was $50 a day right across Australia. The minimum private charge was $50 a day. What is it 12 months later after the splendid cost containment scheme by

1396 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982 States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

this Government') In Western Australia, the Northern Territory and South Australia the mini-
mum bed day ,;harge is SI05 a day a rise of 110
per cent in 12 month:;.
Mr Scott How much?
Dr BLEWETT it is 110 per cent. In New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania the bed day charge is $110 a day--a rise of 120 per cent. In Queensland-I said to Queenslanders that their State Government \Va, g~Lling prelty desperate from November the minimum private charge in a public hospital will be $120 a day - -a rise of 140 per cent. Those increases were not the result of inflation: they were not the result of wage increases; they were the result of the deliberate and determined policy of this Federal Government forcing the State~ to makc those adjustments. This is the BiB that one Qucenslander got up and praised. I am sure that by the time we Llce; the electors of Dawson with the real costs of the new federalism which the honourable member for Dawson boasts of then nol only will the electors of Dawson reje.:! him but also most of the electors of Queensland wil1 reject this Government.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (8.30) -- Mr Deputy Speak<:r
Motion (oy Mr Rourcnierl agreed I,y

Question resolved in the aftlrmcltive.

Amendmt:nt n-:ga ti ved.

Original question resulved in the allirmative.

Bill read i! secc-nd tim\".

Mess,l!,c fro'n the Governor-General recommending appwpriaLon announced.

In Committee

The Bill.

Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (8.33)-1

am concerned about proposed new Division \,

which deals with tax sharing grants for 1981-82,

and propu,t'd new Division 2, ~hich deals with

tax sharillg grants for the three subsequent years. I

am partlcu:arly cu:cerncd :.tbout tho,e Divisions

because running through the statements of this

Government for a number of years in fact for

the total time that this Government has been in

olfice has been a constant and consistent theme.

That theme is (tnt the Commonwealth Govern-

ment has been :, ,-,d is

\hl~ burden of public

sector tina!h:': ir; '\l.b~r,j;'~t ami (hell th(; Slates wdl

have to li!,hten I heir belts. Thl;, theme W,h re-

peated by the 'v1inisler '"or Indu~try and Com-

merce (Sir Phillip Lynch) on 28 March 1981 in a

speech to the New South Wales Liberal Party

Council meeting at Maitland. He was reported as having said:
The States cannot and will not escape playing their part in reducing the public sector blight on the national wealth.
The Treasurer (Mr Howard), in a statement to the Premiers Conference on 4 May 1981, continued that theme when he said:
The States, as well as the Commonwealth, must tighten their belts.
In the Auslralian on 18 May 1981 the Prime Min-
ister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) was reported to have said on his weekly broadcast:
If there are to be worthwhile tax cuts. the States, as well as the Commonwealth. have to rein in spending.
Again the Treasurer, in his statement to the Premiers Conference in June 1982, continued that same theme when he said:
It is essential that the Government-s policies for reducing inflation are not undermined by lax policies towards public sector expenditures. Responsibility for avoiding such an outcome lies with all levels of government.
I think it is unfortunate that spokesmen for the Government should continue to parade this type of statement around the Commonwealth. They know that those statements are not correct. They can be demonstrated not to be correct. For example, looking at the 1982-83 Budget we might compare the changes that have taken place in State grants during the period of this government. In 1975-76 total Commonwealth revenue was $18,295m. For 1982-83 total Commonwealth revenue will be $45,393m, which represents an increase of 148 per cent. That is an increase of 148 per cent in Commonwealth Government revenue during the period that this Government has been in ollice. During that same period there has been an increase in the consumer price index, or the level of prices and costs, in Australia of 98.9 per cent.
Let us look at what has happened to total Commonwealth grants to the States. The reason I am referring to these figures is to refute the claim which has been made that the States should be tightening their belts. The States have been forced to tighten their belts but the Commonwealth has been in a position where it has been significantly able to relax its own belt. Total Commonwealth payments to the States during the period that this Government has been in office have increased by 81.3 per cent. Again I compare this with an 148 per cent increase for total Commonwealth revenue. Total Commonwealth Budget funds allocated to the States as a percentage of total Commonwealth receipts have decreased from 46.8 per cent in 1975-76 to 34.2 per cent in 1982-83. If we look at some of the particular grants which are made to the States it can be seen

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1397

that the situation is even worse. I repeat that during the period that this Government has been in office costs and prices have increased by 98.9 per cent. General purpose capital funds to the States have increased during that time by 6.3 per cent. It is incredible that the States should be so starved of funds as a result of actions by this Government.
Despite a CPI increase during this period of almost 100 per cent specific purpose payments have increased by 30 per cent. People speaking for this Government should not be allowed to continue parading around Australia suggesting that the States should be forced to tighten their belts. If the States were to take their belts in any further they simply would not be able to operate. This is confirmed despite assertions by the Prime Minister, by the former Treasurer and by the present Treasurer. The position I have just outlined is confirmed in the Budget Papers. For example, in Budget Paper No.7, entitled Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities, on page 7 it is stated:
The restraint in Commonwealth assistance to the States in recent years has meant that the State-local sector has had to increase its own financing efforts in order to maintain Statelocal outlays relative to GDP . . . in most recent years this has not been achieved by increasing the burden of State taxation relative to GDP, but rather for the most part through increased 'borrowings'.
This is the situation into which the Commonwealth Government and its policies have forced State governments. That same Budget Paper goes on to say:
The slower growth in recent years in Commonwealth assistance than in outlays for the Commonwealth's own purposes has been reflected in a decline in Commonwealth payments and net advances to the States, relative to GDP, since the peak year in 1975-76.
That was the last Budget of the last Labor Government. The statement goes on:
Given that the level of State-local sector outlays has been maintained, relative to GDP, since that time, Commonwealth assistance has financed a declining proportion of State-local sector outlays over this period.
The Bill being considered in Committee at present is the most recent event in this continuous saga of the greatest confidence trick to have been played on the States in Australia by any Commonwealth Government. The present Commonwealth Government referred to it as new federalism-the new deal for the States. Even Mr Bjelke-Petersen in Queensland must have sufficient intelligence to realise that he and the other Premiers have been subjected to a great confidence trick.
In the couple of minutes remaining to me, I would like to draw attention to the way in which some of the States in Australia are subsidising the

others. Let me read figures in relation to total payments and Loan Council borrowing programs for each of the States on a per capita basis: This year New South Wales will receive $924; Queensland $1,067; South Australia $1,232; Western Australia $1,247; and Tasmania $1,617, almost twice as much per head as the amount being received by New South Wales. Like the Budget that the Parliament is still considering, this is a very sorry indictment of the direction that this Government persists in taking in connection with any question of financial management and State rights.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Macphee)-by leaveread a third time.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 9 September, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr ADERMANN (Fisher) (8.44)-1 support the Budget which we are presently debating. I particularly support the positive measures specifically designed to help Australian families. In relation to the family allowance, the spouse rebate, the assistance to home buyers, the raising of the tax threshold and the reduction in the taxation rate through the lower tax scale, the Budget importantly provides relief and assistance to those in greatest need. The breadwinner in the single income family is indeed sorely beset and this Budget does something to ease that burden. Pensioners too receive benefits by way of increased pensions and overdue increases in the amount of additional income they can receive before their fringe benefits and their pension rates are affected.
I am very pleased to see that the veterans have not been forgotten and that veterans and their dependants have received additional assistance. Veterans who contracted pulmonary tuberculosis will be pleased to know that the disability pension has been restored to the 100 per cent general rate. It had been contended that tuberculosis pensions should be treated no differently from other disability pensions and should be related to incapacity. However, there were important differences; because of their particular disability, TB pensioners had to alter their life style and had difficulty in receiving health cover and insurance.

1398 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

These were severe disadvantages peculiar to TB pensioners. They had affected their lifestyle and their prospects over very many years. The restoration of the 100 per cent pension in their case was a response to their constant submissions and I know that they will welcome it.
For a very long time now I and other honourable members, such as my colleagues the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite) and the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher), have been contending that there should be a restructuring of the taxation scales and system in this nation and, indeed, a re-writing of the Income Tax Assessment Act. We have not, of course, proceeded very far along that desirable journey, but I welcome in this Budget the further restructuring of the taxation scales and the further restructuring of the taxation mix, because that is the direction which we should be taking. If I am too impatient at the speed of the process, let me at least ask that we continue on this path and not be
diverted in progressing to that goal. This Budget recognises that the pay-as-you-earn taxpayer, particularly the single income family breadwinner, has been paying a disproportionate share of the income tax bill. The tax avoiders who are now being exposed and prevented from engaging in that practice have without conscience caused the burden on the PAYE taxpayer in particular to become very much heavier. The day of the tax avoider is virtually over and I hope that the end result of that will be that the PAYE taxpayers and other bona fide taxpayers can benefit from reduced taxation.
In welcoming the Budget concentration on assisting those particular taxpayers and the family breadwinner, and in welcoming the very consistent and constructive attacks by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) on tax avoidance, let me make an important and personal observation. In company, I guess, with every member of this House, I have been inundated with correspondence, telegrams and phone calls related to so-called retrospectivity of legislation. Some have been designed to be persuasive, some have been couched in quasilegal terms and some have been quite threatening and abusive in nature. As I have seen at least one statement of intention to cross the floor, let me candidly and honestly state my position. At the outset I make it perfectly clear that I will not subjugate my conscience because of any threat of electoral retribution. I will not seek to be a member of this parliament or indeed any other office in life if that means that I have to betray my conscience or my honour. I will hear argument and I will listen sympathetically and carefully to submissions, but I will not betray every Christian

precept I have learned because of threats of defeat if I vote as my conscience guides me.
Let me make a couple of points crystal clear. I have been and still am one of the strongest opponents of retrospectivity in the generally accepted sense. I do not believe that what is legal today should tomorrow become retrospectively illegal. However, that is not the issue which confronts me. A number of the schemes which have emerged have basically involved serious breaches of law-company law and other law, and many conventions recognised at law. Records have been falsified and have been deliberately destroyed or hidden. As a result of that, tax has been avoided and evaded. Now I am told that if I support legislation to recover those taxes I am embracing retrospectivity. That is just not true. Indeed, if I failed to support legislation which strengthens the hand of the Government to recover the taxes avoided by acts illegal under the Companies Act I would be guilty of seeking to legitimise and to make respectable today acts which were and are illegal and in some senses even criminally illegal. I will not be a party to legitimising illegality and betraying the trust of millions of Australians who, often with difficulty and hardship, have obeyed the law, paid their tax and simply expected their fellow citizens to do likewise.
What an extraordinary proposition it is to say that if tax can be avoided by breaching the country's laws, namely, the Companies Act and others, I should resist any attempt to recover that tax. The fact that tax has been avoided for some years does not legitimise the illegality. Murder, theft, rape or any other criminal act does not become legal because it is not immediately discovered and prosecuted. All honourable members, of course, have to make their own judgments, but I am not afraid to make my position perfectly clear. I am not afraid or ashamed to declare it. Whatever the consequences, I will not subjugate my conscience nor betray my principles. I have no hesitation in saying that where laws have been broken and, as a result, tax avoided, the tax ought to be collected and the promoters punished for actions in which they have clearly broken the law. If that is the thrust and scope of the measure that is foreshadowed by the Treasurer I will support it. I declare that fact now. There are some aspects of the Budget on which I wish to dwell for a moment or two. The Bicentennial Road Development Program, financed by a special levy on fuel, has my strongest support.
Mr Braithwaite-A very good program.
Mr ADERMANN-It is a good program. As a Queenslander I have been most disappointed that

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1399

in the past the formula used by the States to allocate Federal funds has grievously and unfairly disadvantaged the State of Queensland. I have seen the Bruce Highway take its dreadful toll of lives because it is totally inadequate to accommodate the traffic using it. One of the most heavily trafficked highways in this nation, the southern 160 kilometres of that highway was revealed in a recent study as having 159 kilometres below acceptable standards. Less than half of that section is of four-lane status.
Mr Braithwaite-The third highest traffic in Australia.
Mr ADERMANN-It has. To the north, as my colleagues the honourable member for Dawson in particular, the honourable member for Wide Bay (Mr Millar) and the honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean) have so often said, some is unsealed and much is untraffickable in bad weather. We all welcome this initiative. Perhaps Sydney and Melbourne have the greatest number of drivers who will pay the levy, but Queenslanders see some justice in that because for far too long Queensland has received parsimonious consideration of its road needs. This goes a little way towards redressing that situation. Anyway, most of the cars using Queensland's highways seem to be from southern States. It is only delayed justice, after all. The Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) in this Government and the Minister for Main Roads in Queensland, in the recent joint study have made a very valuable contribution in identifying, quantifying and solving a grievous problem. I commend them for what has been achieved on a shoestring. I see their personal endeavours reflected in the achieving of this accelerated program and express my appreciation of the use of this most appropriate and effective method. That imaginative and effective Bicentennial Road Development Program is to be commended and the Minister and the Government are to be congratulated.
Additionally, I express my appreciation to another Minister for his achievement in this Budget, namely, the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife). Few, if any, regions in this nation are growing so rapidly as the Sunshine Coast. Such is its beauty and popularity that cars with Queensland number plates seem to be outnumbered by cars bearing the number plates of every other Australian State. The people from other States come and see, and indeed many return home, sell up and come back as permanent residents.
Mr Braithwaite-It is the cheapest registration in Queensland.

Mr ADERMANN-It is. That is the story of what is happening. The other States are emptying out and their residents are coming to Queensland. This mecca of tourism, both interstate, intrastate and international, has been serviced by a very busy but most inadequate air terminal. Thus the Budget provisions for the initial upgrading of the strip to accommodate F28 jets, and the provision of a control tower, are most welcome. Indeed, it will not be long before the pressures for further expansion to accommodate medium jets and even international flights into Maroochy airport will become quite irresistible. I commend the Government for this giant step along the road. I commend, too, the very constructive and effective consultation methods of the Minister, his predecessor, his Department and the Maroochy Shire Council. This process of consultation has been valuable, and therefore the Budget provision owes something to a great number of people. The present Minister and his two immediate predecessors have been most helpful. I appreciate the access they have given me and the attention they have given to my submissions. We sometimes forget the councils we represent, but both the previous and present shire councils have done much, contributed much and co-operated greatly to achieve this advance. I welcome unreservedly the specific Budget provisions in this section.
I also commend the Government for progressing further in the captioning of the Australian Broadcasting Commission television for the deaf. I have spoken many times on this subject. I appreciate this further progress and I merely ask the Government to do two more things: Firstly, keep up the pressure on commercial television so that it will adopt captioning too; and, secondly, please get rid of the discriminatory, indefensible sales tax on Seventel attachments and any caption decoding attachments where a medical certificate of profound deafness is produced. That is an appeal that I have made in this House often. It is a rotten tax on deaf people, and I will not give the Government any peace until it loses some of its own deafness and hears this plea on behalf of the deaf.
Let me warmly commend the Government for its swift and substantial action to assist primary producers facing one of the most dreadful droughts in memory. The assistance, totally funded by the Federal Government, in regard to fodder subsidy and interest subsidy is valuable and welcome. I repeat that it is totally funded by the Federal Government. I am pleased, too, to hear that the Queensland Minister for Primary. Industries-a good Minister and a constituent of mine-on behalf of the Queensland Government has stated his support of the agreement. I can only

1400 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

hope that the other States will respond as quickly and as positively to ensure survival of our primary producers. There must be no political posturing while our primary producers are in desperate trouble.
Mr Braithwaite--They are the salt of the earth.
Mr ADERMANN-They are the salt of the earth. The Federal Government is to be commended and again, as so often before, the Queensland Government has shown the way by a positive and compassionate response. Some industries not affected by drought have other serious problems. To mention two of them, the pineapple industry and the strawberry industry are being faced with imports at often virtually dumped prices. That is seriously eroding their viability and, indeed, their capacity to survive. These matters have been taken up by the industries with the Industries Assistance Commission, and the responsible Minister tells us that that is where they ought to be taken up. I and a number of other members from Queensland, the honourable member for Wide Bay in particular, have made the responsible Ministers very aware of the problems of these industries. They are important industries. The farmers on small holdings have no capacity to diversify and I will be doing all that I can to ensure that they are not crucified. I am not sure that, unless the industry is as quantitatively great as, say, the wheat, wool or beef industries, the lAC always fully comprehends the problems of the small primary producer and the horticulturist.
Mr Lloyd-It hasn't got a clue about them.
Mr ADERMANN-As the honourable member for Murray says, it does not seem to comprehend at all the plight of the small horticulturist and the farmer. I will be delighted if its pending reports on these industries dispel my concern, but until that occurs I will not believe it and I will keep battling.
There are many initiatives in this Budget that please me but it is not possible to enumerate them all. The overall pleasing aspect of the Budget is that, whilst it provides substantial assistance to those in greatest need, it has not been achieved by slackening the fight against inflation, nor has it been achieved by increasing pressure on interest rates. Indeed, the situation is quite the reverse. The Treasurer deserves the warmest approbation of the people of this nation for bringing in this Budget. However, it will not meet its objectives as completely as any of us would desire unless there is a corresponding response in the community. That response is essential. The incessant demands

for shorter hours, elaborate wage and salary increases, and the constant industrial disruptions which have occurred and are occurring can only sabotage our economy. They can only price us out
of world markets, they can only brand us as an unreliable supplier, and they can only destroy our very valuable and essential export trade. If that response does not eventuate, particularly from the trade union movement, then our troubles will multiply and stronger and possibly less desirable Government action will have to be brought to bear.
Whilst it was unfortunate that irresponsible militancy necessitated the Queensland Government having to bring in a state of emergency, the action of that Government was not only necessary but also most effective. I hope that the introduction of the state of emergency provision in New South Wales will not be just a statement with no backing. I hope that the New South Wales Premier can show the strength that the Queensland Premier showed. There is tremendous support in Queensland for the Premier and his Government for having the courage and strength to act strongly against the industrial sabotage in that State. There is no doubt that most Australians, particularly those in New South Wales who cannot get petrol for their cars, are sick and tired of militancy and wild cat strikes. It is to be hoped for Australia's sake that not only union leadership but also all sections of the community will get the message. If not it is to be hoped that the governments, State and Federal, will demonstrate the necessary strength and leadership to protect our nation and its people.
I repeat: The Government can bring in a sensible, balanced, responsible Budget, one that is right for this nation, but it has to be supported by all of the elements in this nation. There has to be that sort of restraint and that sort of responsibility if we are to carry Australia through a most difficult period. Inflation, with its travelling companion unemployment, are the cancers which eat the heart out of our nation. The Government has not and must not relinquish its course of responsible economic management for any political expediency. Australians want neither of those intruders-neither inflation nor unemploymentand any government which accommodates policies which engender them loses sight of that and loses the respect of the nation. The economic policies of this Government, sustained in this excellent Budget, are the responsible and proper policies to contain and defeat those enemies. Unrestrained deficits, largesse and politically expedient handouts are not the answer. That is the alternative prescription we have had from the

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1401

other side of the House. They are the recipe for disaster.
I commend the Government for having the courage to resist the temptation to sell Australia down the drain. At successive elections Australians have supported and endorsed that course. I have no doubt whatsoever that they will continue to do so. Never again do they want a repeat of the prodigal irresponsibility which was the hallmark of Labor's last term in office. The memory has not faded as quickly as that. The Labor Party would do well not to insult the Australian community by thinking that its memory is as short as that. This Budget is a responsible, balanced and excellent manifesto for Australia. I support it most strongly.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (9.2)-This Budget is a confession of failure. It does nothing to deal with the worst recession since the Great Depression or to do anything seriously to cushion the impact of the recession on the employed. Instead it is a blatantly political Budget simply designed for a premature election. Of course, that strategy has backfired. The report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union which was released after the Budget is the latest damning indictment of this Government's failure to act against tax evasion and avoidance on a massive scale-the most serious scandal of the past decade. It will certainly ensure that the Government is decimated whenever the next election is held.
I ask the House to look at the record of these self-styled, great economic managers after seven years in which they have had the responsibility and the opportunity of showing their expertise as economic managers. What do we have? We have the worst unemployment since the Great Depression. We have a complete halt to economic

growth this year. We have double digit inflation figures and record interest rates. The Government's forecast of no growth in non-farm gross domestic product in 1982-83 is the worst performance since comprehensive national accounts were commenced in the late 1940s. Even with the full effect of the Menzies credit squeeze in 1961-62 there was a rise in non-farm GDP of 0.8 per cent, which was the previous worst result. Now, in 1982-83, according to this Budget there will be no economic growth at all. It gives me no joy at all to say that at this time last year I offered the view that the Budget then would intensify the economic downswing. I said then that the economic outcome for 1981-82 was likely to be far more draconian than the Government's own predictions. In contrast, last year's Budget Statement No.2 stated:
. . . the fruits of the firm policy action now in train are unlikely to be garnered until 1982-83.
Those fruits are now truly poisonous. What initiatives is the Government taking to deal with a level of economic and social deprivation not seen since the Great Depression? The answer unfortunately to that question is none. Instead it brought down a cosmetic Budget of mickey mouse gimmicks designed at the time to maximise its prospects in what it hoped would be a premature election. It is exactly the same story as the 1977 Budget-another pre-election Budget. The 1977 Budget had tax cuts aimed at an early election. Yet despite a campaign based on a fistful of dollars those tax cuts lasted a mere five months. Five months is about as long as this Budget can hold up. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a document setting out the net cost of the Budget expenditure and revenue initiatives for both this financial year and next financial year.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

NEW GOVERNMENT INITIATIVES ($m)

1982-83 1983-84

Peak Ultimate

Outlays-

Social Security-

Family income supplement

3.5

30

30

30

Mobility allowance for handicapped people

4.6

18.6

18.6

18.6

Education--

Student loan scheme

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Housing-

Mortgage and rent relief program

20

20

20

20

Industry Assistance-

Writing off debt to brucellosis and tuberculosis eradication campaign

23.5

Transport and Communication-

Bicentennial Road Development Program

150.0

470'

470'

Australia telescope

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

TOTAL OUTLAYS

201.6

538.6

538.6

68.6

1402 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

1982-83 1983-84

Peak Ultimate

Less Revenue Changes(I) Announced in 1981-82Personal Income TaxRebate on home loan interest payments Exemption of war-time persecution pensions Deduction of gifts to various organisations and causes Business Income-Leveraged leasing and similar arrangements (2) Announced Immediately Prior to the BudgetBusiness Income-Exemption of tax on discounted securities New depreciation arrangements Additional taxation assistance to the shipping industry Measures to counter tax avoidance and evasionCompany tax in 'bottom of the harbour' cases Higher penalty for late payment of tax Tax deduction from payments for labour and services OtherCoal Export Duty-removal of$I.OO/tonne rate Removal of 2 per cent revenue duty on imports of ships Payroll tax (ACT) (3) Announced in the Budget Personal Income TaxRate scale change Increase in dependant rebates where there is a dependant child Pensioner rebate Withdrawal of zero rate step for non-residents Rebate on home loan interest payments Rebate on up to $1 ,000 of dividend income Exemption of benefits under approved employee share acquisition schemes Increase in the retention allowance for private companies Business IncomeAssessment as groups for certain companies Measures to counter tax avoidance and evasionDivision 7 tax in 'bottom of the harbour' cases Sales TaxIncrease existing rates by 2t per cent Taxation at 7t per cent of goods now exempt Customs and Excise DutyRemove excise exemption on off-road distillate Introduce excise rebate for off-road distillate for certain end uses Increase excise rate onMotor spirit and distillate Tobacco products Beer Other TaxesTax on certain bank transactions Stamp duties (ACT)
TOTAL RECEIPTS (where known)
Increase in deficit due to the above measures (where the implications are known)

-100 n.a. n.a.
-5 -5
225 615
-25 -3 -4
-1,468 -102 -7 I -55 -36 -5 -2 n.a. 30 370 44 253 -92 180 98 113 80
105
96.6

-230 n.a. n.a.

-230 n.a. n.a.

-64 -1,611

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

500

500

-28

-28

-3

-3

-2

-2

-2,357 -210 -36 15 -185 -75
-5 -30
n.a.
n.a.
490 105
304
-128
214 125 135
200

-2,357 -210 -36 15 -185 -75
-5 -30
n.a.
n.a.
490 105
304
-128
214 125 135
200

-1,265

-2,812

1,803.6 3,350.6t

-230 n.a. n.a.
-973 o.a.
500 -28
-3 -2
-2,357 -210 -36 15 -185 -75 -5 -30 n.a.
490 105 304 -128 214 125 135 200
-2,174
2,242.6

- Assumes the total of $2,500 million less $150 million for 1982-83 is spread evenly over the period to 1988-89. t Expected in 1988-89.

Mr HAWKE~ I am indebted to the House. The document shows that the net cost of the Budget initiatives in 1982-83 will be $97m but that in 1983-84 they will rise to $1.8 billion. This is principally because the full year cost of a number of the Budget initiatives, in particular the personal income tax rate changes, far exceeds the

cost in 1982-83. The table provides only a broad picture since the full year revenue effects of some of the Budget initiatives are not available. Nevertheless, it shows unmistakably the horrendous budgetary problem the Government has created for itself next financial year if it continues its refusal to adopt expansionary policies. Next year's

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1403

Budget will be made even more difficult by other emerging pressure points, such as crude oil levy receipts and company tax revenue.
This Budget is just not viable. If there were to be an early election and if against all the possible predictions this Government were to win it there would be only one result next year-massive tax hikes, just as there were after the 1977 election. Even the Budget figuring is cosmetic, whether it is the unemployment benefit estimates, the home interest rebate, the health rebate or the projected revenue from penalties on late payment of tax. The Budget Estimates simply do not stand up.
I ask honourable members to consider the Government's unemployment benefit estimate for 1982-83-an estimate of $1,567m. The Government is assuming an average number of unemployment benefit recipients in 1982-83 of only 395,000. Yet the number of unemployment benefit recipients in July was already 405,000. The Government is forecasting, according to the Budget, 'a marked increase in recorded unemployment' this financial year. The question is not: Will the Government's forecast for unemployment benefit payments in 1982-83 prove accurate? Rather it is: By how much will that forecast in the Budget which is palpably incorrect be exceeded? Again a comparison with the 1977 Budget is instructive-a Budget in which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) blatantly cooked the books. This was reported by Max Walsh in an article in the Australian Business of 13 May this year. In referring to the Budget estimates provided by Treasury to Cabinet in 1977 the author of the article says:
. . . the figures were reworked . . . A new set of figures was prepared.
The article then refers to the Cabinet meeting at which the new figures were presented. It states:
'Two senior bureaucrats were present at that meeting. They were the then Head of Prime Ministers and Cabinet, Sir Alan (can do) Carmody, and the then Head of Business and Consumer Affairs, Tim Besley-the two men told the Cabinet that the figures were "O.K.". They were-if you ignored, or did not believe Treasury's estimate on employment growth . . . Treasury said employment would grow by I per cent through financial year 1977-78. It is clear that forecast, which proved to be correct, was not used as the basis for the Budget estimates . . .'
The article concludes that the 1977 Budget, from the evidence was-and this is the indictment; one could not have a more damning indictment of a government than this-'deliberately cooked for election purposes'. But it was not just the employment projections that were doctored in 1977. An article by Paul Kelly and Andrew Clark in the National Times of 26 August 1978 said this:

'There were at least two areas where the 1977 Budget, described at the time by Mr Lynch as "rubbery", had inserted in it optimistic figures amounting at the financial year's end to about $230 million.'
The article stated that these were average weekly earnings forecasts and Customs receipts forecasts. The article pointed out that the Treasury estimate for average weekly earnings growth was at or below 10 per cent. The article continued:
But the Prime Minister refused to accept the Treasury figures and probably sought advice from his own Department. He finally accepted a figure of 10.5 per cent.
On the Customs receipts forecasts the article stated:
. . . the Prime Minister rejected a Treasury estimate, and sought alternative advice from the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs and the secretary of his own Department, the late Sir Alan Carmody. Fraser received and approved a Customs revenue figure higher than Treasury estimates.
There it is-official Budget estimates from the responsible Department doctored by the Prime Minister to win a premature election. The Prime Minister was cooking the books in 1977 at about the time his friends in the Liberal Party were perfecting schemes of tax avoidance and the evasion to defraud the public on a massive scale. If directors of a board did to their accounts what the Prime Minister did to the 1977 Budget they would be gaoled. The Prime Minister cooked the books with the 1977 Budget. What do we find in 1982 with another pre-election Budget? We find the same pattern and the same shonky figures. There is even a cloud over parts of the economic forecasts in Statement No.2 of the Budget Papers. On the basis of a forecast of zero economic growth in 1982-83, itself an appallingly pessimistic forecast, the Budget Papers conclude:
There is unlikely to be any growth in employment in 1982-83.
But an unchanged level of employment is, as a matter of logic, compatible with zero economic growth, by definition, only if labour productivity also remains unchanged. This implicit assumption is singularly improbable. Page 28 of the Government's own Budget Papers shows that in only one of the past nine years did labour productivity remain unchanged. In all other years labour productivity grew and the average growth was about 2 per cent per annum. If there is any productivity growth at all, then given the forecasts of no economic growth in 1982-83 employment levels must actually fall during the coming year. But even taking this Budget at face value, the Government is damned.
Let us, for the purposes of the exercise, first of all accept the forecast of no growth in employment in 1982-83. Let us also accept that a further

1404 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

decline in the labour force participation rate over this financial year is probable and assume the decline is the same as that for last year-OA percentage points. Finally, let us assume that the civilian population of working age continues to grow in 1982-83 at the same rate as in recent years-that is, at about 2 per cent. The net effect of these assumptions is a rise in the level of unemployment of about 90,000 over the course of 1982-83 on top of current record levels of nearly 500,000. On these assumptions unemployment could peak early next year at close to 600,000-higher than the peak levels of unemployment reached during the Great Depression. All of this occurs seven years after the Prime Minister promised to provide jobs for all.
Not only has the Government mindlessly declined to take any action at all to deal with this catastrophe but it has also refused point blank to cushion the burden on the victims of its policiesthe unemployed. Its miserable $4 rise in the weekly single unemployment benefit after seven years is an insult. Its attempt last year to scrap a key support for the young unemployed, the Community Youth Support Scheme, was foiled only after widespread public outcry. Yet in this Budget the Government boasts of an increase of 21 per cent in spending on manpower and training programs this financial year. It ignores that this is a drop of 38 per cent in real terms on 1975-76 levels while unemployment has risen by more than 50 per cent. What it also ignores is that with its usual incompetence the Government last year underspent on just two of its manpower programs, the Special Youth Employment Training Program and the school-to-work-transition program, by, respectively, 18 per cent and 35 per cent. After adjusting for this, the growth in manpower and training spending this year will be just 12 per cent on the amount it should have been last year-an unchanged real level of spending in the face of record and still rising unemployment.
The Government has come up with two scapegoats for its massive economic failure-the international recession and wages. The answer to the overseas 'excuse' is provided by the Prime Minister himself in an Australian and New Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science speech on 22 January 1975. He said:
When political leaders say the present situation cannot be helped, it is part of a world situation, they are expressing the futility of their own leadership . . .
I shall now turn to the Government's other scapegoat-wages. Wage developments are, of course, of central importance. No one can deny that proposition. A basic feature of the prices and incomes policy the Australian Labor Party is

developing is a recognition that wage rises must be kept within real economic capacity. But the Government's efforts to shift the blame for the current unprecedented economic recession on to the trade union movement are contradicted by its own Budget Papers. A table on page 28 of Budget Statement No.2 shows that real labour costs grew by 11 per cent between 1975-76 and 1981-82. But over the same period labour productivity rose by 12 per cent-marginally faster! How can the Government possibly blame wages growth for the present shambles when, over its period of government, real wages have grown slower than productivity? Certainly, wages have risen relatively strongly over the past year or so, but the Government can take a large part of the responsibility for that.
Government policies and Government submissions were largely responsible for the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission's decision last year finally to abandon a centralised wages system based on wage indexation. The wages surge of the past year occurred under the Government's preferred wages system-that is, a decentralised system based on case-by-case hearings. The core of the Government's free enterprise philosophy is that capital should be given a blank cheque for the unconstrained use of its market power. This was exemplified by the razor gang's decision last year to abolish the Prices Justification Tribunal and to emasculate the Trade Practices Commission. In view of this attitude towards capital it is hardly surprising that organised labour should feel less than constrained in the exercise of its power to achieve what it regards as legitimate objectives.
The Government has been advocating a free for all philosophy and has given the public a practical case study by refusing to act against massive tax evasion. How does the Government propose to achieve the wage restraint it regards as so crucial to economic recovery? Any hopes that the Budget would induce wage restraint were dashedcompletely predictably-on the night the Budget was presented. So the Government is left with the old stand-by of its own tight, contractionary policies. As the Treasurer put it in his Budget Speech:
Monetary policy will be directed at enhancing the recent signs of slowing in the growth in wages.
In other words, the Government will seek to reduce wages by creating ever higher levels of unemployment. This is absolutely immoral and should be rejected by any decent thinking person. But it is also in the longer term completely futile, as recent history demonstrates. Speaking of unreality, I refer to some comments by the Treasury in the Budget Papers. On pages 52 and 53 of Budget

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1405

Paper No. 2 the Treasury proposes that wage negotiations be decentralised to the level of the individual firm. The Treasury suggests that such bargaining agreements as the Metal Trades Industry Agreement late last year are still far too centralised and that decentralising negotiations to the firm level would 'reduce rigidities in the wage system '. Budget Statement No.2 goes on to observe:
While trade unions were originally established to serve social purposes, their ability within a highly industrialised economy to negotiate wage rates across whole sectors of industry and to seek leave to have them adopted as legally enforceable minima poses basic difficulties for the efficient functioning of labour markets and hence for the restoration of price stability and full employment.
Clearly, to decentralise wage negotiations to the company level would involve the forcible dismantling of the trade union movement as we know it. That proposition is, or I suggest it should be, completely repugnant to a democratic society. It is also completely unworkable, except perhaps under a military dictatorship of either the extreme left or the extreme right. Academics are oftenand often rightly-criticised for living in ivory towers. I simply say that academics are models of common sense beside some of the bureaucrats in their ivory towers in the Treasury.
The Labor Party currently is developing a realistic and workable approach to our economic problems in the form of a prices and incomes policy. An essential function of an incomes policy is to reconcile competing incomes claims to ensure that economic stimulus is translated into increased output and employment rather than being dissipated in higher wages and prices. It is not simply a matter of introducing expansionary economic policies because, unless certain preconditions are satisfied, they could prove an exercise in futility. One of the essential ingredients for the success of expansionary policies is wage moderation. That will not be easily achieved, but the basis has already been laid for co-operation between a Labor government and the trade union movement for moderation across all income groups. That will form the linchpin for turning the economy around after the appalling legacy left by this Government.
Let me conclude by saying that I hope it will be understood that my concern is not simply one of criticism of this Government, although on all the terms I have indicated in this speech God knows if there is not sufficient basis for condemning this Government. But if we as Australians are going to be concerned with the enormous challenge, the danger, confronting us in this country we have to recognise that there are faults in all quarters. What is required from government is not the throwing up of hands in hopeless despair but the

provIsion of leadership, the construction of an environment in which there can be consensus, in which the various forces in this community can act together to use the vast resources for the improvement of the people, the citizens, of this country. This Budget singularly fails to give that lead. It will not be until this Government faces an election and its inevitable defeat that a Labor government will be able to provide the lead which is so sorely needed.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (9.22)- I join issue with the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), who
has just resumed his seat, and I commence my remarks by congratulating the Treasurer (Mr Howard) on one of the best Budgets for Australia and Australians that has been brought down for many years. As Minister for the Capital Territory I simply say that the public record demonstrates that this Budget has been received as the best Budget for Canberra for many years. From the point of view of my home State of Tasmania, which I have always put and will continue to put first and foremost in my parliamentary work, it is an outstanding Budget. I welcome the presence in the chamber of my colleagues the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck), the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr), the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) and the honourable member for Bass (Mr Newman).
Let me read into the record details of the Budget for Tasmania and the good news it brings to our State. General revenue funds for Tasmania this year are up $369m, general purpose capital funds are a record $96m, total specific purpose recurrent payments are a record $137m and specific purpose payments for capital purposes are a record $94.8m. That represents a grand total for Tasmania of a magnificent $698.1Im, an increase of $78m on last year's figure and more than $200m above the figure for 1978-79. Who says that this Federal Government does not care for Tasmania?
I now turn to matters of a more national import. In the hope of avoiding any frivolous points of order being raised, I point out that my remarks relate specifically to appropriations for the Parliament, the Attorney-General's Department and the Department of Administrative Services. Insofar as this will involve some criticism of the Opposition, I have to indicate that I bring these matters before the Parliament on the basis that there does come a time in the history of any nation when a politician or parliamentarian does have to stand up publicly and state the truth, even if it does have an impact on those honourable

1406 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

members who sit opposite him in this chamber. The Australian Labor Party stands condemned for its disgraceful smear tactics, its cant and its hypocrisy. The Labor Party~the socialists~has blood up to its elbows. It knows where the bodies are hidden, yet it turns its back on murder and brutality. The Labor Party undoubtedly has received, and for all I know continues to receive, moneys from those from whom it now seeks to dissociate itself. What hypocrites! Heaven knows how much money has been laundered through the many secret books of account of the Australian Labor Party, which clearly should be renamed 'the Australian Laundry Party'~1 repeat, 'the Australian Laundry Party'.
Let me give some examples of why I say the Labor Party should be roundly condemned and censured by all decent and right-thinking Australians, not merely for its complicity in malpractice in the past but for its blatant and naked hypocrisy in this Parliament over the past two weeks and especially today. It is one thing for the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) sanctimoniously to proclaim that he intends to initiate proceedings to disaffiliate the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union from the ALP. I leave aside the arbitrary way in which the Leader of the Opposition appears, on the face of it, to deny the painters and dockers that most basic and fundamental right, the right of a fair trial. It is one thing to disaffiliate and to make a great public show of virtue and righteousness, but will the Labor Party refund to the painters and dockers the affiliation fees paid to the Labor Party by that union over many, many years? Of course it will not. The Leader of the Opposition seeks to make a big stand on a matter of principle but when the Labor Party is asked to choose between principle and cash the cash will win every time. The money greed of the Labor Party in recent years is well illustrated by the notorious loans affair~the greatest constitutional conspiracy in the history of Australia~the Iraqi breakfast scandal and, as I will refer to later, the Labor Party's links, now being exposed publicly for the first time, with the nefarious Nugan Hand Bank.
Let me stay for a moment with the painters and dockers issue and the thousands and thousands of dollars~indeed, the hundreds of thousands of dollars~received by the Labor Party over many years from that union, from which the Labor Party now seeks to distance itself. It is not just the cash relating to affiliation fees~those amounts can be proved beyond reasonable doubt~it is the cash connection which has now been disclosed of which I am certain. I challenge the Labor Party

and every Labor member from the State of Victoria in this House to deny the allegations sweeping Melbourne at this point in time; namely, that substantial moneys have in fact been laundered through the Victorian Branch of the ALP. We know what sorts of moneys are laundered into the Victorian Branch of the ALP. We know what sorts of moneys are laundered. We can easily surmise that many donations made to the Australian Labor Party never see the light of day.
I know I am now touching on a raw nerve, but I condemn Labor members for their utter hypocrisy on this issue. Whilst I know and they know that one of their members, the honourable member for
Port Adelaide (Mr Young), is genuinely striving to bring about public disclosure of donations to political parties, at the same time they, in their utter and shameful hypocrisy, know that there are 'donations' and 'loans' which they would never permit to be publicly revealed. The royal commissioner, Mr Costigan, himself has referred in detail to the laundering of moneys obtained as a direct result of criminal conspiracy. Members of the Labor Party know and I know where some of those moneys have finished up. Yet their code of silence in the Labor Party in the face of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union will prevent, for the time being, the truth from coming out.
Is it a coincidence that this new-found desire to disaffiliate the painters and dockers was announced only last week after~I repeat, after~ the preselection battles of the previous weekend, at which one of the Labor members in this House lost his preselection and endorsement and another Labor member narrowly scraped home by a couple of votes? Before honourable members opposite rise up in mock righteous indignation, let me remind them that Billy 'the Texan' Longley is still alive, albeit in custody, and that there are others around who will know precisely what I am getting at. There are people alive who can tell a lot and it would not be to the advantage of the Australian Labor Party for them to do so. Yet the Labor Party, in its hypocrisy, has the hide to traduce honourable men. Without shame the Labor Party smears people such as the Treasurer of this country, who has been more fair dinkum about eradicating tax evasion in this country than has any other Treasurer in the history of the nation.
I referred earlier to the infamous Nugan Hand Bank. Only this week information, publicly stated by one of the Labor Party's New South Wales colleagues, confirmed beyond any doubt the conclusions which I have drawn as a result of my investigations into alleged links between the Nugan Hand Bank and the Australian Labor Party in

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1407

New South Wales. There is a clear prima facie case that the criminally motivated Nugan Hand merchant bank made substantial cash donations to the ALP in New South Wales prior to the 1976 State election campaign at which Mr Wran was elected to power. While campaigning on behalf of Liberal candidates in Sydney electorates in 1976, I was absolutely amazed at the lavishness and the extravagance of ALP advertising material. It is clear beyond doubt that the Labor Party substantially and demonstrably outspent the Liberal Party in that campaign at which Mr Wran achieved victory.
The obvious question was asked then: Where is all the money coming from? From where is the Labor Party getting its funds? I leave aside the obvious comments about potential sources such as illegal casinos and organised crime in New South Wales. I simply contain my remarks to the Nugan Hand Bank and place on record that at that very time rumours were rife in Sydney that Nugan Hand was 'backing Wran'. During the intervening six years these allegations have been repeated over and over again. It has been freely stated that there were many relieved people within the ranks of the Labor Party when news of Frank Nugan's death reached Sydney. Only this week the most damning evidence of all of this unholy alliance between Nugan Hand and the ALP in New South Wales has come to light. It has come to light out of the mouth of the first law officer in that State. I refer to the Honourable Frank Walker, the Attorney-General of New South Wales, who has publicly stated that persons associated with the collapsed Nugan Hand merchant bank used the New South Wales Labor Party machine to put pressure on him because of his investigations of the bank's criminal activities. I will quote the Attorney-General himself. He said:
Immediately I started that investigation I inherited trouble.
The Attorney-General continued:
All I know is that the violent political opposition to me started immediately I investigated the Nugans. There was no strong opposition to me before.
Attorney-General Walker continued, and these words are staggering for what they reveal:
The Nugan Hand case demonstrates the power these white collar criminals can have over politicians.
Listen to this statement:
Those companies that by and large donate to political parties have the ability to exert influence within the political party.
What is the Honourable Frank Walker, Attorney General of New South Wales, really saying? He is saying that there was a deliberate and concerted attempt to prevent him from carrying out his duties in accordance with his commission and in

accordance with his bounden duty under the law to investigate, with a view to prosecution, the criminal activities of the Nugan Hand merchant bank. Why does Mr Walker specifically refer to 'the power'-I repeat the words 'the power'- these white collar criminals can have over politicians? Why does he specifically refer to 'ability to exert influence' by companies that, 'by and large, donate to political parties'? The answer Mr Deputy Speaker, is as plain as the nose on your face. It is because the Nugan Hand Bank paid very substantial amounts of money to the ALP of New South Wales, probably in excess of $1 00,000, and had actively assisted in the campaign to elect Premier Wran to power in the confident expectation that a Labor government could be bought off, that investigations could be stopped and that the enforcement of the law and the administration of justice in that State could be criminally subverted. We have now exposed before us the blatant corruption of a conspiracy to pervert the course of justice. The price for protection was substantial, was financial and has now been made public. Whether he intended it or not, Attorney General Walker has blown the lid off his colleagues in the ALP who accepted blood money in their grubby climb to power and who, in return, promised the donors immunity from investigation and, indeed, prosecution. You in the ALP have the hypocrisy to condemn us. One of Australia's greatest churchmen, the Reverend Sir Alan Walker--
Mr Scholes-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The honourable gentleman is entitled to make general innuendoes which is usually the coward's castle. When he says 'you', referring to Opposition members, he is being personal. I demand a withdrawal.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-I do not think there is any point of order. The Minister was using the word in a general sense.
Mr Scholes-Mr Deputy Speaker, the Minister is the filthiest politician that we know.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!
Mr Scholes-He has been filthy in order to finance his own electorate with money taken from--
Mr HODGMAN-You are past it; sit down.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Corio will resume his seat for a minute and so will the Minister.
Mr Scholes-His own funds and his own electorate.

1408 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Corio will resume his seat or I will name him.
Mr Scholes--I apologise, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is shouting the Chair down and that is not a fair tactic in any way. The honourable member knows that there is no specific reference to the honourable member for Corio to which he can--
Mr ScholesIf the Minister refers to me again in those terms I will deal with him.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Corio will resume his seat. I call the Minister.
Mr HODGMAN-Mr Deputy Speaker, one of Australia's greatest churchmen, the Reverend Sir Alan Walker only on Sunday publicly proclaimed that politicians of all parties-I repeat the words 'all parties'-should combine to end evils striking at the heart of national well-being. We are an open government. We sponsored the Costigan Royal Commission into the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. We want the truth to come out and we want the law to take its course against those who have acted not only against our laws but also against the best interests of our nation. For this the Labor Party condemns us. The Opposition seeks to censure us and to smear us. I have to say in this Parliament that the members of the Opposition are nothing but hypocrites for they know that they do not come to equity with clean hands. I say that they are dripping in blood up to the elbows. Shame on you!
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I think that, in a parliamentary sense, that language is going too far.
Mr HODGMAN-I accept your ruling, Mr Deputy Speaker. I want to bring the attention of this Parliament and the people of Australia to the shocking and disgraceful conspiracy of silence within the ranks of a major political party relatillg to the attempted murder of a man named Peter Baldwin. Whilst this might stir up Opposition members, I have to say that what is now to be said must be said. I have been directly involved in the course of my professional duties as counsel in nearly a dozen murder trials. I have carefully studied all the evidence and all the information that I have been able to gain access to in respect of the Baldwin case. I am now satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that this was not just a beating up. I am satisfied that there was, in fact, an attempt to murder Mr Baldwin and that his attackers probably expected that he would never

survive their brutal and vicious onslaught. The question I ask is: Could this happen anywhere in Australia without the offenders being apprehended and brought to trial-that is, anywhere in Australia except in the State of New South Wales? The disgraceful and scandalous conspiracy of silence which has prevented the apprehension of those who tried to murder Mr Peter Baldwin begins and ends with the corruption in the Labor Party in New South Wales. I suggest that there are members of this very Parliament who know more than they have been prepared to say on this issue. On the one hand--
Mr Barry Jones-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Minister is clearly transgressing the spirit and the letter of your ruling by traducing people associating with--
Mr HODGMAN-I am talking about a general conspiracy to cover up an attempted murder.
Mr Barry Jones-The general words, which you will well recall, Mr Deputy Speaker, were that there are people in this Parliament who know more than they are saying-in other words, have a degree of complicity with an attempt to murder and that there has been a conspiracy to cover up. I think the suggestion is outrageous. It is quite impossible to sustain. I think the honourable member should be asked to withdraw it.
Mr HODGMAN-Mr Deputy Speaker--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I think the Minister should withdraw any implication against members of the Opposition on such a grave matter. I will offer some advice. If he had put the word 'alleged' in a little while ago he might have been on safer ground.
Mr HODGMAN-Mr Deputy Speaker, In deference to you and to the Opposition I do not persist. What I want to say is this--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the Minister withdraw?
Mr HODGMAN-I will in deference to you, of course, Mr Deputy Speaker. Those who know the facts about the Peter Baldwin incident should now speak up. If in the course of normal political events that man becomes a member of this House it will be a scandal, not just on this House but on this nation. It will be a scandal that a member of this House, representing his electorate and his Party in the Parliament, is a man in respect of whom it has been said that those who tried to kill him have not been brought to justice.
Mr Barry Jones-What about Jim Cairns? The same thing happened with Jim Cairns.
Mr HODGMAN-If the honourable member wants me to stay on the Baldwin issue I will. I am

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1409

indebted to my colleague the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) for reminding me that we are still waiting in the Parliament for the Leader of the Opposition to name the three knights who he said were directly involved in organised crime, an allegation which has cast a slur over every knight of the realm in Queensland and over many others outside Queensland who visit that State. One has to ask why the Labor Party is doing this at this time and attacking honourable men such as the Treasurer and the Attorney-General (Senator Durack). With your record you are not entitled to attack anybody. You are publicly exposed for your sham, cant and hypocrisy. You are the recipients of stolen money. You are prepared to accept campaign donations as a price for the perversion of justice. You are a party without a conscience. Your guilt is known to many thousands of your fellow Australians.
The Labor Party stands condemned for what it is. I say to Opposition members: Come not into this Parliament preaching virtue and righteousness when you yourselves are more guilty by far than those whom you seek to attack, denigrate and smear. The Labor Party is guilty. The Labor Party knows it. Shame on the Opposition for the scurrilous campaign it has run against honourable men, namely, the Attorney-General and the Treasurer of this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-The Minister's time has expired.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-I claim to have been misrepresented. During his remarks the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) made it quite clear that in his opinion members of the Labor Party had received election funds from illegal and illicit sources. He pointed and said the word 'you', which can mean only those members to whom he was directly referring. I challenge the Minister to name any member of the Parliament. I say on behalf of every member of our party in this House that we are prepared and have moved on a number of occasions in this House-
Mr HodgmanYou cannot take it, Gordon. You can throw it out but you cannot take it back.
Mr SCHOLES-Thugs do not go anywhere.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I personally accept what the honourable member for Corio says, but the problem I have is-
Mr SCHOLES-Mr Deputy Speaker, can I finish? I am trying to say one sentence and the Minister is trying to prevent me because he knows what I am going to say. We on this side of the House have moved and are quite prepared now for full disclosure and inquiries into the sources of

funds for political parties. The Liberal Party does not have the guts to do that. If the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) wants to move such a motion now we will co-operate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I think the honourable member has made his point.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (9.45)-The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman), who preceded me in this Budget debate, has made a scurrilous attack on many individuals and on the New South Wales Government. He has done that for one reason and one reason only, and that is to divert discussion on this Budget. The reason he wants to divert discussion on it is that he knows that the Budget strategy of this Government is in tatters. Today the strategy is in tatters, and why? Is it because of a sudden change in the international situation? No, it is simply because of the weather. The Government's fiscal policy now has become hostage to the weather. After months of severe drought, through Victoria and New South Wales especially the Government, two weeks after the Budget, thought suddenly of a fodder subsidy to assist drought affected farmers-
Mr Groom-Are you against that?
Mrs KELLY-No. The ALP does not oppose drought relief. However, we believe that this huge item of expenditure should have been included in the Budget. There is only one reason why this did not happen. It was to ensure that this amount, estimated at $70m a month, was not incorporated into the Budget figure. The size of this year's deficit now depends on when the rain comes. This is just one example of how dubious the 1982-83 Budget figures are.
The 1982-83 Budget was the attempt of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to buy votes with the prospect of an early election. That attempt has now backfired. The recent revelations of massive tax evasion and avoidance and the direct implication of members of the Liberal Party have discredited this Government to such an extent that the ordinary people of Australia are waiting for the opportunity to get rid of this dishonoured Government and this dishonourable Prime Minister. The Fraser Government has been in office for seven years. It is now a tired government bereft of ideas and riddled with corruption. The Prime Minister has failed to keep his promises to the people of Australia. His Governmentthe people opposite me on the Government benches tonight-no longer deserve their respect or confidence. On 27 November 1975 Malcolm Fraser delivered his party's policy speech for the December election in that year. It is well worth recalling the promises he made to the Australian

1410 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

people at that time and comparing them with the reality today, seven years later. In that policy speech Malcolm Fraser made a number of very specific promises. In relation to employment he said:
We will be generous to those who can't get a job and want to work . . . Only under a Liberal National Country Party Government will there be jobs for all who want to work.
What a farce! The aims of his party's policies were these, he said:
. . . restore prosperity, defeat inflation and provide jobs foral!.
He also said that a growth rate of between 6 per cent and 7 per cent was quite feasible and that there were great opportunities for growth above the long term average if the right policies were adopted. The only problem is that seven years later he still has not found what he calls the right policies. In relation to taxes the Prime Minister unequivocally promised:
We will reduce the tax burden . . . We will fully index personal income tax for inflation over three years.
He added:
It will make government more honest with your money.
That is a strange interpretation of honesty. Interestingly enough, a few days prior to the 1975 election Mr Fraser also felt it was necessary to promise to keep all the promises he had made.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr GiJes)-Will the honourable member please use the term 'Prime Minister' instead of the Prime Minister's name.
Mrs KELLYI shall, Mr Deputy Speaker. In the two years following that election further promises were made that unemployment would fall and keep falling; that the Government would bring taxes down further and not increase them; that interest rates which had begun to fall would keep on falling; and that interest rates would be reduced by 2 per cent-that, by the way, was said on 6 December 1977. The promises have gone on. They have all been hollow words. None of the promises have been kept.
Let us look at the reality in Australia today, after seven years of this Government's mismanagement and bungling of the national economy. Tax rates in Australia under the Fraser Government are the highest in the history of Federation. The Budget Papers themselves show that tax receipts represented 27.5 per cent of gross domestic product for the 1981-82 financial year and are estimated to rise further to 27.7 per cent in 1982-83. That means that more money is being collected in taxes from the Australian people by this Government than ever before in our nation's history. When this is converted to collection of tax

per member of the labour force in constant price terms we see that last year the Fraser Government took $1,414 more a year from every taxpayer in Australia than was collected 10 years ago. So, the Prime Minister's 1975 policy speech
promise to end tax ripoffs is a sham. Nothing has been done to implement that promise after seven years, seven Budgets and seven opportunities to prove that the promises would be kept. No wonder the people of Australia are fed up with words. After all this time they will not be fooled now by half-hearted attempts to crack down on tax evasion and they certainly will not be fooled by more hollow promises from this creaky
Government.
The promise to introduce full tax indexation was never kept. During 1976-77 and 1977-78 the unadjusted consumer price index increase was discounted for the effects of indirect taxes so the tax scales were not even then fully indexed to inflation. Then followed a series of much sharper re-
treats from full indexation culminating in its formal abandonment in 1980-81. For a single person with no dependants tax indexation over the six financial years 1976 to 1982 amounted to only 46 per cent of the CPI increases. Taxpayers with a dependent spouse fared even worse during this period. The overall effect under the Fraser Government's policies has been to place a greater relative taxation burden on lower and middle income earners. In contrast the average tax rates on those with high incomes of around $30,000 or more have fallen since 1976. Even taking the proposed changes in the tax scales into consideration the tax paid as a proportion of income grew by about 5 per cent for an average wage earner with a dependent spouse and two children. It has fallen by around one per cent since 1976 for those with a taxable income of over $72,000. Every Australian wage earner is well aware of the tax ripoff that has eaten into his or her pay packet in the past seven years.
It is obvious that the Government has no intention of implementing real tax reform and that the inequalities of the present unsatisfactory taxation structure are being perpetuated and reinforced by the latest Budget. It is important to note that the inequalities are even greater when we consider the effects of tax concessions, changes in medical insurance, indirect tax increases and tax avoidance and evasion. All of these factors have resulted in a greater burden for the average Australian taxpayer. All taxpayers know this. They see the evidence of it every day in their pay packets. This Government has lost all credibility in relation to taxation matters. It has broken its promises to the electorate. The Government has presided over the

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1411

total collapse of tax paying morality in this country. The honest taxpayer, the pay-as-youearn taxpayer, has subsidised tax avoidance and evasions worth billions of dollars. Now the Prime Minister attempts to talk tough on this issue because the opinion polls show that the ordinary
people will not tolerate this tax cheat any longer.
Let us look at another promise~the promise to bring down interest rates. Interest rates have now reached an all time high as a result of the seven years of this Government's economic policies. In 1976 the interest rates for housing and for small overdrafts were 10.5 per cent. I bet that there are many people who wish that we could go back to those days. In 1982 the interest rate for a housing bank loan is 13.5 per cent~that is, of course, if
one is lucky enough to qualify. Increasingly, people are being forced to use alternative financial institutions and sources. Invariably the cost of the money borrowed is a good deal higher, putting enormous pressure on family living standards. So much for the promise that interest rates would comedown.
Unemployment is now at a post-war high of almost 7 per cent of the labour force and going up. The personal and financial misery of the unemployed is incalculable. The social costs will remain with us for a generation at least~that is, providing this Government goes at the next election. What do we find the Government doing about
this? Nothing. Despite the Prime Minister's 1975 promise to be generous to those out of work and provide jobs for all who want to work the reality is
that this Government is indifferent to the plight of the unemployed. It has not implemented job creation schemes. It has not implemented economic policies which will get the economy moving again and provide more employment opportunities. The Government has poured scorn on the recent job creation proposals of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. It has added insult to injury by branding the unemployed as undeserving bludgers.
It is particularly disturbing that the Government has done nothing to alleviate youth unemployment. In the past seven years the level of youth unemployment in Australia has reached appalling proportions~over 17 per cent this year. In my electorate of Canberra where the Fraser Government's maladministration immediately and directly takes effect the level of youth unemployment is over 30 per cent. This is a national disgrace. A whole generation of young Australians are being traumatised and probably scarred for life as a result of this callous disregard. The Budget contained no relief for our young unemployed, no job creation schemes and no

constructive proposals to restore economic growth. So much for the promise to create jobs and provide opportunities for all who want to work.
Let us now turn briefly to the promise to be generous to those seeking work. For the past seven years the level of unemployment benefit has been so low that recipients have been forced to live in poverty. The unemployment benefit is currently $58.10 a week. I am quite sure that nobody in this chamber could live on that amount. Yet, the Fraser Government expects 448,900 Australians to do so. I turn to economic growth. Mr Fraser's policy speech of 1975~~
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member will refer to the Prime Minister as such.
Mrs KELLY~The Prime Minister's policy speech of 1975 promised economic prosperity and growth. A 6 per cent to 7 per cent growth rate was then considered feasible. After seven years of economic decline we now have a Budget which forecasts no growth at all this year. It is over 20 years since the Australian economy has failed to grow for a whole year~the last time was the 1961 depression under the previous Liberal Menzies Government. After seven years of promises and hollow rhetoric we now find that the Australian economy has been brought to a halt by the bungling and mismanagement of this Government. The present no growth Budget forecast compared to the 1975 promise of a 6 per cent to 7 per cent growth rate illustrates the extraordinary level of incompetence of this Government. A further indication of the decline in the Australian economy as a result of the Prime Minister's policies is the ever-decreasing value of the Australian dollar. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development Economic Outlook for July 1982 shows that the Australian dollar's value has declined dramatically during the past seven years. This year, the Budget Papers show a drop in the trade weighted index from 30 June last year to 30 June this year of 5.1 per cent. This is hardly the picture of a country enjoying prosperity and growth as promised by the Prime Minister seven years ago. Australia is much worse off than most of its trading partners. This situation is the direct result of the Government's economic mismanagement.
Business profits are down also. The gross operating surplus of trading companies and financial enterprises shows a fairly stagnant result over the past seven years with a sudden and sharp drop in the past year. Inflation remains at double digit rates after seven years of this Government. No

1412 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Adjournment

matter which economic indicators are chosenprices, consumption, equipment investment, private dwelling construction activity-you name it, the economic forecasts are grim. Australia was once considered the lucky country; it is now one of the unluckiest after being subject to the mismanagement of this Government. The Budget Papers show that our economy is sliding backwards. The OECD average figure for growth in employment is much better than ours. Seven years ago in the World Bank ranking of per capita income Australia was the ninth richest nation; today we have dropped to sixteenth place after seven years of broken promises and seven Budgets. It is no good blaming the previous administration. Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Sir James Killen-I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed
Mrs KELLY-As politicians we in this House have a responsibility to recognise the effect that these policies are having on the individuals in this country and on Australian society. One must accept that seven years of these policies change society, alter values and reduce expectations. The traditional goal, that Australians own their own home, is now a shattered dream-shattered by a combination of high increases in house prices, record interest rates and trivial increases in after tax salaries. Young people have limited job opportunities which will scar them for life. Many of those who are lucky enough to hold jobs are terrified that they will become the next unemployment statistic. Families are under enormous strain as they struggle to meet increasing financial burdens. Many of the aged lose the dignity they deserve as they struggle to survive. Business confidence is shattered, with continued bankruptcy, depressed profits and record interest rates. Under this Government a priceless national asset has been lost. Taxpayer compliance and morality is now gone. The buck stops here, on the Government benches. The Government cannot keep blaming others-the Whitlam Government, the international situation. This Government has failed the people of Australia. This Government

has lied and this Government has now lost the confidence of the electorate. It no longer deserves to be the government of this country.
Debate (on motion by Mr Cadman) adjourned.
ADJOURNMENT
Department of Trade and Resources: Proposed Transfer of Trade Publicity Branch-Petroleum
Industry-Immigration-Hospital Staff Unions-Taxation Agents
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (IOA)-Tonight I wish to refer to some policies under consideration by the Department of Trade and Resources and to point out some of the dangers of those policies if carried out. These policies call for an increased effort in export promotion for resources while cutting back in the amount of export promotional support to the manufacturing sector. The Department apparently believes-despite the wealth of evidence of setbacks in this field-that resources are a better long term prospect than manufacturing. This is news which must astonish the manufacturing sector which employs the bulk of this country's work force. As part of these policies the Department is considering the transfer of its Trade Publicity Branch to Canberra from Melbourne where, if it remained, it would be permanently placed at the World Trade Centre. Such a transfer would be a blow to manufacturers, many of whom need exports to provide economies of scale to keep production lines at full capacity and to provide employment.
In these difficult times manufacturers need more assistance for exporting, not steps by government departments which could jeopardise export promotion of manufactured goods. The suggested transfer would reduce the services available at the World Trade Centre, remove vital publicity and promotional facilities from direct contact with a major manufacturing centre and take up to 70 jobs from the Victorian economy. The proposed move to Canberra is the latest in a series of decisions to remove technical Federal Government branches from the real world. Victoria employs more people in manufacturing than any other State. The proposal is part of a bureaucratic centralisation process which is not in the national interest. The transfer is unnecessary and will create a major loss of promotional expertise to industry.
Many of the facilities of the Branch are not located in Canberra or readily available there. After such a move the Branch would take several years, if at all, to recover lost efficiency. Facilities

Adjournment

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1413

available to the Branch in Melbourne include access to freight forwarders, shipping and an international airport, designers, printers, freelance journalists, artists and photographers and direct contact with manufacturing industry. This access is essential for manufacturers to receive a realistic, not an ivory tower, approach to their promotional needs.
The Trade Publicity Branch offers many services to manufacturers, including trade fairs and trade display support, with shipping coordination, advertising campaigns and publications and media promotion. its work has received world-wide acclaim. In the 10 months period from July 1981 the Department staged 35 overseas trade displays in 24 major cities. More than one million visitors saw the products of 733 Australian exhibitors who reported direct sales of $15.5m and negotiated sales of$114m.
The World Trade Centre in Melbourne is the obvious permanent location for the Trade Publicity Branch which is now located in Queens Road, Melbourne, awaiting the move to the centre. 1 emphasise that if the policies of cutting back on manufacturing export promotion and transferring the Branch to Canberra are carried out this will be a devastating blow to manufacturing industry and consequently to employment. 1 strongly seek an assurance from the Government that these policies will not be carried out and that Trade Publicity Branch will be located permanently at the World Trade Centre where it will have direct contact with both its suppliers and industry and also operate best in terms of cost and efficiency.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-1 call the honourable member for Franklin.
Opposition members-Oh, no!
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (10.7)-1 thank the Opposition for its wild acclaim. I know that it enjoys hearing me speak at this. time of night. The honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) said a heck of a lot about the Government but, unfortunately, she did not put up any positive suggestions on what we should do.
Sir James Killen-You cannot talk about that now.
Mr GOODLUCK-I can start off by saying anything that 1want to, can 1not? Tonight I wish to talk about the petroleum industry. I am very pleased that the present Tasmanian Government has called for an inquiry into the price of petrol in Hobart as compared with the price of petrol in Melbourne. I think it is long overdue.
Mr Groom-And the rest of Tasmania too.

Mr GOODLUCK-The inquiry will cover the rest of Tasmania too, as the honourable member for Braddon said. I know that this affects the north-west of Tasmania as much as it does Hobart and the surrounds of southern Tasmania. This is a very important issue. I believe the inquiry should go further. It is all very well to ask the Consumer Affairs Council of Tasmania to call for that inquiry but we had one like it before. It is very simple to indicate where the solution should be directed. The fact is that the maximum wholesale price of petrol in Tasmania has been charged for a long period. As a consequence the selling price has been much higher. I would like to see the inquiry go a lot further.
I now turn to the root of the problem. I have spent most of my life working in the petroleum industry. It is a dirty, intriguing and manipulative industry. Whilst I could direct a fair bit of blame for the problem towards the oil companies, at the moment I feel very sorry for them because they are under the attack from the trade union movement in every direction. They have their problems. It is not up to me tonight to criticise them unduly, but I am afraid that their marketing principles over the last seven years that I have been a member of parliament have been, if I may say so, completely without direction.
Mr Groom-Shocking.
Mr GOODLUCK-As the honourable member for Braddon said, shocking. The way in which the people who are employed in the industry-the brains which are available to the industry-have handled the marketing of petrol in Australia should be seen to be believed. It varies from State to State and from country area to country area. We have put ourselves as a government into a complexing situation with the people of Australia. At the moment they are paying a high price for petrol. They are starting to ask questions. They are starting to make comparisons between city and city and country and country. It is a very divisive issue. Just like the water we drink and the air we breath, petrol is a very essential commodity. It is a very important resource. It is very important to the industries of Australia. As the price of petrol increases there is an effect throughout the economy. It is something that we need. I have tried in my very gentle way to make inquiries at many levels.
Mr Coleman-They can't get any petrol in Sydney.
Mr GOODLUCK-There we are; people cannot get any petrol in Sydney. When people cannot get petrol in a city like Sydney pandemonium breaks out; people become bitter and nasty. We

1414 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Adjournment

talk about bitterness in this House, but it goes a lot further. Look at the explosive gentlemen on the other side of the House. Imagine them without petro\. They would explode. That is what is happening in Sydney. I would like to think that we as a government-and the Opposition can join in this too-could call for an inquiry into the price of petrol in Australia. I could give my undivided attention to such an inquiry. I am sure the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) and the honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman) would like to join in to find out the reasons that the price varies. Some members of the Opposition may want to join in too. I do not know whether they have the brains but they could try.
Mr Groom-The honourable member for Chisholm.
Mr GOODLUCK-The honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris) could join. So could the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay). We could look into the price of petrol in Australia and bring down a few recommendations.
Mr Groom-What about the honourable member for Burke?
Mr GOODLUCK-He would probably want to nationalise the whole industry, but that is his prerogative.
Dr Theophanous-Now you are talking.
Mr GOODLUCK-It is good to see him smiling for the first time in a couple of weeks. We can do those sorts of things. We could come back to this House with some recommendations that would be to the advancement of the nation.
Mr MAHER (Lowe) (10.12)-Tonight I raise a very important matter concerning one of my constituents, a lady who approached me in January when the seat of Lowe was actually vacant. She is Mrs Patricia Yip from Strathfield. Her problem is that her nephews and nieces and her brother-in-law are in the People's Republic of China and this Government says that this family cannot come to Australia unless it comes as a family unit. The Red Chinese, who are very close to the present Government, will not allow the breadwinner, the father, out of China because he is a valued operative; he is a trained man. The two eldest children have had approval from the Chinese communist Government to leave and to come to Australia.
My purpose in raising this in the national Parliament tonight with the approval of Mrs Yip is to try to get some action by this Government, by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr

Hodges), to allow Mrs Yip's nephews and nieces to come to Australia. These young people have visas to enter this country which expire at the end of the year. In January I wrote to my friend and colleague Senator A. J. Mulvihill and asked that this matter be referred to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. The senator forwarded letters to the Minister concerning a decision made by the Australian Embassy Migration Office in 1981 that the family could come only as a family unit.
I subsequently wrote to the Minister myself following my election in the month of March. I pointed out to him the worry of Mrs Yip and her concern to have her nephews and nieces and this family in Red China brought to Australia. Subsequently Mrs Yip has come to see me regularly because she is extremely worried that her family in Red China will not get to this country before their visas to leave China expire and then the whole tortuous process will have to be started again to get these young people out. In fact a third member of her family in Red China has just sat her university matriculation. If this young. lady obtains a place at a Chinese university she will not be allowed to leave the People's Republic of China to come to Australia. A second reason is emerging. Mrs Yip's sister, the mother of this family, who came to Australia as a refugee will soon be aged 60. Apparently when a person turns 60 her children are not allowed to leave the People's Republic of China.
I rise tonight to stress the urgency of this matter to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. I believe the Government has many close connections with the People's Republic of China. We witnessed this during the recent visit of the Dalai Lama to this Parliament, when no member of the Cabinet attended the reception organised by Senator Tate for this important and celebrated religious leader. I have rung the Minister's office; I have spoken to his parliamentary liaison officer about this matter on a number of occasions, but I have not made any headway.
I should not have to raise matters of this sort in the Parliament. But my constituent is totally exasperated by the delay on the part of the Department, the Minister and the Government. All normal patience has been exhausted. It is this Government that is cutting Public Service staff numbers and destroying morale. As a result government departments are no longer efficient. This is why I am raising this matter tonight. This lady has the worry of trying to get her nephews and nieces from a totalitarian regime into Australia. I hope that the Minister will sympathetically examine this matter and assist Mrs Yip in

Adjournment

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1415

her humanitarian gesture of reuniting her family here in a democratic society. I know that the Minister will have this matter examined. I trust that all of the applications will be expedited.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (1O.17)-On 17 November 1973 Leonard Jolley of Claremont wrote a letter and had it published in the West Australian newspaper. In that letter he said:
I do not know how Mr J. Dawkins will succeed with his strong arm tactics in forcing reluctant hospital workers to join his union.
I should however, like to congratulate him on one achievement. I have never in my life voted for any but a Labor candidate and am still a member of the Australian Labor Party. I do not see how I can possibly fail to change both my membership and my voting habits.
I have the greatest respect for hospital workers who carry out an essential task and who have not always been rewarded appropriately.
I consider that the strike earlier this year by such workers in Britain was probably justified, despite the great ethical problems introduced by a strike which inevitably brings about suffering to those who are already helpless.
I cannot understand why a union should be represented by a person who has had no experience at all of the work done by the workers he is alleged to represent. I doubt if Mr Dawkins would know what a bed pan was if somebody hit him over the head with one. Far be it from me to suggest illegal violence whatever Mr Dawkins may do.
Mr Dawkins, as far as I know, had a not particularly distinguished record as a student of the University of Western Australia and although his status as a student in 1972 and possibly 1973 seems a little curious, he has also been a member of the University Senate. In view of this fact I write this letter with considerable trepidation as he is one of my employers.
Surely, however, there is something seriously wrong when more than one union decides to take on ex-student politicians, sometimes with, sometimes without, an academic qualification as their organisers. If there is no worker to speak for the workers then something is seriously wrong with the trade union movement.
I just wonder whether anyone would be particularly concerned if that particular letter-
Mr ScottYou made that up.
Mr TUCKEY-Oh no. I did not make it up because it is part of the court record. The man who wrote that letter was a librarian at the University of Western Australia and suffered severely from the effects of rheumatic fever. The Mr Dawkins referred to sued this partly invalided person for libel and defamation in the courts of Western Australia. The sensitivity of the man to react in that fashion to that particular letter has to be seen to be believed. The interesting thing is that the jury took exactly 23 minutes to reject the defamation proceedings. They in fact awarded all costs against the applicant, Mr Dawkins. Of course, the Mr Dawkins I am referring to-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! Before the honourable member proceeds further, I caution him against reflecting on the

character of an honourable member of this House. He may do so only by way of a substantive motion. Thus far the Chair has not-
Mr TUCKEY-I do not believe that I have done that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member has been cautioned.
Mr TUCKEY-Mr Deputy Speaker, I was just about to identify the Mr Dawkins in those cases as the present honourable member for Fremantle. I introduced the subject not to discuss that issueyou are well aware, it is history-but to show how remarkable it is that one person can be so sensitive when he is concerned and yet stand in this Parliament and cut to pieces people who are unable to defend themselves in any way. We have witnessed this gentleman doing it. To be quite honest, I have been subject to some of his allegations myself. In a minute he will probably go over all the old ground again as the Labor Party has done for the last year. I think, having introduced that point, that we might just ask ourselves-my remarks, follow those of an honourable member who spoke previously today-where this wonderful association comes from. As I understand it most political parties can be joined for a very small fee and that creates membership.
Mr HoJding-You should get Good luck to tell you how to take yourself in hand.
Mr TUCKEY-The honourable member should not talk. Every time someone says 'corruption' he should leave this chamber.
Mr Scott-I take a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I understand that you cautioned the honourable member for reflecting on a member of this House. In the last 30 seconds he has continued in spite of the direction from you.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable member for Hindmarsh is in error. The Chair did not reprimand the honourable member. It cautioned him against committing a breach which he had not yet committed. The simple fact is that the honourable member was not in contravention of the Standing Orders, but I am required to ask the honourable member to withdraw the reflection that he made on the honourable member for Melbourne Ports.
Mr TUCKEY-I withdraw, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (10.22)-1 wish to raise a matter which has been brought to my attention by two of my constituents, Mr and

1416 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Adjournment

Mrs Bruneau of 39 Persic Street, Belfield. It relates to what I believe is a rather great injustice that has been done to these people. It is an injustice that they should not have to put up with. The Bruneaus have worked hard all their lives and for a number of years they had dealt, as had their relations, with a tax agent in submitting their income tax returns to the Australian Taxation Office. They had dealt with that tax agent for quite some time. They had received reasonable service from the man and they felt confident in their approaches to him. However, unfortunately for the Bruneaus, last year the taxation agent-a firm of accountants-went bankrupt. The Bruneaus then found out what occurred in the Australian Parliament through some amendments to the Bills of Exchange Act 1971, in particular the insertion of section 88D in that Act. The Australian Taxation Office had forwarded their tax rebate cheques, one for the sum of $2,188 and the other for the sum of $2,080.49, to the tax agent. The tax agent had subsequently endorsed their cheques. I have with me in the Parliament this evening a photocopy of the cheques that were returned to the Bruneaus after their collection by the Taxation Office. I have sought the permission of the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) to have incorporated in Hansard copies of the cheques together with letters that they received from the Taxation Office and from the bank's solicitors.
Leave granted.
The letters read as follows-
9/R/119602183
Mrs Joan Bruneau
Dear Madam,
INCOME TAX
A check made on receipt of your recent enquiry concerning a refund due to you for the year ended 30 June 19 shows that cheque No. 40184612 for $2,188.10 was forwarded on 20 April 1982 to C/o Mr W. T. Thornley, P.O. Box 41, Regents Park 2143.
The cheque was presented for payment on 21 April 1982 at A.N.Z. Banking Group Ltd, Auburn
If you have still not received the cheque and wish to enquire of us further in the matter you could contact our Cheque Presentation Section by telephoning 2390222 extension 216. If you write to us, please mark your letter for attention by the Cheque Presentation Section.
Yours faithfully, (F. E. TYPE)
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation

9/R/124 140859

Mr Joseph Bruneau

Dear Sir,

INCOME TAX

A check made on receipt of your recent enquiry concerning a refund due to you for the year ended 30 June 19 shows that cheque No. 40181049 for $2,080.49 was forwarded on 15
April 1982 to C/o Mr W. T. Thornley, P.O. Box 41, Regents Park 2143.

The cheque was presented for payment on 20 April 1982 at A.N.Z. Banking Group Ltd, Auburn

If you have still not received the cheque and wish to enquire of us further in the matter you could contact our Cheque Presentation Section by telephoning 239 0222 extension 216. If you write to us, please mark your letter for attention by the
Cheque Presentation Section.

Yours faithfullY,

(F. E. TYPE) Deputy Commissioner of Taxation

J. L. Bruneau, 39 Persic Street, BELFIELD, N.S.W. 2191.

31 st August, 1982.

Dear Mr. Bruneau,

Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited and Thornley (Auburn N.S.W. Branch)-cheque for $2,080.40 and your letter of 9th July, 1982.

We act for Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited and have been handed a copy of the above letter and have been asked to reply thereto.

On our instructions if the cheque was collected by the Bank
(which is not admitted) it was collected by the Bank in good faith and without negligence in circumstances which would entitle the Bank to the protection of Section 88D of the Bills of
Exchange Act.

Yours faithfully, GREAVES WANNAN & WILLIAMS

Per:

J. M. Bruneau, 39 Persic Street, BELFIELD, N.S.W. 2191.

31 st August, 1982.

Dear Mr. Bruneau,

Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited and Thornley (Auburn N.S.W. Branch)-cheque for $2,188.10 and your letter of 9th July, 1982.

We act for Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited and have been handed a copy of the above letter and
have been asked to reply thereto.

On our instructions if the cheque was collected by the Bank (which is not admitted) it was collected by the Bank in good faith and without negligence in circumstances which would
entitle the Bank to the protection of Section 88D of the Bills of Exchange Act.

Yours faithfully, GREAVES WANNAN & WILLIAMS

Per:

Mr LEO McLEAY-I thank the House. Their cheques were subsequently cashed by the Australian and New Zealand Banking Group at their Auburn New South Wales branch. The cheques

Adjournment

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1417

were not endorsed by the people who were entitled to them but by the tax agent. They went into the tax agent's account, the agent went bankrupt, in the meantime the money had been misappropriated and between them the Bruneaus are out of pocket to the extent of some $4,000. They then wrote to the ANZ Banking Group and said that they believed that the bank was in error in allowing their cheques to be collected when they had not signed them. Most normal people would take that approach. If one gets a cheque that one is supposed to endorse one would expect that someone could not collect on it without one's endorsement. However, the Bruneaus then got a letter back from the ANZ Banking Group which told them that it would seek protection under section 88D of the Bills of Exchange Act.
That section provides that:
Where-
(a) a banker, in good faith and without negligence-(i) receives payment for a customer of a cheque; or (ii) having credited a customer's account with the amount of a cheque, receives payment of the cheque for himself; and
(b) the customer has no title, or has a defective title, to the cheque,
the banker does not incur any liability to the true owner of the cheque by reason of having received payment of the cheque.
That section gives the bank absolute protection against this thief who stole these people's tax rebate cheque. The $4,000 was the only real asset that the Bruneau family had in the world. Because this crook taxation agent has had their cheques credited to his bank account, and has then cleared out the bank account, these people will receive nothing. The ANZ Bank has indicated to them that, if they wish to pursue the matter in the court, the Bank has a pretty big stake in this because of precedent and will pursue it as far as necessary. Of course, ordinary working people are absolutely daunted by that sort of talk because they cannot afford to mount those challenges. I

have no idea why the Parliament in 1971 resolved to take this decision to amend the Bills of Exchange Act, but I think the outcome of that amendment, as I pointed out in these circumstances tonight, has had a very grave effect on some of my constituents and no doubt on other people in Australia.
Once again, it highlights the necessity for an accountants' fidelity fund as exists for lawyers. In the past lawyers cleaned out their trust accounts and their clients went broke. Now accountants are doing it. Last week I brought to the attention of the Parliament a case of a taxation agent in Newtown who was robbing people in the same fashion. There is a need for the Government to give consideration to an accountant's or taxation agent's fidelity fund so that people do not have their life savings purloined from them in such a fashion and banks cannot look to Acts of Parliament to give them absolute protection from the machinations of these thieves. I commend to the Government that it looks to see what it can do to provide some type of protection for ordinary people in these circumstances.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. I inform the honourable member for Grayndler that the material for which he had leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard may present some technical difficulties for Hansard. The inclusion will depend on a resolution of those problems.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 10.28 p.m.
PAPER
The following paper was deemed to have been presented on 14 September 1982, pursuant to statute:
Lands Acquisition Act-Statement of lands acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (1).

1418 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Education Expenditure: Private Schools
(Question No. 3327)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
( I) What were the allocations by (a) the Commonwealth Government, (b) each State Government and (c) other sources, specifying major ones, for each of the various levels of (i) Catholic and (ii) other private schools in each year since 1970.
(2) What were the enrolments within each level for each year.
(3) What was the per capita spending in each category in (a) current and (b) real terms.
Mr Fife-The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Tables I to 9 provide the information sought for 1976, 1977 and 1979, the only years for which information on each of the major sources of direct expenditure on non-government schools is readily available, as a result of detailed surveys of individual non-government schools in those years. Separate details are provided for primary, secondary and mixed schools. Mixed schools are schools which enrol both primary and secondary students. It should be noted that expenditure shown here is recurrent expenditure only and is that which is directly allocated to non-government schools and excludes such indirect expenditure as scholarships and bursaries, transport, teacher education and funds relating to the operation of boarding facilities. Expenditure from private sources includes debt servicing. Information on capital expenditure can be obtained from Table 10.11 in the Report of the Commonwealth Schools Commission or the 1982-84 triennium.
(2) Enrolments corresponding to the years for which information is given in section (I) are shown in Table 10.
(3) Per capita expenditure is shown in Tables 11 to 19.
EXPLANATORY NOTES
(i) While in general non-government schools with high levels of income from private sources receive relatively lower levels of funding from the Commonwealth Government, exceptions may occur for the following reasons: prior to 1982, new non-systemic schools approved for funding were automatically placed in levels 6, 5, 4 and 3 successively in their first four years of operation. This principle was applied irrespective of resource levels to compensate for the high costs involved in establishing new schools. The method of providing additional support for new nongovernment schools was changed in the 1982 Guidelines, on the Commonwealth Schools Commission's advice, to the payment of supplementary establishment grants for the first four years of operation. exPenditure by the Commonwealth Government principally includes per capita recurrent grants which were distributed to six funding levels, but also includes other Commonwealth funds which were not distributed on this basis (see Explanatory Note (v) ).

in mixed schools the level of income and expenditure per student is strongly influenced by the relative proportions of primary and secondary students in the total enrolment. Care should therefore be exercised in comparing mixed schools with primary and secondary schools, and in comparing mixed schools in different subsidy levels.
(ii) Trends in "Private Sources" data may be influenced by the above-mentioned policy of placing new nonsystemic schools in levels 6, 5, 4 and 3 in the first four years of operation as well as by the fact that Catholic non-systemic schools were included in the "Other Schools" category in 1976 (see footnotes to Tables 1,2, 3, 10, II, 12 and 13). Also, expenditure from private sources excludes the value of contributed services (which is the difference between the notional salaries of teachers and other professional staff and actual salaries paid) though this is considered in the Commonwealth's assessment of non-government schools' subsidy levels. Contributed services on a per student basis are not always distributed evenly across subsidy levels.
(iii) In general the non-government schools in each State receive grants from the State Government at the same primary and secondary rate regardless of the school's classification for Commonwealth general recurrent grants (South Australia is an exception to this). There are two major reasons why the average State Government expenditure per student figures shown in Tables 11 to 19 may appear to depart from this underlying pattern:
per capita rates of payment differ from State to State and the proportional distribution of students by State differs from one funding level to another.
The average State government expenditure figures also include interest subsidies and, in the case of primary and mixed schools, grants in respect of preschool children where the pre-school is an integral part of the primary sector. Interest subsidies and pre-school grants are not evenly distributed across subsidy levels.
(iv) Commonwealth general recurrent grants for nongovernment schools in 1982 will be made on the basis of a scheme which compresses the existing six levels of subsidy to three. In 1982 schools and systems will be classified into one of three groups and will receive per capita grants as specified in the table below. The per capita rates were announced in 1982 outturn prices, but for comparability with other sections of this answer the rates are specified here in estimated December 1980 prices.

Answers to Questions

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1419

1982 PER CAPITA SUBSIDIES PAYABLE TO NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS AND
PERCENTAGES OF AVERAGE GOVERNMENT SCHOOL STANDARD COSTS
(Est. December 1980 $) (a)

(a) The rates actually payable in 1982 were announced in 1982 outturn price levels, and hence differ from these rates.

Group
I 2 3

Primary Secondary

Percentage of average
Government school
standard costs

$

$

253

410

379

615

480

779

% 20 30 (b)38

(b) In 1983, these grants will increase to 40 per cent of average government school standard costs.
(v) Other Commonwealth recurrent assistance to nongovernment schools in 1982 (English as a Second Language, Disadvantaged Schools and Special Education Programs) to the six States and the Northern Territory amounts to $25.6m (1982 outturn price levels).

Table I
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE IN NON-GOVERNMENT PRIMARY SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1976
(i) Current Prices.

$m Funding level

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

Catholic Schools(a)Private sources
State Governments
Commonwealth Government

22.1

22.1

31.6

31.6

66.5

66.5

Total

120.2 120.2

Other Schools(b)Private sources
State Governments
Commonwealth Government

1.9

1.2

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.6

4.8

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.7

1.7

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.2

1.4

2.5

Total

2.4

1.7

1.0

0.7

0.4

2.7

8.9

(ii) Constant Prices-(est. December 1980 $) Catholic Schools(a)-
Private sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

31.0

31.0

44.4

44.4

93.3

93.3

Total

168.7 168.7

Other Schools(b)Private sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

2.7

1.7

0.8

0.5

0.2

0.8

6.8

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.1

1.0

2.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.3

2.0

3.5

Total

3.4

2.4

1.4

1.0

0.6

3.8

12.6

(a) Catholic systemic schools only. (b) Includes Catholic non-systemic schools. Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and total are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.

1420 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Table 2 RECURRENT EXPENDITURE IN NON-GOVERNMENT SECONDARY SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL
AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1976 (i) Current Prices.
$m Funding level

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

Catholic Schools(a)Private sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

9.3

9.3

13.0

13.0

23.5

23.5

Total

45.7

45.7

Other Schools(b)Private sources
State Governments
Commonwealth Government

3.0

2.7

4.2

2.0

1.6

7.8

21.3

0.4

0.7

1.2

0.8

1.0

9.7

13.8

0.2

0.5

1.3

1.0

1.5

18.1

22.7

Total

3.7

3.9

6.8

3.8

4.2

35.5

57.7

(ii) Constant Prices-(est. December 1980$) Catholic Schools(a)-
Private sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

13.0

13.0

18.2

18.2

32.9

32.9

Total

64.2

64.2

OtherSchools(b)Private sources
State Governments
Commonwealth Government

4.2

3.8

5.9

2.8

2.2

10.9

29.9

0.6

0.9

1.7

1.1

1.5

13.6

19.3

0.3

0.7

1.8

1.4

2.2

25.4

31.8

Total

5.1

5.5

9.5

5.3

5.8

49.8

81.0

(a) Catholic systemic schools only. (b) Includes Catholic non-systemic schools. Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 3 RECURRENT EXPENDITURE IN NON-GOVERNMENT MIXED(a) SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND
SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1976 (i) Current Prices
$m Funding level

Catholic Schools(b)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other Schools(c)Private Sources State Governments

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

4.9

4.9

6.0

6.0

11.4

11.4

22.2

22.2

49.7

39.3

9.9

4.4

3.6

7.1

113.9

8.0

7.7

2.3

1.4

2.0

7.1

28.4

Answers to Questions

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 1421

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

Commonwealth Government

4.8

6.3

2.5

1.8

3.3

13.7

32.4

Total

62.4

53.3

14.7

7.6

8.9

27.8

174.7

(ii) Constant Prices (est. December 1980 $)
Catholic Schools(b)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

6.8

6.8

8.4

8.4

15.9

15.9

Total

31.1

31.1

Other Schools(c)Private Sources
State Governments
Commonwealth Government

69.7

55.1

13.9

6.1

5.0

9.9

159.9

11.2

10.8

3.2

1.9

2.9

9.9

39.8

6.7

8.9

3.5

2.6

4.6

19.2

45.4

Total

87.6

74.8

20.6

10.7

12.5

39.0 245.1

(a) Schools which enrol both primary and secondary students. (b) Catholic systemic schools only. (c) Includes Catholic non-systemic schools. Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 4
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE IN NON-GOVERNMENT PRIMARY SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA,1977
(i) Current Prices
$m Funding level

2

3

4

Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources
State Governments Commonwealth Government

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.1

Total

0.2

0.3

Other Schools-
Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

2.3

1.4

0.5

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.2

0.2

Total

2.8

2.1

1.0

0.5

(ii) Constant Prices- (est. December 1980 $)
Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

Total

0.2

0.4

Other Schools-
Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

2.9

1.8

0.7

0.3

0.5

0.5

0.3

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.3

0.2

Total

3.6

2.6

1.2

0.7

Notes: (I) Wherever .. occurs the amount is less than $50,000. (2) Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding.
Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.

All

5

6 levels

28.6

28.8

38.2

38.3

76.7

76.9

0.1

143.5

144.0

0.3

0.8

5.4

0.1

0.5

1.7

0.2

1.0

2.0

0.5

2.2

9.1

36.7

37.0

49.1

49.2

98.7

98.8

0.1

184.4

185.1

0.3

1.0

7.0

0.1

0.6

2.1

0.2

1.3

2.6

0.7

2.9

11.7

1422

REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Answers to Questions

TableS
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE IN NON-GOVERNMENT SECONDARY SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1977

(i) Current Prices

$m Funding level

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources
State Governments
Commonwealth Government

0.1

0.9

0.9

1.2

22.4

25.4

0.5

0.5

0.9

27.2

29.2

0.5

0.7

1.3

48.2

50.8

Total

0.2

\.9

2.0

3.5

97.8

105.4

Other SchoolsPrivate Sources
State Governments
Commonwealth Government

4.4

3.0

3.6

0.6

1.3

0.8

13.6

0.7

0.7

1.0

0.3

0.5

0.3

3.4

0.4

0.6

1.2

0.3

0.6

0.4

3.4

Total

5.5

4.2

5.7

1.2

2.4

1.4

20.4

(ii) Constant Prices-(est. December 1980 $)
Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

0.2

1.2

l.l

1.5

28.7

32.7

0.1

0.6

0.6

1.2

35.0

37.5

0.1

0.7

0.9

1.7

62.0

65.3

Total

0.3

2.4

2.6

4.4

125.7

135.5

Other SchoolsPrivate Sources
State Governments
Commonwealth Government

5.7

3.8

4.6

0.8

1.6

1.0

17.4

0.9

0.9

1.2

0.3

0.6

0.3

4.3

0.5

0.7

1.5

0.4

0.8

0.5

4.4

Total

7.0

5.4

7.3

1.5

3.1

1.8

26.2

Notes: (I) Wherever .. occurs the amount is less than $50,000. (2) Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding.
Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.

Table 6
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE IN NON-GOVERNMENT MIXED'" SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA 1977
(i) Current Prices
$m Funding level

Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Gover'lJlents

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

3.1

l.l

1.8

3.1

14.6

23.8

0.9

0.4

0.8

2.0

14.6

18.7

0.6

0.5

l.l

3.2

28.2

33.6

4.6

2.0

3.7

8.3

57.5

76.1

54.9

41.5

10.3

2.5

0.7

0.3

110.1

9.4

8.4

2.4

0.7

0.3

0.1

21.3

Answers to Questions

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1423

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

Commonwealth Government

5.8

7.3

2.8

1.0

0.4

0.4

17.6

Total

70.0

57.2

15.5

4.1

1.4

0.7

149.0

(ii) Constant Prices-(est. Dec. 1980 $)
Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

4.0

1.5

2.4

4.0

18.8

30.6

1.2

0.5

1.0

2.6

18.8

24.1

0.8

0.6

1.4

4.1

36.3

43.2

Total

6.0

2.6

4.8

10.7

73.9

97.9

Other SchoolsPrivate Sources
State Governments
Commonwealth Government

70.5

53.3

13.3

3.2

0.9

0.3

141.6

12.1

10.8

3.1

0.9

0.3

0.2

27.4

7.4

9.4

3.5

1.2

0.5

0.5

22.6

Total

90.0

73.5

19.9

5.3

1.8

1.0

191.5

(a) Schools which enrol both primary and secondary students. Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 7
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE IN NON-GOVERNMENT PRIMARY SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1979
(i) Current Prices.
$m Funding level

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

Catholic Schools-

Private Sources

0.1

State Governments

0.1

Commonwealth Government

0.1

Total

0.3

Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments
Commonwealth Government

2.3

1.3

l.l

0.9

0.4

0.2

0.3

0.5

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.6

Total

3.1

1.8

1.7

2.1

(ii) Constant Prices- (est. Dec. 1980 $)

Catholic Schools-

Private Sources

0.2

State Governments

0.1

Commonwealth Government

0.1

Total

0.3

Other SchoolsPrivate Sources
State Governments Commonwealth Government

2.6

1.5

1.2

1.0

0.5

0.3

0.3

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.4

0.7

Total

3.5

2.1

1.9

2.3

r

Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.

;,

0.3

32.6

33.0

0.1

51.8

52.0

0.2

100.9

\0\.2

0.6

185.3

186.2

0.7

l.l

7.4

0.2

0.8

2.5

0.3

1.5

3.4

1.2

3.5

13.4

0.3

36.8

37.3

0.2

58.5

58.7

0.3

113.9

114.2

0.7

209.2

210.2

0.8

1.2

8.4

0.3

1.0

2.9

0.3

1.7

3.8

1.4

3.9

15.1

1424 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Answers to Questions

TableS RECURRENT EXPENDITURE IN NON-GOVERNMENT SECONDARY SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL
AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA,1979 (i) Current Prices
$m Funding level

Catholic SchoolsPri vate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
(ii) Constant Prices-(est. Dec. 1980 $) Catholic Schools-
Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

0.2

0.6

I.7

37.0

39.5

0.1

0.4

1.0

40.0

41.5

0.1

0.6

1.4

66.2

68.2

0.3

I.7

4.2

143.2

149.3

5.5

2.1

5.3

1.6

0.9

0.9

16.3

1.0

0.5

1.5

0.6

0.4

0.7

4.7

0.7

0.5

1.6

0.8

0.5

1.0

5.1

7.2

3.0

8.5

3.0

1.8

2.6

26.1

0.2

0.7

2.0

41.8

44.6

0.1

0.5

1.1

45.1

46.8

0.1

0.6

1.6

74.7

77.1

0.3

1.9

4.7

161.6

168.6

6.2

2.3

6.0

1.8

1.0

1.0

18.4

1.1

0.6

I.7

0.7

0.4

0.7

5.3

0.8

0.5

1.8

0.9

0.6

1.1

5.8

8.1

3.4

9.6

3.4

2.0

2.9

29.5

Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 9 RECURRENT EXPENDITURE IN NON-GOVERNMENT MIXED'" SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND
SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1979 (i) Current Prices
$m Funding level

Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

2.8

1.4

0.8

2.5

20.1

27.6

0.8

0.5

0.3

1.3

20.7

23.7

0.7

0.5

0.4

2.1

35.1

38.8

4.3

2.4

1.5

5.9

75.9

90.1

49.1

52.5

18.7

3.5

0.9

1.4

126.2

9.8

12.4

5.0

1.2

0.3

0.9

29.6

Answers to Questions

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1425

All

2

3

4

5

6

levels

Commonwealth Government

7.3

12.1

5.3

1.4

0.4

1.7

28.2

Total . . . . . .

66.2

77.1

29.0

6.1

1.6

4.0

184.0

(ii) Constant Prices- (est. Dec. 1980 $)
Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments . . . Commonwealth Government

3.2

1.6

0.9

2.9

22.7

31.2

0.9

0.6

0.4

1.5

23.4

26.7

0.8

0.6

0.5

2.3

39.6

43.8

Total ..

4.9

2.7

1.7

6.7

85.7

101.7

Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments . . .
Commonwealth Government

55.5

59.3

21.2

4.0

1.0

1.6

142.5

11.1

14.0

5.6

1.3

0.3

1.1

33.4

8.2

13.7

6.0

1.5

0.5

2.0

31.9

Total . . . . . .

74.8

87.0

32.8

6.8

1.8

4.6

207.8

(a) Schools which enrol both primary and secondary students. . Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 10 ENROLMENTS IN NON-GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL, AUSTRALIA, 1976, 1977 and 1979
PRIMARY

Funding level

1976
Catholic (a)

Other (b)

1977 Catholic

I

2,253

2

2,189

3

1,766

288

4

1,376

458

5

750

106

6

272,704

6,257 278,511

All levels

272,704

14,591 279,363

SECONDARY

I

2,146

2

3,200

209

3

6,223

2,097

4

3,816

2,288

5

4,949

3,854

6

63,291

49,272 116,101

All levels

63,291

69,606 124,549

MIXED'"

I

43,102

2

42,678

3,580

3

13,650

2,()97

4

8,342

4,088

5

11,675

9,728

6

36,774

41,995

76,577

All levels

36,774 161,442

96,070

(a) Catholic systemic schools only. (b) Includes Catholic non-systemic schools. (c) Schools which enrol both primary and secondary students.

1979

Other
2,479 2,238 1,514
873 744 3,784
11,632

Catholic
299 811 285,105 286,214

2,916 2,930 4,295 1,012 1,847 1,043
14,043

214 1,574 3,418 130,022
135,228

43,324 39,810 12,333
3,556 1,391 1,021
101,435

2,630 1,792 1,302 5,182 79,183
90,089

Other
2,183 1,461 1,786 2,610 1,149 4,663
13,851
3,040 1,590 4,950 2,173 1,256 1,990
14,999
34,627 45,200 19,207
4,379 1,273 3,731
108,416

1426 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Note: Part-time students are expressed as full-time equivalents, and any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding.
Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 11
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE PER STUDENT IN NON-GOVERNMENT PRIMARY SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1976
(i) Current Prices
($ per student) Funding level

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

Catholic Schools"'Private Sources State Governments
Commonwealth Government

81

81

116

116

244

244

Total

441

441

Other schools'bIPrivate Sources
State Governments Commonwealth Government

853

568

318

261

228

89

330

123

107

III

114

117

113

114

84

97

140

166

250

225

169

Total

1,060

772

570

541

595

428

613

(ii) Constant Prices-(est. Dec. 1980 $)
Catholic Schools"'Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

113

113

163

163

342

342

Total

618

618

Other Schools'bIPrivate Sources State Governments
Commonwealth Government

1,197

798

447

366

320

125

463

172

150

156

160

164

159

160

118

136

196

233

350

316

238

Total

1,487

1,083

799

760

834

600

861

(a) Catholic systemic schools only. (b) Includes Catholic non-systemic schools. Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.

Table 12.
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE PER STUDENT IN NON-GOVERNMENT SECONDARY SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1976
(i) Current Prices.
($ per student) Funding level

Catholic Schools(a)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other Schools(b)Private Sources State Governments

All

2

3

4

5

6

levels

147

147

205

205

371

371

723

723

1,398

851

680

522

319

158

306

196

207

197

199

210

196

198

Answers to Questions

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1427

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

Commonwealth Government

114

163

209

264

312

367

326

Total

1,707

1,221

1,085

985

842

720

830

(ii) Constant Prices-(est. Dec. 1980$)
Catholic Schools(a)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

206

206

288

288

520

520

Total

1,014

1,014

Other Schools(b)Private Sources State Governments
Commonwealth Government

1,961

1,195

954

732

448

221

429

275

290

276

279

295

275

278

160

229

293

371

438

515

458

Total

2,396

1,714

1,523

1,382

11181

1,011

1,164

(a) Catholic systemic schools only. (b) Includes Catholic non-systemic schools. Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 13
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE PER STUDENT IN NON-GOVERNMENT MIXED(a) SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1976
(I) Current Prices.
($ per student) Funding level

2

Catholic Schools(a)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

Total

Other Schools(b)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

1,153

921

185

179

110

148

Total

1,447

1,248

(ii) Constant Prices-(est. Dec. 1980$)
Catholic Schools(a)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

Total

Other Schools(b)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

1,618 259 155

11292 252 208

Total

2,031

1,752

(a) Schools which enrol both primary and secondary students. (b) Catholic systemic schools only. (c) Includes Catholic non-systemic schools.

3
727 166 182 1,075
1,020 232 256
1,508

4
523 166 221 910
734 233 310 1,277

5
308 175 282 764
432 245 395 1,072

All 6 levels

132

132

162

162

309

309

603

603

169

706

169

176

325

200

662

1,082

185

185

227

227

434

434

846

846

237

990

236

247

456

281

930

1,518

1428 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 14 RECURRENT EXPENDITURE PER STUDENT IN NON-GOVERNMENT PRIMARY SCHOOLS BY
FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1977 (i) Current Prices.
($ per student) Funding level

Catholic Schools(a)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other Schools(b)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
(ii) Constant Prices-(est. Dec. 1980 $) Catholic Schools(a)-
Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other Schools(b)Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

267

335

192

103

103

139

121

115

137

137

152

182

212

276

275

558

638

519

515

515

909

629

345

267

361

200

468

144

164

132

149

139

133

143

85

123

159

182

209

257

173

1,138

916

635

599

710

590

784

343

431

247

132

133

179

155

147

176

176

195

234

273

354

354

718

820

667

662

662

1,168

809

443

344

465

256

601

184

210

169

192

179

171

183

110

158

204

234

269

331

223

1,463 1,178

816

769

912

758 1,007

Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 15. RECURRENT EXPENDITURE PER STUDENT IN NON-GOVERNMENT SECONDARY SCHOOLS BY
FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1977 (i) Current Prices.
($ per student) Funding level

Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

664

428

372

308

193

204

190

235

220

242

234

234

193

244

296

347

415

408

1,047

907

888

897

842

846

1,508 1,009

829

618

688

720

966

235

244

224

260

259

247

240

Answers to Questions

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 1429

Commonwealth Government
Total
(ii) Constant Prices-test. Dec. 1980 $) Catholic Schools-
Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total

127 1,870

2 193 1,446

3 268 1,321

4 296 1,175

5 350 1,297

6 398 1,364

All levels
246 1,451

1,939 302 164
2,404

854 245 248
1,346
1,297 3\3 248
1,858

550 302 314
1,166
1,065 288 345
1,699

479 282 381
1,142
795 335 381
1,510

396 311 447
1,154
884 334 449
1,667

248 301 534
1,083
925 317 512
1,754

263 301 524
1,088
1,241 308 316
1,865

Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 16 RECURRENT EXPENDITURE PER STUDENT IN NON-GOVERNMENT MIXED(a) SCHOOLS BY
FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1977 ( I) Current Prices.
($ per student) Funding level

2

3

4

Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments
Commonwealth Government

871

546

449

252

196

190

172

222

265

Total

1,295

964

904

Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments
Commonwealth Government

1,267

1,041

838

692

217

211

195

202

133

184

223

272

Total

1,616

1,436

1,256

1,165

(ii) Constant Prices-test. Dec. 1980 $)
Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

1,120

703

577

324

252

244

221

285

341

Total

1,665

1,240

1,162

Other SchoolsPrivate Sources
State Governments Commonwealth Government

1,628

1,339

1,077

889

279

271

250

260

171

237

287

349

Total

2,078

1,846

1,614

1,498

(a) Schools which enrol both primary and secondary students. Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.

5
321 206 328 855
521 195 291 1,007
413 265 422 1,100
670 250 374 1,295

All 6 levels

191

248

191

195

369

350

750

792

260

1,086

131

210

343

173

734

1,469

245

319

246

251

474

449

965

1,019

334

1,396

169

270

441

223

944

1,888

1430 REPRESENTATIVES 14 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Table 17 RECURRENT EXPENDITURE PER STUDENT IN NON-GOVERNMENT PRIMARY SCHOOLS BY
FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1979 (i) Current Prices.
($ per student) Funding level

Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
(ii) Constant Prices-(est. Dec. 1980$) Catholic Schools-
Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

495

316

114

115

176

169

182

182

235

274

354

353

905

759

650

650

1,056

901

606

354

597

237

535

203

157

167

184

207

182

183

142

188

188

254

252

329

246

1,402 1,246

961

792 1,056

748

965

559

356

198

191

265

309

1,022

857

1,192 1,017

684

229

177

189

161

213

212

1,582 1,406 1,085

400

674

208

233

286

284

894 1,192

129

130

205

205

399

399

734

734

267

605

206

207

372

278

845 1,089

Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 18 RECURRENT EXPENDITURE PER STUDENT IN NON-GOVERNMENT SECONDARY SCHOOLS BY
FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1979 (i) Current Prices
($ per student) Funding level

Catholics SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government
Total
Other SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

838

412

507

284

292

266

283

292

308

307

311

358

420

509

505

1,415 1,053 1,219 1,101 1,104

1,806 1,291 1,079

727

697

460 1,084

328

318

310

297

312

333

316

Answers to Questions

14 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1431

All

2

3

4

5

6 levels

Commonwealth Government

233

296

325

358

420

504

340

Total

2,367

1,905

1,714

1,382

1,428

1,297

1,739

(ii) Constant Prices-(est. Dec. 1980$)
Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

946

466

572

321

330

300

319

330

347

346

351

404

474

575

570

Total

1,597

1,189

1,376

1,243

1,246

Other Schools-
Private Sources
State Governments Commonwealth Government

2,039

1,458

1,219

820

787

519

1,224

371

359

350

335

352

376

357

263

334

366

404

474

569

384

Total

2,673

2,151

1,936

1,560

1,613

1,464

1,964

Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Table 19
RECURRENT EXPENDITURE PER STUDENT IN NON-GOVERNMENT MIXED(a) SCHOOLS BY FUNDING LEVEL AND SOURCE OF FUNDS, AUSTRALIA, 1979
(i) Current Prices
($ per student) Funding Level

2

3

4

Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources
State Governments Commonwealth Government

1,067

777

580

310

272

252

277

299

328

Total

1,653

1,348

1,160

Other Schools-
Private Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

1,419

1,162

976

803

283

275

260

267

210

268

276

313

Total

1,913

1,705

1,512

1,383

(ii) Constant Prices- (est. Dec. 1980 $)
Catholic SchoolsPrivate Sources State Governments Commonwealth Government

1,205

877

655

350

308

284

312

338

370

Total

1,867

1,522

1,309

Other SchoolsPrivate Sources
State Governments Commonwealth Government

1,603

1,313

1,102

907

320

310

294

302

238

302

312

353

Total

2,160

1,925

1,707

1,561

(a) Schools which enrol both primary and secondary students. Note: Any discrepancies between sums of components and totals are due to rounding. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission.

5
488 259 399 1,146
675 214 329 1,218
551 293 450 1,294
762 242 372 1,375

6
254 261 443 958
369 251 465 1,085
287 295 500 1,082
417 283 525 1,225

All levels
307 263 431 1,000
1,164 273 260
1,697
346 296 487 1,129
1,314 308 294
1,916


