House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 130, 1982 Thursday, 9 December 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Questions without Notice

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3239

Thursday, 9 December 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers.
AUSTRALIA-NEW ZEALAND CLOSER ECONOMIC RELATIONS
Notice of Motion
Mr MILTON (La Trobe)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House expresses concern about th~ proposed Australia-New Zealand Closer Economic Relatiolls Agreement and calls on the Commonwealth Government to provide protection for smali businesses such as Artex Leat hergoods Co., of Ferntree Gully, Victoria, whi~h wi!! be forced to retrench 80 employees as a result of the foreign competition.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
BANKING
Mr WILLIS--I address my question to the Treasurer. Has the Government approved the issue of licences to a number of foreign banks to conduct banking business in Australia? If so, to which banks and on what terms? Has the Treasurer or the Government also approved the issue of a licence to a new domestic bank? When does the Treasurer propose to make a full statement to the Parliament on the Government's policy in this area?
Mr HOWARD-As I think the honourable member for Gellibrand would be aware, it has been the long..standing policy until now of successive Australian governments not to allow, in the issuing of licences for new banks to carryon banking business in Australia or other foreign investment approval, any increase in the total level of foreign ownership and participation in the Australian banking system. As a result of that policy no licences have been issued to foreign banks under the Banking Act. Indeed, the continuation of that policy was reaffirmed at the time of the merger of the Bank of Adelaide with the Australia
or and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. However,
the Campbell Commitlee Inquiry into the Australian Financial System recommended that that policy should change and gave a number of very cogent reasons. I have put certain recommendations of a firm nature to the Government and I would expect that those recommendations will be considered by the Government in the very near future. If a change of policy arises out of that consideration I will be announcing that on behalf of the Government. But until those recommendations have been considered by the Government I do not propose, for reasons which I am sure the honourable gentleman and the House will under-

stand, to canvass the merits of the arguments for
and against except. to note that there has been very widespread debate about this issue. I think
there is a general consensus in the community that
a more competitive banking system would be to the benefit of the. entire Australian community.

SOUTH WEST TASMANIA

Mr SPENDER-My question is addressed to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. The Minister in his statement yesterday said:

Whilst fraser Cave and other caves of archaeological sig-

nificance wiil be flooded by the dan:, let me assure the House

that every endeavour will be made to preserve this important

part of our heritage.

-

I ask the Minister two questions: Firstly, under what depth of water will these caves be flooded? Secondly, how are they to be both flooded and preserved?

Mr McVEIGH-The answer to the first part of the question is 50 metres. As to the answer to the second part of the question, as a lawyer the honourable member will be fully aware of statutory interpretation. Each word is indicated to have a specific meaning and each word must be qUOled in its context. The words I used were 'caves of archaeological significance'. I am advised that the caves as such are limestone caves and not significant as caves. What is important is the archaeological information contained therein. The caves will not be flooded for a period of 10 years. We have indicated to the Tasmanian Government that, as the national Government, we are prepared to co-operate with it in manpower and technical resources, using modern approved archaeological technologies which allow all the archaeological specimens to be taken from the caves in the same manner as archaeological operations are conducted overseas. Honourable
members opposite obviously know very little about archaeology. The specimens are taken from their site. They are catalogued and then transported to a laboratory for examination. These ai'e approved methods overseas.

Fortunately, the Liberal-National Party
Government is aware of how to do things in a
practical sense as opposed to the theoreticians on the opposite side of the House. Quite frankly, they still believe that milk really comes out of the bot-
tle! They cannot understand that modern ap-
proved archaeological techniques are available in this instance. The Government will be pursuing
this matter with the Tasmanian Government over the next 10 years in order to ensure that these archaeological artefacts, which indicate the
development of our civilisation and traditional

3240 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Questions without Notice

culture, will be preserved in a practical sense rather than in a theoretical sense as advocated by people who, quite frankly, do not know their left hand from their right hand.
SOUTH WEST TASMANIA
Mr WEST-Does the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment accept that Commonwealth power to stop the Gordon below Franklin dam does exist, as outlined in the advice of the Attorney-GeneraJ's Department to him and to the Government? If he accepts that that power exists, how can he justify this Government's refusal to accept Australia's clear, moral, national and international legal obligations to prevent this damaging project from proceeding?
Mr McVEIGH-I advise the honourable member for Cunningham that the Government had a great deal of legal information available to it. As I indicated in a previous reply in this House, following a question asked by the honourable member for Braddon, when dealing in a Commonwealth situation legal authority is not necessarily the only basis on which a government makes up its mind. The Attorney-GeneraJ's report, which, I understand, fell off the back of a utility and which was tabled in this Parliament by the honourable member for Cunningham, dealt specifically with the Commonwealth Government's responsibilities under the convention which it has ratified. That advice also had a qualification in it in that it indicated that the Commonwealth Government also had to make decisions appropriate to the arrangements that exist in a Federal-State relationship.
As you would know, Mr Speaker, we also have responsibilities under the Constitution. There are legal rights of the States and legal rights of the Commonwealth. We, therefore, were faced with a situation in which we had to make a decision between our rights and responsibilities under a convention wherein the main emphasis was on our ability to make a best endeavours offer to the State to ensure that there were available alternatives and, against that, the sovereign responsibility of the State to manageits own land matters. Quite obviously, the Government had to make a decision on which was the appropriate way in which to operate. On balance, as I said yesterday--
Mrs Child-You will fall off that fence in a minute.
Mr McVEIGH-The honourable member wants to be--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will continue with his answer and ignore the interjection.

Mr McVEIGH-On balance, in this situation we believed it was appropriate to make a decision bearing in mind the responsibilities of the Commonwealth Government and the States.
SALE OF DEFENCE EQUIPMENT
Mr JULL-I refer the Minister for Defence Support to reports in Australia regarding his recent visit to South East Asia. Was the trip primarily made with a view to selling defence equipment? If so, to which countries are sales likely to be made? What type of equipment are these countries interested in buying? Would such sales have any effect on employment in the Australian defence industries?
Mr VINER-If I can make a successful follow-up to the trip to South East Asia, it can have important employment consequences for the defence industries, both government and private, in Australia. I visited Indonesia, Singapore, the Philippines and Thailand. I talked to political leaders, defence leaders and, particularly, the logistics personnel and factory personnel in each of those countries. As well, I visited a number of the defence industries in each of those countries. Very clearly, there are wide opportunities for Australian defence-oriented industries in each of those countries.
There is within the Association of South East Asian Nations a distinct movement towards standardisation of military equipment. Each of those countries was very keen to look towards Australia as a source of supply-both to diversify its own sources of supply and to diminish its dependence on North America and Europe. One of the points that was very forceably made in almost every country was that Australia had not publicised its own capabilities or the level of its own technologies in this area. Quite clearly, there is a job to be done to let each of those countries know what our Government and private enterprise factories can do and the level of scientific and technical expertese that we have here. The type of equipment that it might be possible to sell goes right across the range. There will be certain types of equipment that, for reasons of security or foreign relations, we could not sell in that region, as we do not sell them in other parts of the world.
There is a real job to be done, I can inform the honourable member for Bowman, to take advantage of the very clear opportunities which lie within those countries. I think also that my experience there complements the experience of the Acting Prime Minister at the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Conference, from which he came home saying that Australia must pay more attention to trade opportunities in the

Questions without Notice

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3241

Pacific Basin. Those of us who are able to travel to South East Asia see there a region of dynamic economic development, great activity to lift the standard of living and increase the economic capacity of each of those countries, and very large and young populations. Therefore, it seems to me that over the next 20 years and beyond Australia has to pay much more attention to the South East Asian region and the Pacific Basin than perhaps it has done in the past. We cannot be insular or inward looking in either our manufacturing or trade areas, be they civilian or defence oriented. We must be prepared to look outward beyond the shores of Australia, to widen our markets and to create greater opportunities for industry and for our work force.
AUSTRALIAN DAIRY CORPORATION
Mr KERIN-My question is directed to the Acting Minister for Primary Industry. Was an agreement signed on 20 September 1981 between the Australian Dairy Corporation and P.T. Kebun Bunga for the purchase of the ADC's 50 per cent shareholding in P.T. Indomilk for $10m? Did a meeting of shareholders of P.T. Indomilk, held on 24 November 1981, take no action on the transfer of shares because the Minister for Primary Industry had instructed the Australian Dairy Corporation not to proceed? Did the heads of agreement, signed on 20 September 1981, disable the Minister for Primary Industry from preempting procedures to obtain necessary approvals within the regulatory constraints imposed by Indonesian authorities? As a result of the Minister's interference in a commercial transaction, did the ADC enter into a further agreement to sell the same shares for $4.5m to another party, a loss to the dairy industry of $5.5m? What stage has been reached in the sale of the ADC's share in P.T. Indomilk? Is it a fact that the ramification of the bungle is that the future of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd is in doubt?
Mr HUNT-Surely the honourable member for Werriwa would not expect an immediate answer to such a complex question. I will ensure that the question is referred to the Minister on his return.
COASTAL SURVEILLANCE
Mr KATTER-I direct my question to the Minister for Transport and Construction. The situation with regard to the surveillance of our coastline and offshore approaches, particularly in the north, is of considerable concern to all Australians, particularly to those of us who live in the north in the more vulnerable and involved areas. Can the Minister inform the House of the

measures that the Government is taking to provide effective and continuing surveillance operations?
Mr HUNT-As the honourable member for Kennedy will know, the interdepartmental committee of review on coastal surveillance has reported to the Government after having reviewed the operation of coastal surveillance from north-west Western Australia to Cairns. A number of tenders were received for the renewal of contracts for some legs or sections of those contracts that had expired. The tender review board made recommendations to the Government. Those recommendations were accepted in respect of a number of legs where those contracts had to be renewed. In regard to the other two principal areas, firstly, in the Great Barrier Reef surveillance area, which is of tremendous importance to the preservation of the integrity of the reef, it is a service that has been operated by Reprographic Services (Australia) Pty Ltd. It is a service that has used the Nomad aircraft with Litton-type radar equipment which gives a 360 degree coverage and which has been very useful for search and rescue operations apart from Customs surveillance, et cetera. That particular area of surveillance remains a very important consideration of the Government.
The other area, of course, is in the Northern Territory where currently three Nomads are being used to carry out littoral and offshore surveillance. In addition, on behalf of the Department of Immigration two Nomads have been fitted with Litton-type radar to undertake surveillance over what was regarded as the refugee entry point into the Northern Territory.
The Government has been giving consideration to whether the existing form of surveillance there is necessary; it is a very costly form of surveillance. In order to give itself more time to make a proper evaluation of the needs, both of the Great Barrier Reef and of the Northern Territory, the Government has extended the existing contracts until 31 March. We will, of course, between now and that point be calling for fresh tenders. The nature of the tenders has yet to be determined. I give an undertaking to the honourable member for Kennedy, the honourable member for the Northern Territory and those Queensland members who have an interest in the Great Barrier Reef that there is no way that the Government will abdicate its responsibility for ensuring that there is adequate surveillance over the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park and all the interests that lie therein.

3242 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Questions without Notice

DEPORTATIONS
Mr YOUNG-I preface my question, which is directed to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, by referring to the decision by the Minister to withdraw the deportation order against Luigi Pochi. As the Minister will know, there are deportation orders standing against a number of people, in some cases people with quite large Australian families. Will the same decision be made in these cases?
Mr HODGES-When I made the decision to revoke the deportation order on Mr Luigi Pochi I was very conscious of the fact that there were what some people might call similar cases involving other Australians with resident status who had deportation orders issued against them. I am currently reviewing the criminal deportation policy and I have all the matters to which the honourable member for Port Adelaide referred under consideration. I hope to make an announcement in the very near future.
PROPOSED UNION IMPORT RESTRICTIONS
Mr MOORE-Is the Minister for Industry and Commerce aware of a newspaper report this morning in which Mr Halfpenny says that he, or his union, will impose a selective restriction on imports for certain Australian importers? As his union has contributed very greatly to the noncompetitiveness of Australian industry, will the Government now ensure that this attempt to disrupt commerce will not succeed?
Mr PEACOCK-I have seen the reports. Irrespective of the fundamental point of the role of trade unions and the role of government, the reality is that action to ban imports as a means allegedly of restoring jobs would be completely irresponsible and a self-defeating approach. Companies have to be able to determine where to source their inputs on the basis of their commercial judgments as to the mix of local and imported goods that will keep their options viable. Today's Press reports of proposed trade union import bans are typical of the short sighted attitude of Mr Halfpenny and certain other union leaders of just robbing Peter to pay Paul. Quite apart from the disruption associated with the banning itself, the cost flow-on effects of forcing industry to pay higher prices for local inputs would place at risk thousands of jobs in downstream industries. That is a reality that seems to be ignored. The Government made it clear last Tuesday that it would speak--
Dr Theophanous-Nonsense. Why don't you go and learn some economics?

Mr PEACOCK-The honourable member can interject if he wishes. Because the honourable member comes from Victoria, I will quote words that the State Secretary of the Australian Labor Party used about its economic policies following the Flinders by-election. He said that the Australian Labor Party does not have coherent economic or industrial policies. Honourable members should not sit there and question us about policies. We have them in place and they are working. They have not even got them in place. As I said, the Government made it clear last Tuesday that it would speed up access to assistance against damaging short term competition from imports. However, it was also made clear in that statement that drastic action against imports, as demanded by some groups, would not address the main problem currently facing industry and would have adverse effects on costs and employment throughout the economy. The sooner people opposite recognise that the most pressing requirement now is for a wage pause the better it is for the national interest. Wage increases over the last year spearheaded, interestingly enough in view of Mr Halfpenny's remarks, by the metal trades unions have been a fundamental cause of the loss of Australian jobs. The fundamental health of the economy will not be restored until a balance between wages and profits is restored and Australian industry becomes more competitive. As I say, the sooner Mr Halfpenny and the Parliamentary Labor Party see that the better it will be for the national interest. The reality is that---
Mr Scholes-How many unemployed will there be then?
Mr PEACOCK-The reality is that the Australian Labor Party does not have a policy in this area, other than opposing what we are doing in the wages area.
Mr Scholes-How many are out now? You have done a damned good job so far. You are putting people out by the hour.
Mr PEACOCK-The honourable member can talk as much as he likes. The reality is that the Australian Labor Party is a bankrupt party with bankrupt policies and a bankrupt leader, and it will lead this nation to bankruptcy if it gets into office.
IMPORT RESTRICTIONS
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-In a moment of calm atmosphere I wish to ask the Minister for Industry and Commerce what might be called a supplementary question. Is it not a fact that the Minister has received representations from the Victorian Chamber of Commerce urging that

Questions without Notice

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3243

something be done about the flood of imports coming into this country and describing the Minister's statement in relation to the matter as being unrealistic? Is it a fact that the Minister has also received representations from the apparel manufacturers clearly indicating that in 12 months they have lost some 19,000 jobs because of imports where the Government's program was that they would lose 11,000 jobs in eight years? Has the Minister received representations from the Metal Trades Industry Association and the chambers of manufactures in New South Wales and Victoria, all urging that something be done to stop the flood of imports? Accordingly, I ask: When will the Minister act to give real protection to Australian industry along the lines properly advocated by these groups, including quantitative restrictions on imports, termination of quota and tariff reductions, and enforcement of stringent design and standard regulations?
Mr PEACOCK-The answer to the last part of the question is that the Government is not intending to take drastic action against imports by utilising import restrictions. The reality of their impact and the reality on international trade ought to be well known to the majority of honourable members opposite. I do not know what the fiddle is in policy terms, but I heard one other member on Sunday agreeing with me on a television program that the Australian Labor Party would not walk down that track.
Mr Viner-Who was that?
Mr PEACOCK-We will be hearing from him shortly on the matter of public importance. The representations that are referred to by the Deputy Leader have been received by me. The ones that he referred to from the apparel industry have been disowned by the industry as a group. The Textiles and Apparel Industry Advisory Council--
Mrs ChildRubbish!
Mr PEACOCK-It is not rubbish. The President of the Textile Council of Australia, Mr Blood, and the Executive Director advised that they disagreed on behalf of the textile, clothing and footwear industry with what the apparel industry was saying. It was calling for a change to the package that has been put down as a sevenyear program for the textile clothing and footwear industry. We took the decision in 1980 on a sevenyear program to operate from 1982. In its first year of operation one segment wants the package changed. I will not have a bar of it. This package was put down to give certainty to industry. It has proper mechanisms within it for effective review and we are going along with those mechanisms as

the industry as a whole has requested and as it ought.
To speak more generally so far as the problems of industry are concerned, the announcements that I made on Tuesday provide the mechanism for those who have difficulty to go to the Temporary Assistance Authority. The systems are there to seek assistance and to determine whether there will be a finding on their behalf. That is the way to approach the matter-not by putting down quantitative restrictions as suggested, at least by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. In the area of protection the Government considers that drastic action such as the honourable member is suggesting simply would not address the main problems currently facing industry. As I have indicated elsewhere, it would have adverse flow-on effects on costs and employment throughout the economy and it could also be seriously detrimental to Australia's trade relations. We have nevertheless been aware of the problems and that is why the matters that we addressed in the statement. I put out on Tuesday, endorsed by the Premiers-three of whom are Australian Labor Party Premiers-to speed up the mechanisms, to assist in the area of developing country preferences, to embark on a 'buy Australian' campaign, to reintroduce preferences in the area of Government purchasing, were warmly endorsed not only by Liberal Premiers but also by Labor Premiers. We have a package; the Labor Party has only a scramble of proposals which conflict one with the other amongst its own front bench.
SHIPPING
Mr TUCKEY-I refer the Minister for Transport and Construction to his enthusiastic Press statements issued after his negotiations with the maritime unions and the Government's consequent acceptance of the Crawford report on the Revitalisation of Australian Shipping. I ask the Minister: Is he aware of the recent demarcation dispute relating to union jurisdiction over a winch driver on the River Boyne which has laid that ship up for six weeks at a reported cost of $2.5m? Is the Minister also aware of the present strike of unionists operating tugs in our major ports and its effect on an already depressed Australian industry? Is it a fact that, even when operating without industrial action, the Australian maritime industry imposes a $200m relative cost burden on other Australian industries and that this amount could be translated into 10,000 land based jobs per annum? If the answers to the above questions are yes, will the Minister admit that these senseless strikes are evidence of the total failure of the exercise by him and the Minister for Employment and

3244 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Questions without Notice

Industrial Relations in the Crawford trade-offs with the maritime unions? Is he consequently prepared to get off his knees and commence more realistic and effective policies of negotiating--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I call the Minister for Transport and Construction.
Mr HUNT-After that speech, I must say that I am well and truly off my knees in respect of the Crawford report. Unfortunately, the dispute on the River Boyne does not have anything to do with the basic thrust of the Crawford report, which aimed at revitalising the Australian shipping industry on a more commercial basis so that it would achieve more internationally competitive manning scales and would be entitled to depreciation allowances, investment allowances and incentives similar to what other maritime countries have provided for their shipping industries. Whether honourable members admit it or not, there really has not been much encouragement to the Australian shipping industry over a long period of years. The Crawford initiative was the first real initiative to give some substance and initiative to the Australian shipping industry to develop on a competitively commercial basis. There is no compulsion, no cargo reservation. Cargo reservation was rejected.
Coming back to the specific instance of the River Boyne, I say that it is a disgraceful demarcation dispute between the Maritime Services Guild and the Seamen's Union.
Mr Morris-Merchant Service Guild.
Mr HUNT-The honourable member for Shortland might know them and he might support them, but I hope the honourable member does not support the Merchant Service Guild in its ridiculous campaign about both the River Boyne and the liquefied petroleum gas vessel Bora!, which the shipowner refused to bring to Australia.
Mr Morris-It is your responsibility.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. I ask the honourable member for Shortland to cease interjecting. The Minister will ignore the interjection and proceed with his answer.
Mr HUNTI must say that these types of disputes are doing untold damage to the whole employment situation in this country. Disputes such as demarcation disputes are in fact causing enormous damage to the other industries that depend so much on transportation and the availability of ships to undertake the movement of cargoes from one port to another or from Australia to overseas

markets. Every effort has been made by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to arbitrate in this dispute. Indeed, a decision was made that members of the Seamen's Union should be responsible for the handling of the winch and for doing the shipwrights' work. Quite logically it is a job that they should be doing, rather than members of the Guild. I understand that a union conference has been arranged for 10 December under the auspices of the Australian Council of Trade Unions in a further attempt to resolve the deadlock. The Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has done its best. The River Boyne has been bunkered at Gladstone. I understand that last night it completed the bunkering and cleared the berth. Although the issue is still not settled, it is hoped that it will be settled in the next two or three days.
I agree with the honourable member for O'Connor that this is an outrageous state of affairs. I still have not lost hope that the disputesettling procedures that the Government adopted as a result of the report of the task force will clear the way for far more orderly settlement of disputes in the maritime area. In fact, that has already been the case, except for this ridiculous demarcation dispute. I think it ought to be understood that in the four months to the end of September of this year there was a 50 per cent reduction in maritime disputes in this country as a result of the efforts that the Government, the shipowners and the unions have made. Let us not run away with the idea that some improvement has not occurred in the last few months as a result of all the efforts that have been undertaken to improve the industrial situation on the waterfront.
Mr Hayden-Can't you finish, Ralph?
Mr HUNT-The Leader of Opposition is expressing his concern, too, about this ridiculous demarcation dispute involving the River Boyne, is he not? It is nice to have his support because we need the support and co-operation of the Australian Labor Party, which is tied up with the unions anyway.
PETROL PRICE RISE
Mr HAYDEN-I wish to ask a question of the Acting Prime Minister. However, to put the Minister for Transport and Construction straight, I was actually suggesting that he might be able to wind up after that lengthy dissertation. I remind the Acting Prime Minister of the scheduled rise of 2.5c a litre in petrol prices in January as part of the Government's oil pricing policy. Is it a fact that the Government proposes to force motorists to pay an extra $1 a week in petrol costs while at the same time demanding that their wages be

Questions without Notice

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3245

frozen? Will the Government follow the lead of Mr Cain and the Victorian Government and apply a freeze on Commonwealth taxes and charges, starting with the proposed rise in petrol prices?
Mr ANTHONY~ We have had a policy of import parity pricing for oil for a number of years.
Mr West~1t is a petrol tax.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Cunningham and other honourable members will remain silent while the answer is being given. On certain occasions when there is crossfire I allow it to go, but there has been no crossfire on this occasion. I ask honourable members to listen to the answer in silence.
Mr ANTHONY~1t is a policy that was opposed by the Australian Labor Party. It tried to capitalise on it in a number of elections, by confusing the public into imagining that there was some way of obtaining cheap fuel. Fortunately the Australian public has accepted the policy we have put forward. It is not only a policy which relates to having a commercial price for oil related to whatever the world price is but also it is a policy to encourage further exploration for oil and gas in this country. It is a policy that is working extremely well. We now have record drilling taking place and record expenditure in this area. Our reserves are being extended considerably and extensive investment is taking place in a number of States around Australia as a result of that policy. If at this stage one were in any way to interfere with or create doubts about that policy one would be likely to create doubts as to continuing investment in the area, which is of extreme importance and is in the national interest. It is a little too early to say what the cost will be in January. There will be some variation, not because the price of Saudi crude oil has changed but because of the difference in the value of the United States dollar against which we price our oil. During the six months period the Australian dollar has depreciated against the United States dollar. The exact figure, which might be one or two cents a litre extra by the end of the year, will be determined at that stage. The Government remains firm on its import parity pricing policy.
SOUTH WEST TASMANIA
Mr GOODLUCK~Will the Acting Prime Minister give an assurance to the Tasmanian people that the Federal Government will do all within its power to help the Tasmanian Government to maintain law and order in the south west

of Tasmania, particularly in view of the statements made today by the Tasmanian Wilderness Society?
Mr ANTHONY~I think it goes without question that in this democracy it is very important that law and order be maintained and that there should be co-operation and co-ordination between the Federal and State law enforcement bodies. The Premier of Tasmania, when he was here for the Premiers Conference on Tuesday, canvassed this question with me. I said that if he felt there was a need for forms of assistance we would consider that and would be forthcoming in helping him. The assistance did not necessarily mean personnel, although it could mean personnel. Certainly, the Premier at this stage has not suggested personnel as a form of assistance.
BUDGET REVENUE
Dr KLUGMAN~I preface my question by drawing to the attention of the Treasurer the Budget Papers stating that there will be an increase in revenue from taxation of individual taxpayers of $2, 122m during 1982-83. Was not nearly all of this projected increase due to the then expected wage and salary increases? In view of this, will the Treasurer have another look at his answer yesterday stating that the loss of revenue due to a 12-month wage freeze would be only $250m to $300m? I refer to a loss not only during 1982-83 but also during 1983-84. Would not a successful wage freeze for 12 months lead to a loss of revenue income of close to $2,OOOm, admittedly balanced to a small extent by savings in expenditure? Has the Department of the Treasury made any calculations on this?
Mr HOWARD~ The estimated rise in taxation receipts from individuals contained in the Budget Papers was on the assumption that there would be a rise of about 12 per cent in average weekly earnings. The latest Treasury estimate is that, quite apart from the effects of the pause which was agreed to on Tuesday, the AWE figure is likely to be closer to II per cent or 11.5 per cent. That in part accounts for the downward revision in tax receipts that I provided to the House yesterday. I recollect saying to the House yesterday that, if on top of that downward revision which has already occurred the pause is totally effective across both the public sector and the private sector for the remainder of this financial year, the rise in average weekly earnings, according to the best estimate that the Treasury has provided to me so far, would come out at 10 per cent or thereabouts. If that occurred there would be a further reduction of some $200m to $300m in taxation receipts for 1982-83.

3246 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

General

Obviously, if the pause is effective for 12 months, which we hope it wili be, that will have revenue implications into J983-84. That will depend on the extent to which that pause gives a breathing space to the private sector and allows the private sector to retain at lower wage rates people whom otherwise it might have dismissed in the absence of the pause. In overall employment terms and also, in a secondary sense, revenue terms, that is the real value of the pause. Of course, if we have lower wages we collect lower taxes. Equally, if we have lower 'Wages we have lower costs, lower inflation and lower outlays. In the: long run it is very short-sighted to look at the problem in terms of maintaining the level of revenue. We have to look at it from a long range point of view. From a long range point of view, restoring the profitability of industry is the single most important thing that can be done to help employment in Australia at present.
PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
Mr SPEAKER--I understand that the honourable member for Lalor wishes to ask a detailed question about the parlIamentary departments.
Mr BARRY JONES-Yes, Mr Speaker. I seek information in relation to the parliamentary departments.
Mr SPEAl{ERIf the honourable gentleman will put his request in writing it will appear in Hansard. In due course I will reply and that reply will appear in Hansard.
FOREIGN INVESTMENT
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report. entitled 'Aastralia's Foreign Investment Policy--A Guide for investors'.
AUSTRALIAN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
Sir JAMES KILLEN (MGreton--Vice President of the Executive Council) -- Pursuant to section 6 (2) the Australian Science and Technology Council Act, I present a report by ASTEC entitled 'Biotechnology in Australia', together with a statement relating to the report. I move:
That the House take note of the papers.
Debate (on motion by Mr Barry Jones) "djournec1.
NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT
AND OCCUPATION
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava--Minister for Employment and Industrial Rclations)-For the information of honourable members. I present the

National Committee on Discrimination in Employment and Occupation annual report for 1981-82.
STEVEDORING INDUSTRY FINANCE COMMITTEE
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava--Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations)- Pursuant to section 30 of the Stevedoring Finance Industry Committee Act 1973, I present the annual report of the Stevedoring Finance Committee for 198 I-82.
CARGO CENTRALISATION
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report published by the Bureau of Transport Economics on cargo centrali~ation in the overseas liner trades.
TRANSPORT RESEARCH
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report published by the Bureau of Transport Economics on funding characteristics of transport research In Australia.
AUSTRALIAN WINE AND BRANDY CORPORATION
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction)-Pursuant to section 38 of the Australjpn Wine and Brandy Corporation Act 1980, I present the Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation annual report 1981 -82.
BARLEY INDUSTRY RESEARCH COUNCIL
Mr HUNT (Gwydir--Minister for Transport and Construction)--Pursuant to section 35 of the Barley Research Act 1980, I present the Barley Industry Research Council annual report J 981-82.
WHEAT RESEARCH ACT
Mr HUNT (Gwydir--Minister for Transport and Construction)- Pursuant to section 18 of the Wheat Research Act 1957, I present the annual report for 198 I-82 on the operation of the Act.
AUSTRALIAN MEAT RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Conslruction)--Pursuant to section 17 oflhe Meat Research Act 1960, I present the Australian Meat Research Committee annual report for 1981-82.

General

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3247

POULTRY INDUSTRY ASSISTANCE ACT
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction)-Pursuant to section 8 of the Poultry Industry Assistance Act 1975, I present the annual report for 1981-82 on the operation of the Act.
FISHING ZONES
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction)-For the information of honourable members. I present the agreement between the Australian Government and the Kaohsiung Fishing Boat Commercial Guild concerning access to fishing zones.
FISHING INDUSTRY RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) - Pursuant to section 39 of the Fishing Industry Research Act 1969, I present the annual report of the Fishing Industry Research Committee for 1980-81.
HONEY RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction)-Pursuant to section 18 of the Honey Research Act 1980, I present the Honey Research Committee annual report for 1981-82.
PIG INDUSTRY RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction)-Pursuant to section 16 of the Pig Industry Research Act 1971, I present the Australian Pig Industry Research Committee report for 1981-82.
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES: EFFICIENCY AUDIT REPORT
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) - For the information of honourable members. I present the Government's response to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure report on the review of the Auditor-General's efficiency audit report for the Department of Administrative Services, Australian property function.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PURCHASING
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Government's

response to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure report on Commonwealth Government purchasing.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
COMMONWEALTH ACCOMMODATION CATERING SERVICES LTD
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Commonwealth Accommodation Catering Services Ltd annual report for 1981-82.
COMMONWEALTH FIRE BOARD
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Commonwealth Fire Board annual report for 1981-82.
SPECIAL BROADCASTING SERVICE
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications)-Pursuant to section 79 of the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942 I present the Special Broadcasting Service annual report for 1981-82.
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications)-Pursuant to subsections 29 (1) and 29 (2) of the Human Rights Commission Act 1981, I present the Human Rights Commission annual report for 1981-82.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AND NATURE CONSERVATION
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report published by the Australian Environment Council and the Council of Nature Conservation Ministers on Australian achievements in environment protection and nature conservation 1972-82.
AUSTRALIA COUNCIL
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 38 of the Australia Council Act 1975, I present the Australia Council annual report for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN HERITAGE COMMISSION
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members and in accordance with section 43 (8) (b) of the Australian Heritage

3248 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

General

Commission Act 1975 I table a report presented to me by the Australian Heritage Commission on 17 November 1982.
Mr West-I take a point of order. In accordance with the normal procedures of this House, I have just asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment to move, as a matter of courtesy, that the House take note of the Australian Heritage Commission report to him at which stage I was prepared to move that the debate be adjourned. Usually, there is no real problem about these matters but on this occasion he has refused to do so. I understand that his reason for doing that is that he considers it a secret report to him about the controversial issue of South West Tasmania. If the Australian Heritage Commission has reported to the Minister on this controversial matter, it is only correct, in my view-Mr Speaker, I ask for your ruling-that he should accede to the Opposition's request and move that the House take note of the paper.
Mr SPEAKER-I am afraid that the honourable gentleman is under a misunderstanding. Ministers are entitled to table any report or paper at any time. They do not need leave. We go through the process of Ministers tabling papers. It is true that very frequently at the request of an honourable member in the House a motion is moved that the House take note of the paper which motion then becomes a vehicle for debate. But there is no procedure under the Standing Orders which requires a Minister to do so. I indicate to the honourable gentleman that it seems strange that something could be characterised as secret if it is tabled' but whether there will be a debate is entireiy a matter for the Minister.
Mr West-Mr Speaker, I take a further point of order. I am simply making the point that the protocol in the House generally is that such requests are acceded to. Obviously, I am wrong and a report is not secretive if it is tabled but this matter is certainly controversial in that the Minister will not accept any possibility of future debate.
Mr SPEAKER-I think the honourable gentleman has made his point, that is, that the Minister has declined to move that the House take note of the paper.
Sir .Tames Killen-Mr Speaker, I will speak briefly to the point of order. I give the honourable gentleman an undertaking that I will consult with my colleague on the point of perturbation. My understanding is that the Australian Heritage Commission Act is a public Act. The report is certainly very much a public report when it is tabled in this place. I will undertake to examine the matter and inform him.

DAY AND HOUR OF MEETING
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 14 December 1982, at 10 a.m.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (10.59)-1 think it is indicative of the total mess that the Australian Government and the management of this country are in that the Government cannot know from day to day what legislation it intends to introduce next. It cannot present legislation to the Parliament so that members of the Parliament can view that legislation. It is not in a position even to know when it will sit next and what matters it will debate. The management of the affairs of this country by this Government this year has been the most chaotic, irresponsible and incompetent that has ever befallen the Parliament. I think it is indicative of the situation that the Government is now seeking to make scapegoats of other people to cover up its own shortcomings. That is why we will meet next week to discuss problems that have been created by a totally irresponsible and incompetent government.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
GRIEVANCE DEBATE
Travel Insurance-Trade Unions-Government Aircraft Factory-Philippines: Amnesty International-Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport-Water Resources-
Telecommunication Services in AustraliaSteel Industry-North West Shelf ProjectRussian Migrants-Manufacturing Industries
Question proposed:
That grievances be noted.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (11.0)-1 wish to bring to the notice of the House the case of a constituent of mine who is a 68-year-old widow--
Mr SPEAKER-I interrupt the honourable gentleman to address a matter to the honourable member for Cunningham and the honourable member for Bonython. I do not intend to take up the time of the honourable member for Scullin, so the clock will be stopped. I indicate to the honourable member for Cunningham and the honourable member for Bonython that, as a matter of courtesy, they ought not to pass between the Speaker and the honourable member with the call. I know it was accidental in both cases but it is an old practice of the House not to do so. I take advantage of the infringement on this occasion by two amenable members to make the point to the whole of the House.
Dr JENKINS-I return to this case of a constituent of mine who is a 68-year-old widow on

Grievance Debate

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3249

the age pension. She and her late husband were refugees from Lithuania. That they came early to Australia is evidenced by the fact that they were naturalised in 1957. She has a widowed daughter who can do only casual work to keep two student children at school. Three and a half years ago this lady's husband died suddenly. The lady became very depressed and it was thought that a visit to her surviving sister in Philadelphia in the United States of America might benefit her. So, in May 1981, she went to Philadelphia.
Before leaving she had her pensioner health benefit card; she had taken the highest schedule of health insurance with the ANA Friendly Society;
and she had taken travel insurance with the Australian Federation of Travel Agents through Sentry Insurance (Australasia) Ltd. She was quite well while in Philadelphia but on starting to return home she took ill on the plane between New York and Los Angeles with congestive cardiac failure and was taken to the Marina Mercy Hospital where she spent 24 days, part of this in intensive care. Her total bill for hospital and doctors for those 24 days was $US45,642.31. Her pensioner health benefit card and her health insurance fund refunded her $US6,043.90, leaving a balance in round figures of $US39,598. The travel insurance company, Sentry Insurance, has refused to make payment of any part of this account on the basis that the heart failure was due to a preexisting condition. Since that time the hospital has sent her account to a debt collecting agency in California, which has added $US2,708-odd interest to the account.
I have been handling the correspondence because the lady is not particularly good with using written English. I have approached both Ministers for Health of this year-the honourable member for Warringah (Mr MacKellar) and the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton)-with respect to this problem and sought assistance. Both have been sympathetic. They have accepted that my constituent had taken every possible effort to cover her health needs while overseas. They have had the amount she received from the Commonwealth Department of Health and ANA checked. She has received the correct amount. They are unable to influence the travel insurance company, which persists with its refusal to pay anything on the basis that she had a pre-existing condition. The Ministers referred the matter to the Minister for Finance (Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle) with regard to the possibility of some sort of ex gratia payment being made. I regret to say that the Minister for Finance has refused to accept this situation.

There are a number of points that I think may be taken from this unfortunate case. I feel that I must be critical of the Minister for Finance for the lack of compassion shown in this case. I do not think anyone expected the total amount to be paid as an ex gratia payment, but a lady who came in difficult circumstances to this country-as a refugee-and who has been a good citizen, who has lost her husband, who took every effort she could to cover herself and who finds herself in this position with a bill of $45,000 for 24 days in hospital needs a little understanding and a little assistance. I believe that some sort of ex gratia payment could have been made and that there could have been some attempt through government-togovernment channels to clear the situation in regard to what happened in the United States because I am sure that there is a lack of understanding there by both hospital and doctor. The case also gives a warning to Australian travellers of the type of expenses that they may have overseas. I do not know how we can do it, but I think that particularly the elderly should be given a warning before they go so that they know full well that they face this type of expense.
The next thing that I think has to be raised is the nature of travel insurance in this country. Anyone who has looked at the premiums one has to pay for temporary travel insurance will find them inordinately high. Yet, the exclusion clauses that are there in very fine print are not pointed out to travellers taking out the travel insurance. I know that our legal friends will say, 'well, it is their responsibility to read it', but I think we understand that many people do not comprehend these things and should be advised of them. It seems to me that the 'pre-existing condition' clause must be a great let-out for those companies. It would be pretty easy to find some sort of preexisting condition to which the illness could be attributed. I think that there should be an examination of the whole range of travel insurance, what benefits people get from it and how much is just a cop-out.
There is a warning in this case about the direction that our health services should take. In receiving her account, the lady I mentioned also received a pile of about 40 half-sized computer print-out sheets of pharmacy and diagnostic tests, a whole range of which contributed to the expense. It seems to me that 24 hours for oxygen at $120 is surely exorbitant. In Australia one can buy the apparatus and the cylinder for that price and have it permanently. We have to watch this, because I believe that whilst I was not there to clinically assess her condition, if one looks at this

3250 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Grievance Debate

battery of tests it is hard to believe that even in intensive care so many were needed. I think the warning is that when a hospital system runs riot hospitals get the most sophisticated apparatus and to pay for it, they have to use it, and they have to dun the patient for it. This presents a very strong argument for the rationalisation of the use of sophisticated, diagnostic equipment. We must take a warning from it. I feel that doctors are pressurised into performing a wide battery of tests because of a fear of litigation from the patient. Fortunately, that has not occurred here yet. Tourists should be warned that, if overseas, they should be very careful to explain their circumstances if they
are to be admitted to private hospitals, especially in America.
There is obviously no comprehension in this case by the hospital or doctors of this lady's circumstances. Obviously the right questions have not been asked. She receives the age pension which I think is still $74.15 a week-sometimes
one misses an adjustment but I think that is the correct figure-yet the most recent letter from one of the doctors asking her to settle her account suggested she pay it off at $200 a month. I ask you Mr Deputy Speaker! She is a confused old lady who has had a very hard life. Here she is being asked for $200 of the $300 a month she receives. There is a lack of appreciation of what is her true income. I trust that the Government will ask the Minister for Finance to reconsider the case with a view to making some sort of ex gratia payment and to make some contact with the United States authorities for assistance.
Mr PORTER (Barker) (ll.ll )-As many honourable members of this House will know I, together with other members of my family, am involved in farming in the south-east of South Australia within the electorate of Barker. On 30 October this year information was given to my family by a third party who had been told of a discussion concerning a proposal to burn down a politician's shearing shed. If that threat referred to our shed there could be three motives. Firstly, it could relate to the fact that our contract shearer uses some non-union labour. Secondly, it may relate to the wide combs debate. Thirdly, it may involve someone bearing a political grudge.
Dealing firstly with the issue of compulsory unionism, in August and September this year we had been shearing and we had employed the same contractor, Mr Polomka, as we had used previously. I am informed that his team has some non-union members who, on occasions, have been approached to join the Australian Workers Union by the local organiser, Mr Neville Thompson. Unfortunately, Mr Thompson's approach to these

matters leaves a lot to be desired. For example, I am told that recently he had to be physically restrained in an altercation in a shed. The result has been that these men have not joined the union. In fact, his activities have actually had a negative effect and some members have left the union. As far as shearing in our shed is concerned, we have not specified, nor do we intend in the future to specify, to the contractor any closed shop arrangements whereby only union members can be employed. Furthermore, despite the harassment, while Mr Polomka does the job required we intend to continue to use him. We will not succumb to standover tactics.
In relation to the second motive, it has become clear that around this time the AWU was apparently harassing contractors and shearers, especially those who gave evidence to Commissioner McKenzie in the course of his hearing of the case relating to the use of wide combs. Commissioner McKenzie is to bring down his decision tomorrow. Examples of this harassment are not hard to find. Earlier, on about 7 October in the south-east of South Australia on a neighbouring property to our own, about $4,000 worth of shearing gear was stolen from the men employed by Mr Polomka, the contractor that we use. Mr Polomka gave evidence to the McKenzie hearing. Mr White, a New South Wales shearing contractor, also gave evidence to Commissioner McKenzie. Recently, while shearing in Queensland, Mr White, his wife and some of his team were physically assaulted and beaten up at Eromanga near Mount Margaret. That was around 23 October. Subsequently, on I November the New South Wales Branch Secretary of the AWU, Mr Ecob, on an Australian Broadcasting Commission country radio program-I quote from the transcript I have-said:
There has been a report to the meeting this morning that Mr White will be coming in the next day or so into the Dubbo area to commence shearing. We have made the necessary arrangements. There is people who have been put on the alert and Mr White will receive the same treatment as he received when he left Mt. Margaret.
As I have stated, Mr White and his team were beaten up when they left Mount Margaret. As if that blatant threat was not enough, I am informed that a number of unionists went to Mr White's home town three days later. On 4 November there were allegations of an assault on Mr White. The New South Wales Police informed me of allegations of harassment of Mr White's wife and family in their home to such an extent that police protection has been required.
Mr ChapmanDisgusting thuggery.

Grievance Debate

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3251

Mr PORTER-As the honourable member for Kingston says, it is disgusting. At about the same time as this was going on in New South Wales I repeat that on 30 October my family was told of a threat to burn down a politician's shed. On receipt of that information we took steps to inform the State police and to endeavour to protect our property. As the information was not specific, two State politicians who have farming interests in the area were also notified. Honourable members should bear in mind that this was a week before the South Australian State election. On 4 November it was reported in our local paper, the Naracoorte Herald, that Mr Begg, who is president of the Australian Workers Union, commented on the theft of gear from our neighbour's property and stated:
I have no doubt that pastoral workers will take the law into their own hands if these 'industrial scabs' are allowed to continue.
The same article quoted Mr Thompson, who is the local AWU organiser, as fearing that there would be bloodshed. Some members of the AWU appear to have forsaken any attempt to argue their case in the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission on the wide combs issue, but rather have been adopting the role of enforcers.
Eight days after that article appeared in the Naracoorte Herald on the night of 12 November our shearing shed was burnt to the ground, incurring a loss of $50,000. At the time we were not aware of the action taken on the wide combs dispute in other areas. With the benefit of hindsight, it may well be that this arson was an attempt to stir up the wide combs issue. In any case, Commissioner MacKenzie is to deliver his judgment tomorrow. I am firmly of the view that the decision should rest with the Commissioner and should not be determined by thugs. We will certainly not be bowing to intimidation tactics. Quite frankly, given the details as I have recounted them, it seems a group of irresponsible union members, probably only a small section of the union, are trying to take the law into their own hands. Like the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, they may well be a prime candidate for an inquiry.
Alternatively, if the arson was an attempt by a small, misguided, irresponsible section of the AWU to blackmail us through standover tactics to change our contractor, 1 can assure those responsible that they will fail, as have their previous attempts.
If the arsonist was not acting in relation to the wide combs debate or compulsory unionism but was politically motivated, 1 believe it is a very sad day for Australian politics when the rights of free

expression are challenged in this way. I had hoped that the dark days of the shotgun attack on Arthur Calwell had passed.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (11.20)--1 want to raise a matter of particular concern to myself. I have also been asked to raise it on behalf of the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) who has had a considerable number of representations made to her. The matter I refer to is within the province and responsibility of the Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner). I refer the House to a set of circumstances which arose at the Government Aircraft Factories in May when the then Minister for Industry and Commerce, the now retired Sir Phillip Lynch, indicated that there would be a cutback in production and the abandonment of the Nomad aircraft. It was contemplated that some 370 members of the work force at the Government Aircraft Factories would, over a period, be retrenched. Following that, there were discussions with the Minister for Defence Support and subsequently a motion was passed in the Senate on 26 October.
That motion was raised in the Senate on the initiative of the Leader of the Opposition, Senator John Button. 1 believe it is important to refer this House to the terms of that motion. The motion moved by Senator Button was:
(I) That the following matter be referred to the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence for inquiry and report as a matter of urgency: The effects on the aircraft industry of:
(a) the level of work needed by the industry in order to maintain skills in the industry;
(b) proposed retrenchments in the industry, as a result of the decision to cut by 30 the Nomad Project, on available skills in:
(i) technical management and design, and
(ii) trade skills related to aircraft production; and
(c) the cost of an extension of the Nomad Project to cover the loss of skills in projected retrenchments in the period between the rundown in Nomad production and the commencement of the F / A-18 and the trainer program.
(2) That no retrenchment of employees should take place until both Houses of the Parliament have debated the Joint Committee's report on this reference.
It is that last aspect-that no retrenchment of employees should take place until both Houses of the Parliament have debated the report of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence on this reference-that I desire to draw to the attention of the House. Honourable members who are concerned about the matter and want to follow the debate that subsequently took place will find it at page 1814 of Senate Hansard of 26 October.

3252 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Grievance Debate

I will summarise the effect of that debate. Speaking on behalf of the Government, the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Senator Messner, moved a very simple and straightforward amendment which inserted the word 'compulsory' in clause 2 that I have just read out. That amendment was accepted by Senator Button and agreed to by the Senate. The Senate voted unanimously that no compulsory retrenchment of employees should take place until both Houses of Parliament had debated the Joint Committee's report on this reference. There is nothing new or novel about that. I refer the House to the varying precedents that are followed when there is reference by a House to a select committee as there was in the case of the Bendigo Ordnance Factory: The situation is frozen. We had a clear motion which was the subject of consideration by all honourable senators and, of course, members of Cabinet. The motion was passed unanimously.
Acting on the basis of that resolution, the Joint Committee has moved with as much expedition as is possible to get the terms of inquiry under way. Management at the GAF called in the unions and indicated to them that, as a result of the Senate motion, the subsequent Joint Committee inquiry and the fact that retrenchments would not take place, it would be appropriate if the unions considered lifting bans which had been imposed on various levels of work as a result of a union response to the threat of retrenchment. As a result of that request from management, all bans with the exception of overtime were lifted. Indeed one is bound to say that the unions, in their response, also sought assistance from management in the preparation of a submission to be made by the combined unions to the committee inquiring into this matter. Sensibly and appropriately, management said that in certain areas where it had possession of information it would be happy to
comply.
I make two points. As at the beginning of this week the work force had been told by management, their unions and me-as their local member-that there would be no retrenchments as a result of the motion passed by the Senate, particularly as a result of the Government's support for that motion. It was not as though it was a motion passed by the Senate as a result of the combined forces of the Australian Democrats and the Australian Labor Party. It was a unanimous motion. Clearly management has acted in good faith on it, as had the unions. When I visited the factory earlier this week, as part of my responsibilities as a member of the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee, I was staggered to find that

the Chairman of the Committee had been provided with a letter by the Minister for Defence Support which indicated, putting it shortly, that he had been absent overseas when this motion was passed and that the Government had reviewed the position and was now proposing that 38 employees be paid off on 22 December.
I do not know where this Government is going in terms of political morality and the kind of undertakings it gives to its own employees. What kind of situation are we getting to in Australia when one of the two Houses of Parliament can, with the support of the Government, pass a motion referring a matter of considerable importance to a select committee for urgent inquiry and, as part of the terms of the motion, it is decided that no compulsory retrenchments would take place, and when management, the work force and local members all act in good faith, as they are entitled to on the basis of that motion, and then weeks before Christmas and without any consultation-there are consultation mechanisms in place-with the work force, and I suspect not a great deal of consultation with management, a letter is given and the work force is told that 38 employees at GAF will be retrenched before Christmas?
Two clear implications of very considerable importance to all honourable members arise as a result of this decision. The first is the cavalier and irresponsible attitude of the Government to a motion of one of the Houses of Parliament. Let me not hear members of the Government railing against miners who try to beat down the doors of Parliament House when the Government will pay no heed to-treats with contempt-a unanimous motion for which its own members and Ministers voted. Also, of course, there is the Government's undertaking to its own work force. I doubt whether any private employer would place himself in the situation of giving clear and unequivocal undertakings to his work force that no compulsory retrenchments will take place and then acting in such a manner without consultation. The enormous implication of this decision if the Government does not abandon it-I urge the Government to abandon it-is that no Commonwealth employee at any level can act upon the undertakings of this Minister or the Government in terms of the future security of his employment. That is a matter of deep concern and I urge the Government to reconsider its position.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Grievance Debate

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3253

Mr FALCONER (Casey) (11.30)-1 wish to speak on behalf of the Parliamentary Group of Amnesty International, of which I am Chairman this year, which has expressed very grave concern at the state of civil rights in the Philippines. In particular the Group has considered a report of an Amnesty International mission to the Republic of the Philippines which visited that country from II to 28 November 1981. There is a great deal of concern and, I think, a growing level of concern in Australia and other countries about the state of civil liberties in the Philippines. A recent case which has attracted attention in Australia is that of Father Brian Gore. Father Brian Gore, who is an Australian Catholic priest of the Columban order, was detained in the Philippines on 24 September following the alleged discovery of a fragmentation grenade, five rounds of ammunition and voluminuous subversive literature during a raid on his presbytery at Oringao on Negros Island the previous night. Father Gore was subsequently charged with possession of explosives and enciting to rebellion. He has received a degree of public and media sympathy for his assertion that he was framed because of his work amongst the rural poor on Negros. Indeed, no less a leading anticommunist figure than Mr B. A. Santamaria, in an article which was published on 17 November this year in the magazine News Weekly, said:
The Marcos Government ought to wake up to itself. In arresting innocent people like Fr Gore, it is not fighting communism. It is winning new recruits for the Communist New People's Army, far more effectively than its leaders can gain for themselves. It is increasing the strength of the pro-Marxist Left inside the Catholic Church, at a time when John Paul II is attempting to force a line of demarcation between the defence of justice and the propogation of Marxist subversion. One does not need to spell out who stands to gain by this folly.
The delegation from Amnesty International to which I refer was the second Amnesty mission to the Philippines. The first was received by Government officials during November and December of 1975 and was able to interview detainees held under regulations introduced after the imposition of martial law in September 1972. Since its 1975 mission Amnesty International has continued to receive reports of arrests and detentions in which international law and nationally prescribed procedures have been violated. Many such arrests have resulted in the disappearance of detainees for several months during which time they are reported to have been tortured.
While the pattern of violations noted by the 1975 mission delegates persisted, subsequent reports have given rise to new concerns. It appears that the number of people believed to be detained for political reasons fell from about 6,000 in 1975

to fewer than 1,000 by the end of 1980. But reports in the same period indicated that more people were becoming victims of human rights violations, which included disappearance and extrajudicial execution, such violations not, of course, appearing in any official statistics of people being held or detained for various reasons. A disappearance occurs when a person is taken into custody by the authorities, who subsequently deny responsibility for the arrest or abduction and claim to know nothing of the victim's fate or whereabouts. Extra-judicial executions are unlawful killings perpetrated for political reasons by order of the Government or with its complicity. During 1980 the United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances sent information to the Philippines Government about more than 200 cases of disappearances which had been reported to it. In reply the Government stated:
Though we share a deep concern for missing persons in the Philippines, we believe . . . these persistent reports . . . to be misleading and may be again part of the overall propaganda effort of the underground to discredit the Government.
There has been no satisfactory explanation for large numbers of disappearance and apparent extra-judicial killings. Amnesty International concludes from the evidence gathered during its mission to the Philippines in November 1981 that the security forces of the Philippines have systematically engaged in practices which violate fundamental human rights, including the right to life, the right to security of person and the right against arbitrary arrest and detention. Amnesty International believes that this development dates from the introduction of martial law but has continued since the repeal of martial law.
At the same time members of the delegation noted a growing cynicism in many quarters amongst ordinary people whom they interviewed about the efficacy of redress through normal legal channels. I can confirm this from some of my own discussions in the Philippines. When I visited the Philippines in April of last year I discussed this position with a number of people. I think I am now free to quote from a discussion which I had with Cardinal Sin, one of the two Catholic archbishops of the Philippines. I spoke to him on 20 April 1981 at his residence in Manila and I asked him about the alleged radical activities of a number of priests, particularly younger priests, in the Philippines. He is not by any means a radical person. I think it is fair to say that he has a fairly conservative reputation and puts things in moderate and conservative terms. The note which I made of our conversation reads:

3254 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Grievance Debate

He could understand why some of the younger priests out in the provinces in particular became more radical. The people brought their problems to the priests and to a large extent this was a consequence of the failure of government and politicians in achieving results.
The Amnesty International delegation was presented with evidence of 49 cases in which allegations were made of abuses by members of the
armed forces of the Philippines, the Integrated Civilian Home Defense Force-the ICHDF-the Integrated National Police and irregular paramilitary units, apparently operating with official sanction. The Amnesty International report on its visit to the Philippines goes on to describe the activities
of some of these irregular paramilitary units which apparently operate with some official sanction. I will not go into the details of their operations, but they are well documented in this report published by Amnesty International. The allegations of the operations of these bodies include incidents such as arbitrary killings, disappearances, torture and other forms of illtreatment, arbitrary arrest and incommunicado detention. Amnesty International recommended very strongly that the Government of the Philippines should review the procedures for investigation, prosecution and punishment of alleged abuses by military personnel and other government employees.
Amnesty International further recommended that the Government of the Philippines should guarantee certain basic rights of detainees as nonwaivable, including the right to appear before a judicial authority within a prescribed period. I should say in explanation that it appears in a number of cases of arbitrary arrests and disappearances that allegedly people had signed waivers of their rights to appear in court to have a charged placed against them and waivers of their rights to some form of legal representation, but these documents which they purportedly signed have been produced in circumstances which can only be described as very dubious. Amnesty International has further stated concern at the continued suspension of the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus since the lifting of martial law and the introduction through Letter of InstructionLOI No. 1211 as recently as 9 March 1982-of procedures giving military personnel discretion not to seek the authorisation of civil courts for arrests and detention.
This indicates a very serious situation which exists in the Philippines today. I think it is important to note that expressions of concern at this deteriorating situation, despite the supposed lifting of martiallaw, are coming from a wide variety of people across the whole political spectrum who are concerned with basic civil rights and, indeed,

from many friends of the Marcos Government who want to see that Government do the right thing and be effective in its activities against the spread of communism. These are very real concerns of a wide variety of people.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! the honourable member's time has
expired.,
Mr MORRISON (St George) (l1.40)-As a former chairman of the Parliamentary Group of Amnesty International I would like to associate myself with the remarks made by the honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer). I think they serve to underline the selective indignation that we in what is called the free world undertake in condemning martial law in Poland at the same time as condoning martial law in countries which are allies of ours-the Philippines and Turkey. I believe the honourable member for Casey has done a service to this House in bringing forward the proposition he has. I think I can, on behalf of the Opposition, associate myself with those remarks.
This morning I want to raise another human problem. It is a problem which affects a quarter of a million people who are living in the environs of Kingsford-Smith Airport and, particularly, some 75,000 people who live within the high level aircraft noise area. I think one tends to forget when we are talking about aircraft noise, which sounds like a very technical subject, that it has a tremendous impact on people who, unfortunately, suffer from its effects. I also want to point out some of the other characteristics of St George and the surrounding areas which are affected by the aircraft noise. Within a five-mile radius of the Kingsford Smith Airport there are 38 public hospitals, 61 private hospitals, 242 schools and 361 churches. AU these institutions are detrimentally affected by the operations of aircraft flying in and out of Kingsford-Smith Airport. Any of us who have suffered the effects of aircraft noise would know full well that it is debilitating. Apart from that, part of the human problem is also the very real danger-we have seen examples of this in other parts of the world-of planes crashing into our residential areas. We have been lucky so far.
Let me refer now to the increased amount of traffic as it is part of the reasons for the proposal of the present Government to build a second runway at Kingsford-Smith Airport. The increased amount of traffic that is envisaged is likely to add to the probability of planes crashing. I do not believe it is a risk we should be taking. The Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) made a statement a few weeks ago about the proposed second runway at

Grievance Debate

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3255

Kingsford-Smith Airport. His statement contained a number of glaring inconsistencies. He expressed concern about the inconvenience to regular air travellers and the mounting costs to airlines because of delays. We all know that there are delays, but I want to correct one misapprehension. That is that there is an assumption that movements of p3.ssenger transports have increased. The situation is that movements of regular passenger transports--that is, domestic airlines and international airlines-have in fact dropped. There are fewer domestic and international flights now than there were in 1975.
In 1975 the number of domestic flights was 93,345. Last year the number was 83,638, a drop of some 10,000 movements. There has also been a drop in the number of international flights from 19,082 in 1975 to 18,010 in 1981. It is true that total movements have increased from 155,155 in 1975 to 175,602 in 1981, but this increase has taken place in commuter movements and in private and general aviation movements. Commuter movements have more than doubled and private and general aviation movements have increased from 26,369 in 1975 to 39,259 in 1981.
We have all see-n-we, as politicians, use transport fairly regularly-situations in which a jumbo jet carrying hundreds of passengers is delayed, and during that delay the jet is burning hundreds of litres of fuel, while a small private aircraft is either landing or taking off. The unassailable fact is that commuter, private and general aviation movements represent now two out of every five aircraft movements, yet they represent only 3 per cent of the number of passengers carried. This is managerial madness; it is also economic stupidity.
I want to make a couple of points about this particularly in relation to a government which maintains the principle of user pays. The recovery rate from commuter services is 25 per cent of total cost and the recovery rate for general aviation is only 15 per cent of total cost. Therefore, the taxpayer is heavily subsidising these operations. No wonder they are expanding. More than that, the taxpayer., after subsidising this vast increase in the number of commuter and general aviation operations at Kingsford-Smith Airport, will be asked to find what will be at least $200m to build another runway. This will all be for the convenience of a mere 3 per cent of the number of passengers being carried by the commuters and general aviation airlines. As I have said, the Government has always mouthed the principle of user pays and I believe it should be applied in the case of Kingsford-Smith Airport. We would see how many of these private users and commuters

would continue to operate if they had to pay their share of the cost of operation of the airport.
The other concern I have about the propositions that have been put forward by the Government-this gets back to the human problem I mentioned-is that once that second runway is built the Government will pull off the curfew. The argument will be very simply that the Kingsford-Smith Airport is a high-priced asset and therefore must be used 24 hours a day, but that proposition forgets the fate of the quarter of a million people on the ground around the airport. I have said many times before in this place that the Government should face up to the realities and respond to the pressures of its friends in the airline industry and in the commuter industry by getting an airport which can be used 24 hours a day in the same way as Tullamarine Airport is
used in Melbourne.
The whole matter has been a political football for a long while. I say quite clearly that the Government has played politics on this issue over many years. The current Minister for Aviation, who is not in the chamber this morning, has been a leading actor in this play. He was a Minister in the New South Wales Government when his Premier, Sir Robert Askin, told a packed election campaign meeting in 1973 that the New South Wales Government would and could in the long run prevent the construction of an airport at Galston. He said that he would block construction of roads, sewerage and transport facilities. This Minister, after having been associated with that type of activity with his former Government in New South Wales, is seeking the co-operation of the New South Wales Government. The New South Wales Government has said very clearly that civil aviation is a federal matter and that it is prepared to co-operate.
All I want this Government to do is to get on with building a second airport. This would make far more sense, both economically and for the benefit of the people living within the area of the present Kingsford-Smith Airport. We certainly would not condone and we will oppose strenuously any attempt to lift the curfew. If that is the purpose of the present Government I can only say on behalf of the people in St George and the surrounding areas that it is not on.
Mr HICKS (Riverina) (l1.50)-Few things are of more basic importance to human existence than water. This has been brought home to us in no uncertain manner by the present drought. One thing that has captured the imagination of scientists and laymen for centuries has been the quest for a means of making rain, but, unfortunately,

3256 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Grievance Debate

this has eluded us. That is a problem in my electorate where in one area someone may be drying sultanas and raisins while across the road someone else's sheep may be dying due to the drought. Nevertheless, I think that in future we may see some progress.
Our options, therefore, are still narrowed to the collection and conservation of water, particularly in this, the driest continent. I was pleased to hear an announcement by the New South Wales Government that, despite the low levels of many of the State's dams, the situation is not yet critical. It is interesting to note the levels of major storages affecting the Riverina and to compare them with last year's levels. Burrinjuck Dam at this time last year was 96 per cent full. At present it is only 27 per cent full. Blowering Dam at this time last year was 88 per cent full. Now it is only 24 per cent. Last year Hume Weir held 98 per cent of its capacity. It now contains only 15 per cent. Last year, the Menindee Lakes scheme was 69 per cent full. Now it contains only 59 per cent. At present Lake Cargelligo is 31 per cent full.
We have been guaranteed by the New South Wales Government spokesman that supplies to the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area from Burrinjuck and Blowering are assured, but that care needs to be taken. For some time the New South Wales Government has been speaking of constructing the Lake Mejum scheme near Narrandera in New South Wales. Unfortunately, the Government has not given this project the priority it requires in order to obtain a share of Commonwealth and State funding. It is to be hoped that, to provide a needed buffer, the scheme will soon be elevated on the list of State Government priorities.
The situation in other parts of the Riverina is a matter of concern. In the small opal mining town of White Cliffs, since last Friday water has been carted from the Darling River, approximately 100 kilometres away. One can guess what the cost of that would be over a long, hot summer. The people are grateful for this service, and the water being carted is of a reasonable standard. To supply a permanent scheme to the town is beyond the means of local government and will need State and Federal assistance to ensure a permanent water supply.
The large mining centre of Broken Hill has two reservoirs-Stephens Creek, which has been dry since April 1977 except for a small flush in 1978-79, and Umberumberka, which has been dry since 1981. The city now depends on a small diameter pipeline, approximately 113 kilometres long, from the Darling River. This pipeline is

totally inadequate and needs to be enlarged. Presently the water is pumped from the river by
means of diesel operated pumps and the cost is becoming prohibitive in light of the cost of diesel and added taxes. I raise these matters today in order to put a representative case to the Parliament to show the need for an overall policy on water conservation, supply and quality control. Because I do not have time. I will not mention quality control. It is a matter which I will speak about later. Without conservation, supply and quality control, national development must suffer.
Another matter that I wish to raise is the report of the Davidson Committee of Inquiry into Telecommunications Services in Australia. Many Riverina residents are concerned about some of the recommendations of the Davidson report. I must admit I have not read the full report because it consists of many pages. From what I have read, there appears to be some merit in it. However, I
wish to touch on a few matters that concern me. One is the recommendation that the Australian Telecommunications Commission should become more commercially viable. I have little argument with that. However, added to that is the suggestion that it should make enough profits to finance
itself. Considering the size of our continent and that over its great area the population is spread rather thinly, I can see problems looming in that
area.
Recommendation 47 suggests that crosssubsidisation of the less profitable areas of its undertakings by the more profitable areas should be reduced. People in isolated areas already suffer
many disadvantages, both technical and financial, not only in their business transactions but also in their social lives because of lack of communication. This occurs despite many steps that have been taken by this Government to assist them. I hope that those gains will remain for those people who are making such a great contribution to this nation's welfare.
Recommendation 46 states that Telecom's uniform pricing policies should be replaced by prices that relate more to costs on the user-pays principle. I believe that, if this were to be implemented to any great degree, few people west of the Great Divide could afford the luxury of what I, and most people, regard as a basic necessity. I do not sit easy with a number of other recommendations. I hope I will have the opportunity to speak on them on another occasion. One of the better recommendations of the report is that Telecom's rural conversion program should be accelerated. I am keen to ensure that this will not bring added costs to rural subscribers. I believe

Grievance Debate

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3257

that the report is to lie on the table for at least three months so that it can be perused by those who are interested. I urge the public and interested groups to study the report and to put their submissions to the Government on this very important matter.
As a result of representations by the people of Broken Hill to the New South Wales Government, the New South Wales Premier, the Honourable Neville Wran, established a committee to examine the future of the economy of Broken Hill. For many years it has been recognised that Broken Hill is likely to have a finite life as a major mining centre. Estimates of the life of the mines have varied and depend on factors such as the extraction rate of the mines, ore quality and the volume of ore which can be economically extracted, the latter depending on assumptions about metal prices and technological change in the industry. Broken Hill is an important centre for a number of reasons. It contains over 28,000 people and is one of the major inland cities in New South Wales. It is a major world producer of silver, lead and zinc. The ore mined in Broken Hill provides the input for large industries in other centres-in particular, Port Pirie in South Australia, Risdon in Tasmania and, to a lesser extent, Cockle Creek in New South Wales.
I spoke earlier about a report that was commissioned by Mr Wran. I wish to congratulate him on having instigated that report. It is called the 'Report of the Broken Hill Economic Review Committee'. It goes into detail about the future of Broken Hill. One of the recommendations of the report is that a co-ordinator be appointed. It states:
A co-ordinator be appointed by the New South Wales Premier to liaise with relevant organisations and follow up on progress in relation to recommendations approved by the Government or other decisions taken by the Government in relation to Broken Hill.
I am pleased to say that a co-ordinator has been appointed by the New South Wales Government. He is a young New South Wales public servant called Brian Thornton. He has been in that position for some time and the work that he is doing in Broken Hill is excellent. I commend him on that work. I hope that he is kept in the position for a long time because I believe he is carrying out the work that the Premier recommended, that is, to look into the future of Broken Hill. He is bringing forward points that need to be brought forward. As I said, I recommend him for that work and hope that the New South Wales Government keeps him in that position so that he may assist in the future development of Broken Hill.

Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (11.59)-The great North West Shelf off-shore gas project has required until now the usage of 346,100 tonnes of steel. Of this large total, believe it or not, only 5,200 tonnes, or less than 1.5 per cent, have been supplied in Australia. The rest of the steel has come or is coming from overseas. I believe this is a national disgrace. In this grievance day debate, I grieve for the thousands of Australians whose jobs have been made insecure because of this fact and for those who have lost their jobs. I grieve for the fact that this country has lacked and is lacking an Australian government which is committed to a manufacturing base in general and a steel industry in particular. We just have not had a government with that commitment. I grieve for the fact that the country lacks secondary industry directorship and management which is determined to plan for
jobs in Australia. If we had had such directorship and management we would not have had this national disgrace of so little of our steel production going into that great North West Shelf project.
This scandalous situation has come about because we have in control of us a group of people who worship at the shrine of an ideology whose principal belief is that market forces must prevail. This is the religion that those people practise. Their high priest is, of course, Milton Friedman. Without equivocation I say that that ideology is a false one. Like John Maynard Keynes, I know that 'man's actions can be guarded by intelligence, not merely by market forces'. Intelligence should lead us firmly to the conclusions that Australian men and women should be providing more than merely 1.5 per cent of the steel used in the North West Shelf project. In what way can we properly and fully spread the benefits from such a great asset as North West Shelf natural gas to the Australian community which we should be serving? Manufacturing industry, for a start, should playa greater part in its establishment.
Let me state, on behalf of the Australian Labor Party, that its firm commitment to Australian manufacturing industry is clear. As part of that we have a commitment to a continuing Australian steel industry. We have the iron ore here. Much of it is in the Pilbara region, which is very close to where the North West Shelf natural gas is being drawn. We have the energy in this country in the form of coal. We have the educated work force, the management and employees ready, willing and able to get on with the task of producing steel in Australia. All that we lack is the will to make sure that we achieve the purpose. In other words, if it is easier to import, our national Government is so spineless and our industry leaders so gormless

3258 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Grievance Debate

that we go ahead and import instead of manufac-
turing here.
Let me now give some more of the details of this project that have been given to me. There are eight particular projects that make up the whole at this point in time. Firstly, there is the North Rankin A jacket and mains project. That project required 15,000 tonnes of plate steel which was all fabricated and supplied by Japan. The Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd had the capability to supply that plate steel but the excuse was given that the only Australian fabricator-Eglo Engineering Pty Ltd in Victoria-was fully tied up on Bass Strait construction. My response to that is to
ask: Would not one have thought that with some planning from government, some involvement of the national interest in such a decision, the result would have been the establishment of a new fabricating capacity in this country to supply that venture?
The second project involved 24 main and follower piles for which 9,800 tonnes of steel have been supplied and fabricated in Korea. BHP had a capability to supply that form of steel. A Western Australian firm could have fabricated it. Both BHP and that Western Australian firm tendered. The contract appears to have been lost, so it is alleged, on a dollar basis. I wonder what would have
been the result if the foreign price had been studied properly to see whether it was a dumped price. I make no allegations; I just say to the House that from my knowledge of industry in this country and the way in which this country is being governed in that area that price was probably not examined in the way it should have been examined. Better still, if we had had a government that believed in involving itself in a consultative way in issues such as this the planning approach that applies in most other countries would have been applied. I bet that we could have made sure that the Australian price matched the competitive one from overseas.
The third project involved 34 conductor piles of 4,100 tonnes. I am pleased to say that all were supplied and fabricated in Australia. I say hooray to that. At least we can see an Australian content in the steel part of this project. In this case we matched the price and everything else. I believe we could have done that with so many of these other projects. The fourth project concerned production modules for which 6,000 tonnes of steel have been supplied by Japan. They were fabricated by Australia. BHP had the capability to supply the steel. Would not one think that with the fabrication being carried out in Australia we could have supplied the steel in the way that the Japanese would have made sure they did for their

own projects of this sort? The fifth project is a gas
pipeline off-shore where 84,000 tonnes of steel have been supplied and fabricated by Japan. Need I say any more? What scandal was involved here that we could not have done at least some of that? The sixth project is the flare tower for which 4,700 tonnes of steel were needed. All of it was supplied by Japan. I could make similar comments. The seventh project is a condensate tank on which 2,500 tonnes have been used, of which 1,400 tonnes were supplied by Japan and 1,100 tonnes by BHP. The tank was fabricated in Australia. Once again, would not one have
thought that if 1,100 tonnes could be supplied here, why not the other 1,400 tonnes? All of that adds up, in the off-shore part of this project, to 126,100 tonnes of which only 5,200 tonnes were supplied in Australia.
On-shore the position is even worse. For the 1,500 kilometres of piping that has been used for the gas pipeline 220,000 tonnes of steel was used-not one tonne from this country. The piping was supplied by Italy and Japan. All but 42,000 tonnes was fabricated elsewhere. The fabrication here was done by Steel Mains Pty Ltd. Once again, if we did not have the capacity-only Steel Mains was available-why on earth did we not have an involvement on the part of national and State governments to see that the capacity was built up here so that we could use some of the vast army of unemployed and give them work in this area? Let me go on to say that I am indebted to a journalist-Rick Powell of the Australian Broadcasting Commission's 2JJJ in Sydney-for first alerting me to this issue and to the ABC Nationwide team in Adelaide for following it through, as I believe it will in a segment tonight. There is still some hope that this action on my part and the part of others will salvage something for Australia. There is still something to be built-an LNG marine structure and a sea island berth of 3,000 tonnes which will be starting in May 1983 and a production loading jetty of 20,000 tonnes which will be starting in 1984. It is
not too much to hope that this further 23,000 tonnes of raw steel and its fabrication will come from this country.
Even the United Kingdom, which many are quick to denigrate these days, has for its North Sea oil venture an off-shore supplies office which makes sure that British industry maximises its participation in that venture. In this cumbersome federation we sit back and let ourselves be raped. The Western Australian Government could have done a lot more to see that there was more Australian participation in the North West Shelf venture. Instead, we get competition between States.

Grievance Debate

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3259

We get the attitude that if something is going to the eastern States it might as wel1 go to Korea. To a large extent the problem has been a lack of capacity. That could have been overcome by the national government getting involved in this very relevant activity.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (12.9)-1 wish to raise in the House today the inadequate response that I have had from the Soviet Ambassador and the Soviet Embassy in Canberra to my continuing representations on behalf of two families which are potential migrants from the Soviet Union. I am extremely disappointed in the inadequate response that I have got from the Soviets.
On a visit to Israel earlier this year I was approached by friends of Mr Leonid Volvovsky concerning an application for him and his family to emigrate to Israel from the Soviet Union. I also met with Mrs Zina Shtamler who was anxious for her parents, Mr and Mrs Slutzky, to emigrate from the Soviet Union. In March this year I raised these two matters with the Soviet Ambassador, Mr Soudarikov. I wrote again in April and have received no reply from him. My office and I inquired from time to time at the Soviet Embassy and we got the brush-off. In July my office was told that it was an internal matter and up to the local authorities in the Soviet Union to make a decision. I raised the matter with Ambassador Soudarikov at a diplomatic reception.
I regret having to raise the issue publicly to express my disappointment at the lack of response from the Ambassador and the Embassy, but I have no alternative in view of the fact that I have had no response. Particularly in this year, which I understand is the fortieth anniversary of diplomatic relations between our two countries, I would have thought that the Ambassador would have been sympathetic to my request and at least have replied to me and looked into the matter. I hoped for a better response. I publicly request the Ambassador to take this matter up with the local Soviet authorities to ensure that exit visas are issued for the Volvovsky and Slutzky families. I would also have thought that another factor that the Ambassador might take into account is that at this time of leadership change in the Soviet Union it would show the Soviet Union's intent of goodwill if it let people leave that country freely. Let us hope that is so in the case of the Volvovsky and Slutzky families and other families in a similar position in the Soviet Union.

I would also like to refer, in the remaining time available to me today, to the nature of manufacturing industries in Australia, their future and the future technologies which will be the base for new industries in Australia. The honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) who spoke before me looked at the steel industry. We are told every day that what is happening in the economy is a recession, or perhaps a depression. It is certainly cal1ed a recession. I do not know whether that is the right way of describing what is happening.
Massive structural change is taking place in our economy. Regrettably, because the price of labour has priced large parts of industry out of world markets, large unemployment is being created.
In respect of unemployment, we have to retrain those who are unemployed in those industries of the future, the new industries. This provides many challenges for us. In fact, there is a challenge to the whole education system. I think that the education system in this country leaves a lot to be desired. It is basically turning out people unqualified for the future industries and directions of those industries in Australia. Technology will set the economic agenda to the end of this century. There is absolutely no doubt about that at all. One hears advertisements today for home computers.
This Christmas they are being advertised in newspapers and on television in the United States of America. Everybody is being encouraged by retailers to have their own home computer so that they can put their accounts, such as their electricity bill, medical benefits and rate notices on the computer. Computers create new industries. Computer games are now the games that al1 children want to have for Christmas.
Some of the industries of the future will be high technology industries; some will be low technology industries. What is certain is that they will be new technologies. That is the direction we have to look at. I think that people in this Parliament have to spend more time looking at the future and at the future directions of Australian industry. I am prepared to publicly congratulate the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) because he looks at the nature of what is happening in Australia and at the potential for future industries. I disagree with his basic conclusions but that does not mean that I condemn him for not thinking about them. I think that he has made a contribution to the debate regarding future industries and technologies which will make its mark. As I say, I disagree with him.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! It is now 12.15 p.m. In accordance with Standing Order 106, as amended for this session, the debate is interrupted.

3260 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Employment Market

Question resolved in the affirmative.
EMPLOYMENT MARKET
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The total disarray of Government policy in the face of the collapse of the employment market in Australia.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number of members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
MrHAWKE (Wills) (12.15)-Ofall the many tragic features of the current economic situation none is ultimately more disturbing than the steadfast refusal of this Government to be honest in its analysis and presentation of this problem to the Australian people. I quote from a statement by the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) of yesterday to this House in which he said:
I think we have all been surprised at the suddenness with which the international recession finally impacted on Australia.
Two points need to be made about that statement. The first is that once again this statement displays the continuing refusal of this Government to acknowledge, with one sentence or one word, any responsibility flowing from its own mistaken economic policies for the situation in this country today and the fact that hundreds of thousands of our fellow Australians are in a situation of unemployment. The second point that needs to be made is that we have to dispose immediately and without equivocation of this nonsense about the suddenness of what has happened in this country. The easiest way to dispose of this nonsense which the Government now attempts to foist upon us is simply that to refer very briefly to the statements I made throughout this year and in the very early part of this year pointing out what in fact was happening in the labour market and positively indicating the sorts of things that ought to be done. I refer firstly to what I said on II March of this year:
The unemployment estimates for February reveal the stark reality of the Australian labour market in deep recession.
I pointed out then, in respect of the February figures, the fact which the Treasurer of this country (Mr Howard) is now trying to say has only become apparent in recent months, that is, a change in the composition of the unemployed.

The Opposition realises that the excuse or explanation that is put forward for the blowout of the Government's expenditure in regard to unemployment benefits is that it has just started to discover that there is an increased proportion of adults receiving unemployment benefit. In respect of the February figures, on II March, I said:
A large part of the increase in joblessness has occurred amongst adults . . .
So, as far back as February I was saying that the employment market had collapsed and that the significant feature was the growth in respect of the adult unemployed. On behalf of the Opposition, I said:
The Government's general economic strategy, aimed at reduced public expenditure and money supply growth, has been the major cause of poor employment performance. Its inadequate labour market programs have had no effect on relieving the unemployment problem . . What is required is a more expansionary fiscal policy to regenerate employment growth, combined with specific job creation schemes aimed at particular disadvantaged groups of unemployed.
That was the position of the Opposition being put to the people of this country in respect of figures for February 1982. I was saying it on behalf of the Opposition on II March. What gall this Government has to be getting up now and saying that it is appalled by the suddenness with which this problem has hit the country and that only recently it has discovered that there is a change in the composition of the unemployed and that perhaps it should do something in respect of alternative economic strategies in regard to job creation programs. That was what we said in March. Again, on 2 April, I said:
There can be little doubt now that the Australian labour market is in a state of collapse.
In attacking the Government's policies, I said on that date:
In particular, it must not continue to dismiss the relevance of public job creation programs.
I ask members of this House to recall the reaction to those statements made by me on behalf of the Opposition in the early part of this year when I analysed, on the available evidence, what was happening in terms of the collapse of employment and when I said, on behalf of the Opposition, that what was necessary as part of the new approach was the undertaking of job creation programs. We were ridiculed. Scorn was poured upon us when we said that that had to be part of an approach. But now, as we get to the end of this year, the slow learners who constitute the Government of this country have gradually come to understand that what we were telling the people of Australia in the early part of this year was right.

Employment Market

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3261

The same sort of point was made a few days later on 6 April when I said:
. . . the Australian labour market is in a state of collapse.
I remind honourable members that on 6 April I said:
Unless Federal policies are dramatically revised, we are confronted with the spectre of over half a million unemployed by the end of 1982.
I said that on 6 April this year in respect of the figures for March. Again, what was the reaction of this Government? I was not merely contenting myself with analysing what would inevitably happen; I pointed out what needed to be done in terms of a change of direction, including the undertaking of job creation programs. Again, we were met with scorn back in April. We were told that we were exaggerating when we said that by the end of the year over a half a million people would be unemployed. I said the same thing in respect of the available evidence in the following month.
The point I want to make here is that this gives me and the Opposition no comfort at all. We are not trying to gloat in terms of saying now in December that we were right in February, March and April when we read the statistics, accurately predicted the developments and analysed what inevitably would happen in this country, when we told this Government in April that unless it changed its direction over half a million would be unemployed by the end of the year and when we told this Government that it had to undertake, amongst other things, job creation programs. It gives us no comfort now to be able to say that we analysed the situation correctly some six months or more before this. This Government knows that we went through the half a million barrier of unemployed in September this year. Just half an hour ago we were given the figures for November.
Mr Les Johnson~ What are they?
Mr HA WKE~ They are disastrous. In seasonally adjusted terms, the figure of unemployed in this country is now 603,300~8.6 per cent. There has been a growth in unemployment over the year to November of 180,000. In the last 12 months there has been a growth of full time job seekers of 174,000. I said in the earlier part of this year~something just discovered by this inept Government that simply will not face up to the truth~that we could see the composition of the unemployed changing towards involving more and more adults.
What do the figures for the last 12 months show? Out of that growth of 174,000 full time job seekers, 144,000 were adults~about 110,000 men

and 33,000 women. Those are the figures for the last 12 months. If honourable members look at the figures for the last six months they will see that there has been a growth of 150,000 full time job seekers, of which 131,000 are adults. Those are the sorts of figures we have before us. Full time seasonally adjusted unemployment rates from June to November have consistently gone up. The figures from June to September inclusive were 6.6 per cent, 6.8 per cent, 6.9 per cent and 7.4 per cent. In October the figure was 8.4 per cent and in November the full time seasonally adjusted figure for the unemployment rate in this country was 9.1 per cent. Those are the figures.
The point I want to hammer is that this sort of trend was clear and was exposed by us early this year. Confronted with these facts the Government has dissembled and deliberately attempted to mislead the Australian public as to the extent of the response that it is making in this area. I know that the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) will accept the accuracy of what I put. But I do not rely simply on our own analysis. I wish to refer briefly to an article written by Mr John Freeland of the Department of Social Work in the University of Sydney. Under the heading 'An Evaluation of the Fraser Government's Record in the Area of Unemployment and Training Programs' he refers to the Minister's Press release on Budget night in which the Minister stated:
This increase is a positive response by the Government to recent developments in the labour market.
That is referring to the area of manpower and training programs. He referred to the further statement by the Minister:
The 1982-83 allocation again demonstrates the Government's full commitment to help the young and others disadvantaged in the labour market . . .
What did Mr Freeland have to say in respect of the Government's claim that it had made a positive, increased response to this increase in unemployment? This independent researcher had this to say about the Government's claim that it had increased its allocation in the face of a growing unemployment problem:
What Mr Macphee conveniently failed to mention is the fact that the Labor Government Budget allocated $408.7 million (in 1982-83 prices) to 'manpower and training programmes'.
Mr Freeland said:
That is, the Fraser Government's real commitment to the unemployed is evidenced by a 39.15 per cent cut in expenditure on unemployment and training programmes from 1975-76 to 1982-83.
That is an independent analysis. We have had this great growth in unemployment and we have the

3262 REPR ESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Employment Market

Government attempting to talk about an increase in expenditures on manpower and training programs in this last Budget when, as these independent researchers show, in the face of this more than 50 per cent increase in unemployment it has massively cut its expenditures in this field. The Council of Social Service of New South Wales in its Press release dated 21 November-I do not suppose that even the idiot in the far corner of the chamber who is attempting to interject will say that the Council of Social Services of New South Wales is some communist front organisation-had something to say when picking up this point. Under the heading 'Necessary Changes' the Council said in respect of this real cut:
Immediately increase the 1982-83 Budget allocation for unemployment assistance and training programmes to parity, ($ per person unemployed) with the 1975-76 level. That is an immediate increase of $475m, from $290m to $765m.
That is what is needed, my friends, if we are to have the same level of commitment by this Government to training and employment programs for the unemployed at the end of 1982 as we had in 1975-76. This is not being pointed out by the Australian Labor Party but by the Council of Social Service of New South Wales. Those sorts of things ought, I suggest, to be enough to make the Government realise that, in aggregate terms, it simply is not doing the sort of job that needs to be done. But the Council of Social Service goes on to point out the inadequacy and the irrelevance of so many of the programs of the Government in relation to the dimension and structure of the unemployment problem. It states:
A minimum of 81 per cent of total expenditure in 1981-82 was allocated to programmes for persons under 25 years of age. At the same time only 51 per cent of the unemployed were under 25 years.
Putting it round the other way, the Council continues:
A maximum of9 per cent of total expenditure was available to the 49 per cent of the unemployed over 24 years of age.
This Government has got to come clean, be honest and acknowledge the great growth in unemployment. It has to acknowledge that it has cut its real expenditures. It should face up to those problems and increase the level of expenditures in a way which relates to the reality of the problem.
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations) (l2.32)-1t is not true to say that merely the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) has been warning Australians of the worsening economic situation. We, as a government, have been doing so consistently, and there is no denying--
Mr KerinDoing nothing about it.

Mr MACPHEE-If the honourable member waits a minute I will tell him what we have done about it and what we are doing about it. There is no denying that there has been a dramatic deterioration in the economy. The figures read out by the honourable member for Wills confirm that. The honourable member for Wills has analysed the economic situation correctly in terms of its sorry state. In fact, the Australian Labor Party has still not provided a prescription. There was reference this morning to the comments of the State Secretary of the Labor Party as to the incoherence of Labor's economic suggestion. I recall the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) saying that one reason why the Labor Party lost the Flinders by-election was that it had not had time to prepare its economic policy.
This Government has responded progressively to the deteriorating situation. In May this year we aanounced our housing package and in July our industry program which was aimed at helping retain employment and encourage further investmen. In the Budget in August we announced our tax measures, our training programs and the capital works programs, all of which are employment creating. We had our strategy for real wage reduction beginning with our own salaries and the Remuneration Tribunal and, more recently, the call for a wage pause and the willingness to off-set the savings-not to reduce the deficit-to assist in the creation of other employment. There is no doubt that Opposition members of this Parliament are out of what is now a significant broad based consensus. They are the ones who are out and they are the ones who are bleating and still have no tangible program to offer the people of Australia. There is a large measure of agreement between the Australian Council of Trade Unions and this Government and there is a large measure of agreement between this Government and Labor Premiers as well as the non-Labor Premiers. There is no denying the fact that we are in a serious international recession.
But before I leave the comments made by the honourable member for Wills, let me just dispel again the remarks he has made by quoting Mr Freeland who, because he is apparently an independent researcher, must apparently be accepted as gospel. Mr Freeland's figures cover the last Labor Budget, as he says. They relate to programs called Regional Employment Development schemes which have been derided by every Premier who was here this week, by the ACTU and by members of the Opposition, and which were terminated by the Labor Government. The figures in my Press release, of which he chose to

Employment Market

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3263

take a part, related to the real training programs, not the make-work programs of this Government.
I will not take any further time to criticise the Opposition, but I will refer briefly to the state of the economy. There is no denying that the international recession has directly and adversely affected the volume of and the prices paid for Australian agricultural, mining and manufacturing exports. It has also led to a levelling off of investment expenditure as expectations of future export demand have had to be revised downwards. It has increased import competition as overseas suppliers search for market opportunities. wherever they can find them. We are caught up In a global recession. There is very little about this global recession which can be attributed to the policies of the Government. Unemployment in the United States is currently above 10 per cent, in the United Kingdom 13 per cent, in Canada over 12 per cent, in West Germany 8 per cent and in France 9 per cent. Our situation has been worsened by drought. To suggest that Government policy is causing the unemployment slide ignores the fact of international economic life.
The Government has never pretended that our problems are entirely a result of the drought or the global recession, nor have we sought to make a scapegoat of wages. We know that our competitiveness in overseas markets is declining for all of those reasons. We have had a situation where there has been a decline in domestic productivity growth. We are now in a situation where our inflation rate is higher than that of our Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development competitors. Yet in the year to September our inflation was 12.3 per cent compared with the OECD average of 7.4 per cent. The figures in Japan and the United States of America-which are so important to us as trading partners--are even lower than that average. Their trend is going downwards and our trend is at least remaining the same. The increase in wages over the same period h~s been about 17 per cent and that is clearly running ahead of the consumer price index. So real wages have increased by over 4 per cent during that period.
Mr Hawke~-And major executive salaries went up by 19 per cent.
Mr MACPHEE-That reminds me--
Mr Campbell-Tell us about the drop In production.
Mr MACPHEE-I will. Honourable members who have spoken about the wage restraint have chosen. to ignore the fact that every politican, every Judge, every senior public servant and

people who have their incomes boosted by Commonwealth support, such as pharmacists and doctors, will be caught up in the legislation which I will be introducing next week. We are not just asking wage earners to make a sacrifice, we are also asking salary earners to make the same
sacrifice. I can. assure you, .Mr Deputy Speaker, that the most Important thing we can do at the moment is to recognise that our real wages have increased dramatically and also that this Budget has increased real disposable income. The only way. we can get our costs down is by exercising, not Just wage restraint, but a total wage deferral of the next community round. We have allowed the completion of the community round which began a year ago with the metal industry award on the basis of equity and we are now asking the public and .private sectors and every wage and salary earner In the country to accept a wage pause in order that the economy can recover and our competitiveness can improve. We have also said that the savings that can be gained from the pause can be applied in conjunction with the States for work related activities.
I must stress that we have never thought that
expanding the Budget deficit still further by make-work programs was going to do anything other than aggravate inflation and worsen unemployment. By getting this pause we are seeking to retain jobs. This will enable those people who go off on their Christmas recess to know that they have a better prospect of having jobs when they return than would have been the case if the wage pause were not in place. Many companies are currently considering the fact that they might not reopen their doors or they might ask some of their employees not to come back or all of them to take several more weeks leave instead of coming back at the end of January. Now the employers, the investors of capital, will know that they have an opportunity to avoid massive wage hikes in the next 12 months. The employees know that their skills and their investment of labour have a better chance of being retained. That is a most important step forward. The fact that a wage pause is recognised as important by the ACTU and the Labor Premiers, albeit they now say for six months, shows how wrong-footed was the Opposition when the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) continued to talk about the fact that there must be real wage maintenance. What are we doing in response to this situation? We are undertaking extra--
Mr Campbell-You are blaming God and the workers; that is what you are doing.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The Chair has warned the honourable

3264 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Employment Market

member for Kalgoorlie. I give him a final warning. One more word and he is out.
Mr MACPHEE-We have undertaken discussions with the Labour Ministers and the Premiers on the kinds of programs which they would like to see in place. In respect of our training programs, commencing 1 March 1983 a new scheme for unemployed adults will be available though a wage subsidy to employers to provide job opportunities for them. The scheme is similar to the Special Youth Employment Training Program for unemployed youth and it will give employers, taking on adults over 25 who have been unemployed for eight out of the past 12 months, a subsidy of $100 a week for 17 weeks followed by $75 a week for a further 17 weeks.
Mrs Darling-When does that start?
Mr MACPHEE-It starts on 1 March 1983. A more generous subsidy will be paid for those aged over 45 years who have been continuously unemployed for 12 months. Employers of these persons will receive $125 a week for a full year. This initiative responds to the growing number of long term unemployed adults in the labour market and will help re-establish participants in stable employment in the private sector. In addition, wages subsidies are an effective means of helping females to re-enter the work force after protracted periods of unemployment.
On the apprenticeship front, all the indicators suggest that apprenticeship numbers will decline in 1983. The Government is determined to ensure that all possible measures are taken to keep as high as possible apprenticeship training. To offset a decline in industry intakes, we will negotiate with State governments to increase by 2,000 the number of full time education places in tradebased pre-employment courses. Some State governments have already come forward with proposals and I am confident that we will reach an early agreement on those. Existing support programs will be used more flexibly to help retrenched apprentices maintain their skills or finish their formal training. I urge employers to take on as many apprentices as possible in 1983. I draw their attention again to the Budget announcement of the increase of some 40 per cent in incentives under the Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training scheme from I January 1983.
Other measures have been introduced to help workers who are retrenched, or under threat of retrenchment, to undertake training or to help them relocate to areas where employment is available. Following very wide consultations with steel industry employers and unions, arrangements are

being implemented to provide special training assistance for redundant workers such as those who are in the steel industry in Newcastle and Wollongong. A wide range of special training courses is being developed and training allowances will be paid to these people so that they can upgrade and update or broaden their skills and improve their employment prospects. The Department of Employment and Industrial Relations and the Commonwealth Employment Service will co-operate in making this flexible training response available across Australia wherever large scale retrenchments are concentrated in particular industries or areas.
Retrenched workers will also benefit from the increases in allowances and subsidies which are payable under the skills training program and more generous relocation assistance. The full year cost of these measures is expected to be more than $20m but because of the timing and delay in claiming payment there will be little impact on expenditure in this financial year. The main expenditure increase will be felt in 1983-84. The Government has approved an immediate increase of 400 full time staff and 84 part time staff in the CES. These additional staff resources have been provided to improve and extend the employment services offered to unemployed persons seeking the assistance of the CES.
Mr Hawke-And to deal with the massive increase in the numbers of unemployed.
Mr MACPHEE-Would the honourable member rather not see this done? In particular, CES assistance has been significantly augmented for mature age job seekers-who are reflected very clearly in these statistics today-and the long term unemployed to help determine their employment prospects and directions in which they should seek work. A substantial increase has been provided for skilled employment officers and employment counsellors. We are also giving particular attention to migrant job seekers. Interpreter services will be boosted and liaison officers will be provided in areas where there is a high concentration of migrants seeking employment.
Regarding youth, the schools liaison program will be re-introduced and the CES support for the School to Work Transition Program and the Community Youth Support Scheme will be increased. Additional CES vocational officers will be provided to assist those Aboriginal persons who do not have ready access to existing CES offices. There is also occupational information and guidance. The majority of CES offices are equipped to provide ready access on up to date information opportunities for job seekers. These are

Petitions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3265

important responses to what is a very serious economic situation. I repeat that the people of Australia can feel confident that the heads of government in this country and the ACTU have a capacity to come to terms with the situation. A remarkable amount of common ground has been found. It is about time that the sparring, shadow boxing and point scoring was put to one side and that the Opposition accepted the fact that governments are governing and they are governing in harmony for the well-being of Australia.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Vietnam Veterans
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) that US, Australian and allied forces used huge amounts of toxic chemicals for military purposes, such as Agents Orange, Blue and White, in Vietnam during the war there;
(2) many of these chemicals were, and are, known to be highly dangerous to human health;
(3) Australia's Vietnam veterans and their families are suffering many severe problems which may be due to their exposure to these chemicals; and
(4) the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia has been seeking a royal commission for well over two years to ensure an independent investigation of these matters.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Parliament of Australia will:
(a) express its support for the Royal Commission; and (b) urge the Federal Government to establish the Royal
Commission immediately.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Everingham, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Kent, Mr Milton, Mr Scholes and Dr Theophanous.
Petitions received.
Australian Postal Commission
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
I. that Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. that the Australian postal service meets the needs of all Australians.
3. that any reduction in Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward will destroy the concept of the national postal service and result in: increased rates for mail carried outside the capital cities;

a reduction in mail delivery and collection frequencies in non-profitable areas; the closure of post offices.
Your petitioners therefore pray: that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
by Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Duffy, Mr Jarman, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Kent and MrMildren.
Petitions received.
Slaughter of Marine Mammals
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. Since the Australian Whaling Protection Act, 1980 provides for the banning of importation into Australia of all whale by-products, and
2. The Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the International Banning of Whaling,
3. Then consistent with (I) and (2), this Government should immediately legislate to ban the importation of all marine mammal by-products, including the harp seal of Canada, and
4. Through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly, the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an International ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that: consistent with Legislation on whaling, this Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products, and support an International ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross and Mr Dean.
Petitions received.
Macedonian Language
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
(I) That the Macedonian language be used by Government Departments in multi-lingual publications.
(2) That the petitioners urge the introduction of the Macedonian language as a Higher School Certificate (H.S.C.) subject in Secondary schools.
(3) That the petitioners urge the introduction of the Macedonian language in tertiary institutions and that a course be introduced at Monash University in the Department of Slavic Languages.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate action to implement the above measures. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins and Mr Kent.
Petitions received.
South Australian College of Advanced Education
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Australian Parliament assembled. This humble petition of citizens of Australia showeth that:

3266 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Petitions

Members of the Community are concerned and alarmed at staffing cuts within the South Australian College of Advanced Education.
Members of the Community are concerned and alarmed at the consequent deleterious effect these staffing cuts will have on the quality of educational programmes and the access of persons to these programmes at the South Australian College of Advanced Education.
We the undersigned citizens of Australia by this humble petition respectfully pray that the Australian Government provide additional funding to the South Australian College of Advanced Education to enable 1982 programmes and staff levels to be maintained and where needs exist, the resources of the College to be expanded to meet the requirements of the community of South Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrBaume.
Petition received.
National Estate Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the lack of effective Federal environment protection legislation and urge that suitable legislation be enacted immediately.
Your petitioners are concerned that National Estate areas such as South West Tasmania. the Great Barrier Reef and the Western Australian Jarrah Forests cannot be fully protected until adequate legislation exists and is enforced. Your humble petitioners therefore call upon the House of Representatives to ensure that all provisions of the Heritage Act and the Environment Impact of Proposals Act are fully complied with in respect of National Estate Areas. In particular your petitioners call upon you to adopt the recommendations of the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment on South West Tasmania. Your petitioners believe that this is a national issue and must be resolved by the action of the Federal Parliament.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrBaume.
Petition received.
Philippines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The petition of certain undersigned persons (citizens of Australia) shows concern and dismay that Fr Brian Gore, an Australian citizen and missionary priest in the Philippines is charged with subversion, possession of explosives and of inciting rebellion, warrants of arrest pertaining to which have been issued and served on 18 October 1982.
Your petitioners therefore pray that you do all in your power to urge the Philippine authorities to cease harassment of Fr Gore and to allow him to continue his missionary work without threat of fear of arrest; furthermore, that Fr Gore be allowed his right to legal advice and representation and of access at all times to his friends and religious colleagues.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.

Funding of Pre~schools
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth:
That we are concerned with Pre-school Services in this state if the Commonwealth carries out a suggestion to scrap its funding of pre-schools.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will ensure that there is no decision to end the current $9 million provided and to index its contribution to Pre-schools.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier.
Petition received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not protecting family home buyers from the severe effects of increased and increasing rates by interest on home mortgage loans. Together with causing a drastic slump in the home building and associated industries.
Your Petitioners, therefore, pray that Parliament take immediate and positive action by a I per cent reduction in Savings Bank Interest rates to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause detrimental financial, social and psychological pressures on families, and in many cases, positive hardship.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that Australia Council funding for the Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland has been entirely cut for 1983.
The Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland has made an important contribution to the cultural and artistic life of the Australian community for the past eight years taking innovative and original theatre to sections of the community who would not normally attend live theatre performances.

Petitions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3267

The Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland is the only theatre company in Australia which consistently presents theatre of social comment and tours nationally every year.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament will resolve to ask the Australia Council to reverse its decision in respect of the Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Curfew at Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia shows:
That noise levels created by aircraft using Eagle Farm Airport Brisbane already constitute an annoyance to those residents living near the airport and along flight paths;
That a decision to allow commercial jet aircraft to fly into and out of Eagle Farm Airport between 11.00 p.m. and 6.00 a.m. would:
(a) further violate the right of local residents to sleep for a minimum period of seven hours, and
(b) contradict and negate a commendable undertaking made by the former Minister for Transport, Ralph Hunt, in reply to a question on notice in the Parliament that the curfew will remain at Eagle Farm Airport.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government rejects the curfew proposal made by the Aviation Industry Advisory Councilor any similar proposal which allows commercial jet aircraft to operate in curfew hours.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Telecommunications Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows that implementation of the recommendations of the Davidson Committee report into Telecommunications Services in Australia will leave Telecom with responsibilities for unprofitable services only, that this, together with the proposal to time charge local telephone calls and increase telephone rentals, will mean a drastic increase in charges for the ordinary telephone consumer, particularly:
(a) the frail aged and the disabled for whom the phone is often t he on Iy means of communication,
(b) the lonely who utilise emergency relief organisations such as Lifeline and talk-back radio programs, and
(c) people in rural areas and outer suburbs.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government rejects the report.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pharmaceutical Declaration Form
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.

The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia shows that the decision to make pensioners and financially disadvantaged persons complete a declaration form before obtaining concessional and free pharmaceuticals is both an unnecessary harassment of the aged and those on low incomes and a time consuming and therefore costly burden for chemists.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government demonstrates some concern for the integrity and welfare of the aged by withdrawing the decision.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the taxes of all Australians will be used to finance a dam that would flood the Lower Gordon and Franklin Rivers in South-West Tasmania. Your peititoners declare that the intrinsic values of this area, and the provision of funds from the taxes of all Australians, for the destruction of this area of the National Estate and of world heritage value, does make this a national issue. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government take all possible steps, including financial and legal steps and fulfil its responsibility under the Australian Heritage Act to prevent the destruction of this area of the National Estate, and your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman.
Petition received.
Badgery Creek, New South Wales
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
No airport for Badgery Creek or its surrounding districts and your petitioners duly will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman.
Petition received.
Taxation: Alcohol Beverages
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) Noting that the 1982 National Budget includes increased taxes on beer and spirits, we draw attention to the fact that wines have a higher alcoholic content than beer and that wine consumption must be a significant factor in the mounting problems arising from the use of alcoholic beverages; we request that all alcoholic wines be taxed to a degree comparable to the taxes on other alcoholic beverages.
(2) Whereas non-alcoholic wines do not cause social problems we request that no tax on these drinks be imposed.
(3) That government imposts on all alcoholic beverages be adjusted annually so that the real price of the beverages remain constant.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrMoore.
Petition received.

3268 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Petitions

Nuclear Disarmament
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned, hereby protest strongly against world proliferation of Arms and urge your Government to take a more active role in relation to nuclear disarmament.
by Mr Sainsbury.
Petition received.
Advertising of Alcohol
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the citizens of Queensland respectfully shows:
Last year. over 3,300 people died on Australian roads;
Alcohol is a factor in 50 per cent of road deaths;
Alcohol advertisements do not show the perils of driving after drinking alcohol;
Alcohol advertisements are glamorous and increase their effect on teenagers, indicating drinking alcohol as the social pastime.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will legislate to ban the advertising of alcohol from commercial television and radio.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross, Dr Everingham and Mr Hodges.
Petitions received.
Australian Capital Territory: Public Transport Interchange
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of the Australian Capital Territory shows:
That the exclusion of taxis from the Civic Passenger Transport Interchange is an unjust decision and places hardship on the sick, elderly, disabled and the public in general.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to permit taxis to use the Civic Public Transport Interchange.
by Mr Fry and Mrs Kelly.
Petitions received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Boulder, electors of the Division of Kalgoorlie respectfully showeth that we are opposed to the recently announced intention of Australia Post to discontinue mail deliveries from the Boulder Post Office.
The immediate result of this action will be much later deliveries of mail and parcels to the people of Boulder, however, the ramifications of this move are far more serious than the immediate effects.
Australia Post claims that its operation in Boulder is unprofitable and they intend to rationalise the operation, presumably to return the facility to a position where it will again show them a profit. Our inquiries indicate that the major costs contributing to losses at the Post Office are the extremely high maintenance costs caused by water seepage into foundations and walls and the cleaning costs of unused areas of the building.
These costs will not disappear with any reduction in service and the building has already been offered to the Shire of

Boulder. Bearing this in mind it is certain that postal operations will be reduced to a shop front operation, with a staff of one and will close for lunch. Presumably if this new operation was not profitable then postal services in Boulder would cease altogether.
We call on Australia Post to maintain its present services in Boulder.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Hawker respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Chapman.
Petition received.
Government Economic Policies
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Isaacs respectfully showeth:
I. That the Government's economic policies are causing undue hardship to millions of Australians.
2. The unemployment problem constitutes a national crisis with far-reaching economic and social consequences.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that
I. The Government reverses its economic policies and alleviates the hardships faced by Australian families.
2. Begin a job creation programme in both the private and public sector.
3. Extend Australian training and retraining programmes.
4. Implement a comprehensive manpower policy to meet Australia's future needs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Petitions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3269

by Mr Charles.
Petition received.
Telecom Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Isaacs respectfully showeth-
I. That the proposal to charge local telephone calls on a time basis will increase telephone bills. thereby disadvantaging those people who could least afford it, such as pensioners and other low-income earners.
2. That the proposal to change Telecom into a company would be the first step towards selling Telecom to private enterprise.
3. That the proposal to sell parts of Telecom's more profitable operations can only lead to increased charges, particularly for domestic and country services.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government guarantees:
I. That local telephone calls will continue to be charged on a per call basis.
2. That Telecom will remain a Statutory Authority.
3. That no part of Telecom will be sold, and that Telecom's more profitable operations must continue to subsidise domestic and country services.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received.
Television Programs: Captions for the Deaf
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of certain (electors of the Division of Queensland) shows--your petitioners are concerned that Queensland will not benefit from a decision by the Commonwealth Government to make money available for the Australian Broadcasting Commission to develop programs captioned for the deaf.
Your petitioners petition that the large numbers of deaf people resident in Queensland should be included in considerations concerning captioned television and in this regard call on the Government to ensure that the Australian Broadcasting Commission's captioned programs are broadcast in this state as well as in Victoria and New South Wales.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Telecom Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That all Australians will be financially disadvantaged by private sector involvement in activities currently performed by Telecom Australia;
That the recommendations of the Davidson Inquiry, if implemented, would reduce Telecom's capacity to provide the standard of communications service Australians presently enjoy;
And that, private sector involvement in the profitable areas of Telecom's activities would ultimately mean increased telephone charges, particularly in rural areas, to compensate for Telecom's loss of revenue.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to preserve Telecom as a public utility.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFree.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals for Slaughter
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned supporters of the Animal Rights Campaign and citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the export of over 5 million live food animals for export in 1979, and an estimated 6 million in 1980, has caused and will continue to cause unnecessary suffering to the animals concerned.
And that this trade of live food animals is economically irrational, disregards the well being of the animals and loss of jobs for Australians.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will legislate to prohibit the export of live animals and allow only carcass trade and your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones.
Petition received.
AMENDMENTS TO THE INSURANCE AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Ministerial Statement
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-by leave-The Government intends that the Insurance Amendment Bill 1982, now listed on the Notice Paper, be debated early in the autumn sittings. Following the introduction of the Bill into Parliament on 29 April 1982 the Confederation of Insurance Brokers of Australia and the Insurance Brokers Association of Australia-recently amalgamated to form the National Insurance Brokers Association of Australia-and individual brokers expressed opposition to paragraph (I) (d) of clause 15 of the Bill. Representations on this paragraph were also received from the Insurance Council of Australia and the Australian Insurance Association. As a result debate on the Bill was postponed on 18 August 1982 to enable industry concerns to be examined along with a number of suggestions for incorporating additional appeal provisions that were put forward by the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills.
In its present form paragraph (I) (d) of clause 15 adds a new paragraph (I) (ea) to section 30 of the Act which will provide that premiums which are due to an insurer from intermediariesincluding brokers-may be taken into account as assets for solvency purposes only to an extent not exceeding an amount equal to 20 per cent of the total premiums received by the insurer in the preceding financial year and only to the extent of 4

3270 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982 Amendments to Insurance Amendment Bill

per cent of total premiums received in the case of anyone intermediary. The basic rationale of the paragraph is to limit the extent to which an insurer's compliance with the solvency provisions is dependent upon the ability of brokers to meet their commitments to insurers in respect of premium payments. An incidental effect would be to help speed up the flow of premium payments to insurers.
The Government has undertaken a careful examination L'f the concerns expressed about this paragraph by the industry bodies mentioned and individual insurance interests. As part of that process my colleague the Minister Assisting the Treasurer (Senator Messner) has discussed the paragraph, including proposed modifications to ease its overall effect, with representatives of the insurance broker and underwriter bodies. Following those discussions the ICA and the AlA, which represent the vast majority of all insurers authorised under the Insurance Act, have written to the Government expressing strong support for action to be taken to implement the provisions of paragra ph (I) (d) of clause IS in its proposed modified form.
While brokers have indicated their support for all other aspects of the Bill it is clear that the National Insurance Brokers Association of Australia and individual broker interests continue to be strongly opposed in principle to any form of restrictions of the kind reflected in paragraph (I) (d) of clause IS. Much of the concern of the brokers arises from their view that their financial viability will be threatened because of the loss of income from interest earned on their clients' moneys pending remittance of those moneys to insurers. It is questionable whether it is necesarily in the best interests of clients for premium moneys to be invested by and for the benefit of insurance brokers, particularly where a lengthy period of investment is involved. In any event, the Bill includes a provision which will allow a year for brokers to adjust their practices. In that time they can, if they choose to do so, move to a system whereby they receive appropriate fees and commissions for their services. It is certainly not the Government's intention to drive out brokers, as has been claimed by representatives of that part of the industry.
In a general context it is relevant that the extended credit terms available to insurance brokers are under separate examination by the Government as foreshadowed in my statement in Parliament on 10 June 1981 on the more general subject of broker regulation. It is emphasised, however, that while paragraph (I) (d), as proposed to be modified, would result in brokers being required

to remit premium moneys more promptly to insurers, the paragraph is primarily concerned with ensuring that insurers have sufficient financial strength to absorb any potential failure of a broker to meet its obligations to remit premium moneys to the insurers concerned. Premiums owing by brokers to insurers frequently involve substantial sums of money. If the financial strength of an insurer is marginal the loss of those moneys could endanger its ability to meet its commitments to policy owners. Thus, paragraph (I) (d) concerns a judgment about balancing the objectives of protecting the basic interests of pol-
icy owners through appropriate prudential regulations against the need to limit the degree of interference in the efficient operation of the industry. It is of particular relevance that the restrictions incorporated in paragraph (I) (d), as proposed to be modified, have been developed in the light of strong concerns expressed by successive insurance commissioners about the large amounts of unpaid premiums due to insurers from brokers and the implications those amounts can have in assessing an insurer's financial strength. Somewhat comparable restrictions have been in force in the United Kingdom for many years. As mentioned, the paragraph has received the overwhelming support of insurance underwriters.
It is, of course, relevant that to the extent that
insurers maintain a solvency standard in excess of the prescribed minimum they would not be inhibited by the amount of their premiums outstanding with brokers. As indicated in the latest annual report of the Insurance Commissioner, insurers with solvency margins greater than 30 per cent-the current minimum is IS per centcurrently account for about 84 per cent of premium income written. Thus there is considerable scope for insurers to transact business through brokers even with the limitations reflected in the proposed paragraph (I) (d). Against this background the Government considers it appropriate that the amendments to the Bill which incorporate the proposed modifications to paragraph (I) (d) of clause 15 and a number of other modifications-mainly additional appeals provisions-be circulated in the House at this time and allowed to lie on the table during the Parliamentary recess. Accordingly, I have authorised the circulation of the amendments in the House.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)-by leave-The Opposition recognises the importance of the Insurance Amendment Bill. I merely draw the attention of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) to the difficulty with logistics. There are some 25 amendments on eight pages of a list of

Commonwealth Prosecution Policy

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3271

amendments. In view of the fact that the matter will be dealt with in the next session, I indicate that the Opposition would give leave for a new Bill, incorporating those amendments to be presented next session. I think that would be much more effective.
Mr Howard--I appreciate the courtesy of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. We will take advantage of that facilitation.
COMMONWEALTH PROSECUTION POLICY
Ministerial Statement
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley-Acting Attorney-General)-by leave--For the information of honourable members. I present on hehalf of the Attorney-General, Senator Durack, a statement of the prosecution policy of the Commonwealth. The statement contains the guidelines for the making of decisions in the prosecution process and the considerations upon which those decisions are made. The guidelines set out are those that the Attorney-General will follow as First Law Officer of the Commonwealth, and those that he requires to be followed by officers of his Department and other officers of the Commonwealth engaged in law enforcement.
While the guidelines do not in Senator Durack's view represent any substantial departure from those that have been followed in the past, they are now drawn together for the first time in one document and thus provide a clear statement of the prosecution policy of the Commonwealth. This will assist officials who need to make decisions in the prosecution process; it will also make the public aware of what the guidelines are.
Sitting suspended from 1.1 to 2 p.m.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)--by leave-I wish to reply briefly to the statement made by the Acting Attorney-General (Mr N. A. Brown) when tabling the prosecution policy of the Commonwealth. We welcome the statement and the guidelines therein. In the course of the statement the Minister said:
While the guidelines do not in Senator Durack's view represent any substantial departure from those that have been followed in the past, they are now drawn together for the first time
I welcome the fact that they have now been drawn together, but I think there has been a substantial departure because we have had a lot of trouble in the area of prosecutions. I advert to paragraph 7 of the policy statement, which states:
_ . . the views of the Department responsible for the administration of the law are carefully taken into account _ . .

That was not done in respect of the tax evasion cases. If we look at the opinion of the Australian
Taxation Office, particularly Mr Todman, a senior officer of the Taxation Office, giving advice as to why there should have been prosecutions for conspiracy, supported by the opinion of Mr Brinsden, Q.c., we see that it was not done. It should have been done. It is causing no end of trouble to have to establish an office of special prosecutor to
try to remedy those defects. Another paragraph in the statement reads:

In making a decision

to proceed with conspiracy

charges against a number of defendants jointly, regard must

be had to tk practical difficulties

I welcome that statement. In the Greek con-
spiracy case, which has now cost the taxpayers
$20m, the Attorney-General's Department did not appreciate the practical difficulties or under-
stand whether it had any evidence. In fact, if we
look at the address by counsel for the defendants,
all of whom were acquitted after committal pro-
ceedings extending over years, we see that there was no evidence at the time the information was
laid. I can appreciate the Attorney-General's per-
sonal concern but it ought to be placed on record that these unfortunates were arrested in a glare of
publicity. Police officers made statements to the Press, radio and television about how this was to be a very effective action to prevent corruption,
deceit, conspiracy or whatever in regard to the wrongful use of taxpayers' money and the wrong-
ful claiming of social welfare benefits. It was an abject failure.

Without delaying the House, I shall refer to the most recent case, the Volkman case. The gentle-
man concerned was also charged with conspiracy.
That case, in which Volkman was aquitted by a jury, cost the Government over $2m and nearly
sent Volkman bankrupt because he had to defend
himself. There was an alternative charge avail-
able; he could have been prosecuted under the ap-
propriate Act, which would have brought a fine, but it was decided to charge him with conspiracy.
A prima facie case was not established. In fact the
magistrate clearly indicated that there was insufficient evidence for a jury to convict. The
Attorney-General, after a nine-month delay-this
gets personal-decided to file an ex officio indictment. Halfway through the trial a government Minister referred to the facts of the case in a sec-
ond reading speech, and that meant that the trial
had to be aborted and started again.

Surely these matters should not be allowed to
escape unnoticed. We want always to see that there is consideration for people who are on the
other end of the line and who have only themselves and their resources against those of the

3272 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Use ofChemicals in South Vietnam

Government. We welcome the guidelines but we hope that in future they will be applied with a little more understanding of what the law is all about. We hope that these guidelines are speedily implemented, if they are not already adopted. The mistakes of the past which I mentioned ought to be clearly in mind now. It was either the incompetence of Federal law officers or some personal vindictiveness-we do not know which-which led the nation into untold trouble. It has cost millions of dollars. Apart from Volkman's case, the Greek conspiracy case has effectively destroyed the lives of a number of people. One doctor had to represent himself for over two years in the course of the commital procedings. It is a world wonder to think that the Government was so persistent in pursuing a case when all the evidence was clearly against it, and ultimately the cases failed. The Criminal Investigation Bill which is referred to in paragraph 10 of the statement was introduced some 12 months ago. We appreciate the fact that some action should be taken on that matter.
AUSTRALIAN HERITAGE COMMISSION
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House)-by leave-This morning my colleague the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) tabled a report from the Australian Heritage Commission. After discussion with my colleague, with a view to facilitating the business of the House, I move:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Lionel Bowen) adjourned.
USE OF HERBICIDES AND OTHER CHEMICALS BY THE AUSTRALIAN
FORCES IN SOUTH VIETNAM
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Defence)-I table the report on the use of herbicides, insecticides and other chemicals by the Australian Army in South Vietnam and a report on the use of herbicides, insecticides and other chemicals by the Royal Australian Air Force in South Vietnam and seek leave to make a short statement.
Leave granted.
Mr SINCLAIR-On 6 May this year, in response to a question without notice from the honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford), my predecessor gave an undertaking to provide any further information that might become available on the use of chemicals in South Vietnam by the Australian Army. That undertaking was given

in reply to a question about the large number of Army records created in Vietnam which dealt with Australia's involvement in the Vietnam war that had been recently transferred for archival purposes to the Australian War Memorial. A painstaking search of Army records, comprising over 20,000 files, including Army files created in Vietnam and in Canberra, war diaries of units which served in Vietnam, and appropriate records of functional commands and military districts, was undertaken by teams of up to 30 officers and warrant officers at a time from Army Office. The result of that task, conducted in a sustained effort over three months, is a detailed report on the use of herbicides, insecticides and other chemicals by the Australian Army in South Vietnam. That is the report which I have just tabled. The report also fully covers all known and possible cases of exposure of Australians to chemicals used by United States forces.
Previous research by the Department of Defence on the subject of the use of chemicals in Vietnam was based almost wholly on files created in Canberra, which were thought most likely to contain all the information being sought. These concerned principally policy issues rather than operational details. Records created in Vietnam, giving operational details, were not examined
exhaustively until early this year. Already extensive documentation has been made public in such forms as the report Pesticides Used in Vietnam Hostilities and their use in Australian Agriculture: A Comparative Study, the pesticides report, answers to parliamentary questions, ministerial statements, Press releases and, most recently, evidence to the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment and its report on pesticides and the health of Australian Vietnam veterans. The Army report does much to confirm what was previously known and made public about this subject, but it also provides new information, some of which contradicts earlier statements. These earlier statements were, of course, made in good faith on the basis of the then known facts. But, new information having come to light, some of these statements are seen to have been wrong. I shall refer briefly to the salient points, but I stress-and the media might note-that the Army report, which is a comprehensive and accurate summary of a vast mass of material, needs to be read in its entirety to ensure a correct perspective on the events depicted in the many files examined.
The Australians in Vietnam were involved with herbicides in three ways: there was the aerial herbicide spray program carried out by the United States; there were crop destruction

Use ofChemicals in South Vietnam

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3273

missions principally carried out by the United States; and herbicides were used to control vegetation around perimeters and bases. I wish to emphasise to honourable members that the use of herbicides in Vietnam has to be seen in the context of the war and the terrain in which it was fought. Chemical products were used in and around the Australian Army's bases in an attempt to keep down vegetation which posed risks to Australian lives because it offered cover to hostile forces. There was, and is, no mystery about this matter. The Australian Army took reasonable and responsible steps to protect Australian lives. I draw the particular attention of honourable members to book 2 of the Army report where it is recalled that:
The defoliation program was seen as an important measure in helping to deprive the enemy of the advantages that he enjoyed through the use of natural vegetation for cover in Vietnam's tropical environment. In addition, through crop destruction, mainly utilising herbicides, it was intended that the vital in-country food support that the enemy relied upon could be substantially reduced. The use of herbicides to control base area vegetation was also seen as an important protective aid to local defence.
From 1962 to 1971 the United States carried out, in support of the Government of South Vietnam, an aerial herbicide spray program over a wide area. This became known as the Ranch Hand program. The aim of this was to expose enemy installations and communication routes to observation from the air and to provide improved observation and easier going for allied troops on the ground. Many herbicides were used in the Ranch Hand program, but mainly agents orange and white. The Army report makes it clear that the Ranch Hand missions over parts of Phuoc Tuy Province were mostly at the request of our forces from about mid-1966 to mid-1968. The cessation of the United States defoliation operations in Phuoc Tuy Province appears to have resulted from comments by the Commander, 1st Australian Task Force, among others, that they were not achieving the aims set for the Ranch Hand program.
Control of vegetation by Australians around the Australian Task Force base area was a major task in South Vietnam. A variety of products used for that purpose was, and still is, commercially available in Australia and widely used in this country. It has been previously stated that no records had been found which showed that Australian forces had used agent orange. The Army report refers, however, to indications that on one occasion Australian forces may have used six drums of agent orange to control vegetation in 1966 but it is not possible to say with certainty that they were in fact used. With the exception of

the mention of an Australian crop-destruction operation in the pesticides report, it had been previously understood that Australians did not conduct crop destruction in South Vietnam. The Army report shows that Australian forces destroyed crops by using herbicides, by burning off, by contamination with oil and by breaking padi bunds, those earth banks around rice paddies. In addition to these Australian crop destruction operations, the United States undertook similar operations at our request. Known herbicidal crop destruction operations took place on five occasions between July 1967 and July 1968. Two others may have occurred-one in September 1968 and one in August 1969.
The Air Force report, which I have also tabled, shows that three of the five crop destruction operations I mentioned involved the use of RAAF helicopters and crew. The reports indicate that up to 13 drums of herbicide, possibly of agent orange, may have been used in 1967. This figure was thought to have been only 12 drums and, in fact, has been increased only today as a result of checking the exact number of the drums used. In order to be absolutely certain we have checked the records. Whilst there is some doubt about the figure we believe that 13 drums and not 12 drums were used. For that reason that figure has been included in this statement. I am now making to the House. However, of these 13 drums, the documentation suggests that the United States force sprayed 10 drums and it is probable that the remaining three were sprayed from a RAAF helicopter. Again, those figures were also in some doubt and they have been checked and verified by a search which has been concluded only today.
In spite of the allegations that the Army continued to use helicopters after the United States stopped, there is in the Army report a record of only one request from the Australian Task Force in Vietnam, made after the United States suspension, to employ the herbicide Dalapon to destroy
crops. This request was not agreed to by the Department of Defence. The report also notes one instance of a post-suspension order to kill weeds on a helicopter pad at Nui Dat. Whether herbicides were to be used, or even whether the order was carried out, is not clear. The Army report reveals little new information regarding our use of insecticides in South Vietnam. A variety of measures was used to combat insect-borne diseases, including extensive aerial insecticide spraying as well as ground spraying. The spraying of insecticide was designed to prevent such diseases as malaria, encephalitis and filariasis and was completely in accordance with the recommendations of the World Health Organisation for other areas

3274 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Use ofChemicals in South Vietnam

such as Africa, central America and the south west Pacific, and indeed with practices of long standing and continuing present use and acceptance in Australia.
The Army report also summarises the use of other chemicals such as riot-control agents, camouflage creams and medicines taken for the prevention of malaria. The Army report makes clear that, prior to and during the war in South Vietnam, Australian Military Board instructions were in force on the safety precautions for ground spraying weedkillers and insecticides. There were two recorded departures from these instructions. The first occurred in December 1967 when an Australian ground spraying test of herbicides for the control of perimeter vegetation, using chemicals supplied from Australia, resulted in the exposure of eight individuals. This was attributed to the failure of the individuals to use all their safety equipment. The second involved two people, who had drunk alcohol, using aerosol insecticide sprays in a confined space during what was described as 'horseplay'. One was hospitalised.
On the topic of the extent of the exposure of Australian troops to chemicals the Army report records two instances of aerial herbicide exposure. On 15 September 1967 V Company, a New Zealand company of the combined 2nd Royal Australian Regiment-New Zealand ANZAC Battalion, was exposed to aerial 'crop dusting'. This is the only herbicidal crop destruction operation using a helicopter in which it seems likley that some personnel may have been exposed. The other exposure-and this one has already been made public-involved C Company, 5th Royal Australian Regiment, on 22 August 1969. Some of these troops were exposed to herbicides sprayed by the United States forces as part of Ranch Hand. There were only two cases of Australian soldiers being temporarily overcome by riot control agents to the extent that formal notification was made. On a number of occasions unidentified troops suffered minor ill-effects from these agents which did not need treatment.
As well as recorded instances of exposure, the Army report points out possible exposure in the operational area of the Australian Task Force. There were eleven occasions when friendly troops may have been exposed to herbicides sprayed by the United States forces as part of Ranch Hand. Details of 10 of these occasions were covered in evidence of Army units given to the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment. There were, of course, instances where exposure to Australian ground spraying herbicide operations was possible. The Army report indicates

that on occasions during the Ranch Hand program herbicides were sprayed in Phuoc Tuy by the United States forces at considerably higher than the recommended application rate. Only two of these cases occurred in close proximity-less than four kilometres-to Australian troop locations. In view of the apparent variations in application rates I have asked that this matter be investigated in the United States. On receipt of a reply I will report to the House.
In completing my brief summary of the Army report's contents on exposure I note that any illeffects recorded were in those few cases where safety rules for ground spraying were not followed. There has been particular interest in what Ministers of the day knew about Australian herbicide spraying programs. I shall outline briefly the instances described in the Army report of Ministers receiving information on this matter.
In summary, Ministers for the Army were told of problems encountered in the control of vegetation around base perimeters during 1967 and of the subsequent action taken to implement an adequate herbicide program to protect Australian lives. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), then the Minister for the Army, during a visit to the Australian Task Force in Vietnam in 1967, asked whether one of the substances tested to control vegetation contained toxic organophosphates which could be absorbed through the skin; it was subsequently confirmed that it did not. From June 1967, quarterly reports from the Field Operational Research Section of the Headquarters of the Australian Force, Vietnam, appear to have been passed regularly to the Minister for the Army, the present Prime Minister, at his request. The reports covered a wide range of subjects and occasionally contained brief references to herbicide use for perimeter vegetation control. Another document shows that in August 1967 the Deputy Chief of the General Staff wrote to the Minister for the Army, stating:
As you are aware, I ATF requires defoliants and herbicides to remove growth from their defensive wire and minefields. and to keep fields of fire clear, both at Nui Dat and the Horseshoe feature.
The DCGS indicated that he would seek the Minister's approval to send an expert from the Defence Standards Laboratories to Vietnam to see the problem at first hand. In November 1967, the Minister for Army, the present Prime Minister, approved the visit of Major E. S. Holt of the Scientific Advisor's Office, Army Headquarters, Canberra, to Vietnam to overcome perimeter vegetation control problems. He undertook this task with a Defence scientist, Mr G. A. Lugg of the Defence Standards Laboratories, Department of

Use of Chemicals in Sout h Vietnam

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3275

Supply. In a brief to the Minister for the Army, Mr Lynch, in 1969, the Secretary, Department of Army stated that Australia had not participated in warfare contrary to the 1925 Geneva Protocol, and defoliants had been used only for weedkilling. The Returned Services League in December 1969 sought assurance from the Minister for Defence the present Prime Minister, that servicemen's records would be endorsed when
they served in places where chemicals were employed. The Minister directed the Services to review their recording arrangements. In responding to the Minister for Defence in January 1970, Army stated that current policy called for a blood test to be made on all casualties and on persons suspected of having been subjected to chemical attack; that protective measures were taken to eliminate the risk of exposure where chemical agents were used for defensive purposes; and that accidental exposure was recorded on individual medical documents. In reply to the Secretary of Defence regarding the Minister's directive that Army review its recording arrangements in April 1970, Army said in August of that year that its arrangements were adequate but would be kept under review.
In Navy's case, there were no existing arrangements for recording exposure to chemicals, but arrangements were made in 1970 and appropriate
naval authorities were asked to report any case of exposure to the Head of Naval Personnel Branch, Navy Office. The Royal Australian Air Force considered that Air Board Order A7/28 was adequate to ensure the medical recording of chemical exposure. However, a specific question was included in the post-South East Asia medical examination procedures relating to 'any history of exposure to Weedicides/Pesticides or CS, (tear) gas'. The RAAF also issued instructions for appropriate blood examination if there was any suspicion of exposure. These requirements were subsequently embodied in Royal Australian Air Force Director General of Medical Services 'Medical Services Circular Serial No. GEN 1-31'
issued on 30 April 1970. This circular directed that a medical examination be carried out within three months of a member's return from Vietnam and provided that 'a specific history of exposure to toxic chemicals of the weedicide/herbicide type, or to CS (tear) gas is to be recorded and appropriate action taken'. Finally, although as I have said Ministers were aware of the use of herbicides to control vegetation around Australian bases, there is no record of Ministers having been informed of Australian participation in crop destruction programs or of Australian requests for United States forces to carry out aerial

herbicide spray missions. The report recalls in various places that the enemy mounted a propaganda campaign about the deleterious effects of herbicides. This campaign aroused fears and concerns similar to those experienced today. The United States provided information which stressed that herbicides when sprayed and used as directed would not harm humans. It is possible that many present-day worries over the use of herbicides are born out of that propaganda campaign.
Now I would like to mention several other related matters. There may be some concern that in tabling its report on 'Pesticides and the Health of Australian Vietnam Veterans' the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment
was not aware of the general findings of the Army report. I can say that the salient facts I have outlined here today were presented to the Committee. That Committee will, no doubt, assess the Army report. Previously, in the pesticides report, the extent of RAAF involvement in the aerial
spraying of herbicides and insecticides had been new details of the participation of RAAF helicopters and crew in crop destruction missions. The Air Force report also covers other RAAF chemical activity. In the pesticides report a fairly high degree of probability was accorded to the delivery and use of twenty 50-gallon drums of agent blue by Australians in September 1967. The Army report finds no evidence to support such a conclusion.
Mr Speaker, the Army Office personnel who undertook the task of researching the records and preparing this report are to be congratulated on their extensive and meticulous investigations. I cannot guarantee that further information will not come to light in future. However, given the enormous volume of records already examined, I strongly doubt whether any files that might hereafter be found will yield new information that
would materially alter the picture that has emerged. Given the high public interest in this topic, I have directed that special arrangements be made to make publicly available the files and documents on which the reports are based. In addition to other material, these include about 400 files created in Vietnam and now in the custody of the Australian War Memorial. Some of the documents on these particular files are of foreignmainly United States-origin and the agreement of the originators is being sought to their public disclosure. Australian documents on those 400 files are also being examined prior to release to protect individual privacy and, if relevant and necessary, national security. Those cleared should soon be available for public inspection.

3276 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Use ofChemicals in South Vietnam

I stress that all the documents, whether security classified or not, were examined and reported on by the Army team. Thus security considerations in no way affect the contents of the Army report. In our efforts to ensure that our reconstruction of the events of those days is accurate, my Department sought from the United States Department of Defense an assurance that the Army report does not contain information contrary to any it might hold. It knows of no information contained in United States documents or reports which will contradict the findings of the Australian report. The United States review of its Vietnam records is continuing but, at present, it has no information which would qualify this report. Because I think it will be of interest to the House, I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a cable which originates from Australian Defence, Washington and is addressed to Defence, Canberra. It confirms the advice I mentioned. It states:
For FASPC from HADS
Use of herbicides report
A. Your DEF 41 00 of 25 November 82.
B. Our WAC 466 of 26 November 82.
I. The written responses from the office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Research and Engineering) and the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health Affairs) have been received.
2. From OUSDRE the response was that they know of no information contained in US documents or reports which will contradict or refute the findings of the Australian report.
3. From Health Affairs the response was
Quote: To the best of our knowledge, at the present time we are not aware of any information which would qualify or contradict the Australian report as reviewed by my staff. However our records review of Vietnam era records is continuing and a large number of documents remain to be reviewed. Unquote.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! It is not possible to incorporate the document in Hansard. Mr Speaker has ruled that material of that nature may not be incorporated.
Mr SINCLAIR-I read it and, consequently, in order to verify the contents and the character I think it should be incorporated. I believe that it is not within the category of the cases to which Mr Speaker referred.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Hansard will have recorded the Minister's spoken words and the intelligence he conveyed orally. The Speaker's ruling is that material, the intelligence of which cannot be communicated orally, will be incorporated in Hansard, namely, statistics and figures.
Mr SINCLAIR-It is precisely for that reason that I seek leave to have the cable incorporated because there are a number of hieroglyphics on the cable which I would have thought honourable

members would have appreciated being able to read for themselves. I have a little difficulty in interpreting some of the terms such as 'DKAI 84 unclassified' and other specifics on the cable which I think honourable members might like to read and to ensure its purpose. Could I leave it in your hands, Mr Deputy Speaker? I hope it can be
incorporated.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has advanced a most persuasive argument. We will accept it conditional on the Speaker's seeing it as consistent with his ruling.

Leave granted. The document read as follows-

Department of Defence

INWARD MESSAGE

DKA 184 Unclassified

Priority 0119 OOZ Dec. 82

From AUSTDEF Washington

To Defence Canberra

Received DEF COMCEN 3352007 '82

Russel 654700

BT UNCLAS

SIGADA WAC 468

For FASPC from HADS

USE OF HERBICIDES REPORT

A. Your Def41 000f25 Nov. 82.

B. Our WAC 466 of 26 Nov. 82.

I. The written response from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Research and Engineering) and the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health Affairs) have
been received.

2. From OUSDRE the response was that they know of no
information contained in US documents or reports which will contradict or refute the findings of the Australian report.

3. From Health Affairs the response was

Quote. To the best of our knowledge, at the present time we are not aware of any

Page 02 RUEAKKE 4339 unclas

Information which would qualify or contradict the Australian report as reviewed by my staff. However our records review of Vietnam era records is continuing and a large number of documents remain to be reviewed. Unquote.
BT 04339 End Unclassified Action FASPC Info Standard Sec. CDFS DepSec-B

Mr SINCLAIR-My Department has cooperated in this matter by providing information to the Commonwealth Institute of Health, which is studying the possible effects of Vietnam service on Australian troops, to the departments of Health and Veterans' Affairs, and to the Senate Standing Committee on Science and Environment in its inquiry into pesticides.

Use ofChemicals in South Vietnam

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3277

The reports constitute a major work of reference for those bodies and I know that they will find them useful. They supplement information already given to the Senate Committee in evidence by officers of my Department and in written answers to questions from the Committee.
The source documents to these reports, other than the few restricted by privacy and security considerations, will be available to all these interested government agencies as well as to private bodies and individuals for further research. In addition to the normal tabling distribution of the report, I am making copies available to the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment, to departments, to the Commonwealth Institute of Health and to interested persons outside the Parliament.
The Army report, being a summary of the Vietnam files, tells us nothing about any possible long term effects of exposure to herbicides and the other chemicals. That subject was covered by the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment in its report entitled 'Pesticides and the Health of Australian Vietnam Veterans', tabled last month. What this Army report covers is the extent of exposure to herbicides, and it will be noted that Australian troops in Vietnam in fact experienced relatively little exposure, whether in the Army or in the Royal Australian Air Force. The Government is determined to unravel the events of the past and to assess any possible implications for the welfare of Vietnam veterans and/or their dependants. This report represents a further major contribution to our knowledge. I present the following paper:
Use of Herbicides and Other Chemicals by the Australian Forces in South Vietnam-Ministerial statement, 9 December 1982.
Motion (by Mr Hodgman) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (2.31) - The Opposition welcomes this statement as contributing some important knowledge to the existing state of knowledge with respect to the quite controversial situation involving the exposure of Australian troops in Vietnam to both defoliants and insecticides. It ought to be noted from the outset that, despite the value of the conclusions reached in some areas of the report on the Use of Herbicides and Other Chemicals by the Australian Forces in South Vietnam, neither the Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) nor the Department of Veterans' Affairs has denied that the report which has been tabled today is not the original report; it is one of 10 copies that were made of the original report. All except one have been destroyed, according to an answer given in the

Senate to a question on notice. This report is a summary. I suppose that, given the great volume of files available, someone had to produce a summary. I think it is important to note that in reaching a set of conclusions one is very much in the hands of the person who prepares that summary. Neither the Government nor the Department of Veterans' Affairs has denied that the revision has been carried out by Mr Bruce Manning of the Department of Veterans' Affairs, as alleged by the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia last month. What is important about this is that those people who basically are the object of this studythe Vietnam veterans-have, in my view, to be satisfied that in the preparation of this material they have been treated objectively. It is perfectly clear that the Association does not believe that Mr Manning was the appropriate person to prepare this summary. In a Press release of 25 November 1982 the Association, having alleged that it was his responsibility to produce this summary, said of Mr Manning:
Mr Manning and his boss Mr E. D. Letts have consistently attempted to disprove our claims and downgrade our evidence, under Parliamentary privilege before the Senate Committee. They have openly demonstrated their hostility to our claims.
That can be a matter, I suppose, of conjecture. But I think it is unfortunate that the person who was given the responsibility of putting this material together and drawing conclusions also become an advocate for the Department of Veterans' Affairs in giving evidence before the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment. The purpose of that evidence, according to the veterans themselves, was to downgrade both the worth and the weight of their evidence. I must say that, having heard Mr Manning give evidence, I believe there were many questions that could have been and should have been put to him. It would have been interesting to see how its assertions would have withstood the weight of a properly presented cross-examination in an effective judicial atmosphere. Having made that preliminary but important point, I move to that section of the Minister's statement where he says:
The Australians in Vietnam were involved with herbicides in three ways: There was the aerial herbicide spray program carried out by the United States; there were crop destruction missions principally carried out by the United States; and herbicides were used to control vegetation around perimeters and bases. I wish to emphasise to honourable members that the use of herbicides in Vietnam has to be seen in the context of the war and the terrain in which it was fought.
The Minister went on to make the statement:
The Australian Army took reasonable and responsible steps to protect Australian lives.

3278 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Use ofChemicals in South Vietnam

I have no doubt that it was the intention of the Australian Army and any responsible officer in the Australian Army under any circumstances to do what they thought necessary and appropriate to protect Australian lives. But one has to see any decision made in respect of that in the light of the body of knowledge, as it then existed, as to the extent and dangers of defoliants. I think it is true, and it would be considered, that a great deal more is known now than was known then. Despite all the precautions or, to use a simile, the directions on the bottle it is just not possible in many instances in which members of a task force are op-::rating under difficult regional circumstances in situations of potential hostility to take the kinds of care and precautions that are necessary. Let me quote a statement made on page 32 of the previous report entitled 'Pesticides Used in Vietnam Hostilities and their use in Australian Agriculture: A Comparative Study'. Having dealt with the fact of usage, the report states:
Once again, however, it must be stressed that difficulties are encountered during cunditi,ms of war which prevent the rigid adoption of precautions that can be applied in peacetime.
The report goes on to say:
Allhol!gh the regulations were designed to protect personnel from potential adverse health effects, it is impossible to determine the extent te which they were met.
Let those words sink in-it is impossible to determine the extent to which they were met. I therefore believe that, whilst it is true that reasonable steps would have been taken and would have been intended to be taken by Australian officers in charge;, the reality of the situation is that such is the state of Army records, such is the state of our knowledge now as compared to what it was then, that it is not possible for this Government to go on to minirr,isr;: the effects of exposure to defoliants and insecticides. I think it would have been more appropriate if the terms used in the previous rcports had be'~n used in the Minister's statement because I think they represent the reality of the situation-that is, that it is impossible to determine the extent to which potential adverse health effects occurred as a result of the failure to protect personnel in the vcry difficult situation in which they were operating.
The statement made by the Minister that Australians in Vietnam were involved with herbicides in three ways-he illust.rates them-is, in itself an important admission. On page :3 of his statement where he talks about the effect of the Ranch Hand program he provides details . ',ic~ :>re in themselves, I think, important statements. They are certai!lly, in my view, strongly at variance with the conclusions which were reached by the Senate Standing Committee when the Senate

Standing Committee, on page 51 of its report, reached this conclusion:

. . . the Comrr.ittee considers it far more likelv that

they-

"

That is, Australian troops-

Were exposed to insecticides rather than to herbicides.

In fairness to the Committee the report says:

the Committee acknowledges lhat only a small
number of troops could have been exposed to RANCH HAND herbicide spraying.

The conclusions reached by the Committee is based on two assumptions. The first is that the flight paths flown by pilots in Operation Ranch Hand were strictly adhered to. The reality is that casualties amongst those pilots were quite heavy.
Whilst it might be the intention of a pilot to rigidly adhere to a flight path it is not always easy. It is not even always easy on a flight from Melbourne to Canberra. It is certainly not easy when people are firing at you. That is the first assumption that is made. The second assumption is that whatever
herbicides were sprayed in the proximity of Australian Army personnel, they did not drift. The Senate Committee, having reached its conclusions on those two assumptions, goes on to say:

. . . there is no guarantee that either of these assumptions are correct.

Earlier in the report the Senate Committee accepts as evidence the fact that spray drift can be very considerable, depending upon the height from which the herbicide is dropped or the wind
conditions at the time. It accepted as evidence on oath that under certain circumstances sprays had been known to drift as far as 85.7 kilometres. I allude to those facts in order to point out to the House the complexity of the situation we are examining, the difficulty and, indeed, the danger of drawing some of the conclusions which I believe the Senate Committee has drawn, in many cases both against the evidence and the weight of evidence. I will have something more to say about that at a later stage.

I return te the statement by the Minister in which he makes the important distinction between herbicides and insecticides. Again, I think with the best intention in the world he makes a mistake which is carried right through this whole debate and which is one of the factors which influenced the Senate Committee to reach some incorrect conclusions. Perhaps the simplest way of putting it is to refer to the Minister's statement and the way in which he puts his argument. He says, having conceded that the Australian Army used insecticides in south Vietnam, that there was, 'extensive aerial insecticide spraying as well as

Use ofChemicals in South Vietnam

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3279

ground spraying'. He says that the spraying of insecticide was designed to prevent a range of diseases. He goes on to say that it occurred in accordance with practices of long-standing and continuing present use and acceptance in Australia. That terminology is designed to convince the average reader that what was happening in respect of insecticides~when one thinks about insecticides one thinks about the domestic sort, designed to kill a mosquito or to reduce fties~was
not really very dangerous. But of course the reality is that it depends upon the insecticide that is being used and upon the conditions of its use. It also depends upon the volume used and the nature of the exposure. Insecticides such as malathion, DDT and dieldrin, lindane, pyrethrin
and chlordane are very dangerous substances. To simply bracket them all as insecticides and say, 'Well, of course they are used in an Australian domestic situation and there are all sort of labels on the bottles', in my view, is not a fair or accurate description of the way in which these insecticides were used in a variety of circumstances and, in many cases, with inadequate protective clothing without due regard for the safety that is needed to surround the use of these substances. It certainly leads to false conclusions when we consider the appropriateness of that statement, again having regard to the circumstances in which these insecticides were used in Vietnam.
Mrs Darling~ They are under question in Australia.
Mr HOLDING~ The honourable member for Lilley reminds me that in some parts of Australia the use of these insecticides, even in domestic circumstances, is under question. Of course she is perfectly right about that. I turn to that aspect of the Minister's speech which deals with ministerial knowledge. I think we all have to be grateful that at least it is now formally acknowledged that there was some knowledge on behalf of the appropriate Minister at the time. I have had a question sitting on the Notice Paper since 27 April 1981 and directed to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), who was then the appropriate Minister for Defence, asking him to provide the House with details of his briefings and the extent of his knowledge based on those briefings as a result of the spraying of chemicals for defoliation in Vietnam. Despite there being something like a dozen requests to have that question answered, there has been no response. What we have today is a response which does not tell us that it is based upon the Prime Minister's records.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)~by leave~1 move:
That all words after That' be omitted with a view to substitution the following word;;
'In view of the contents of the Reports and the Minister's statement, this House calls for a Royal Commission of Inquiry into the effect on Vietnam Veterans and their families of the Veterans' exposure to herbicides and pesticides'.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Beazley~1 second the amendment.

Question put:

That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Holding's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker~Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

46

Majority

15

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr. M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Cariton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean, A. G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Fakoner, P. D. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom, R. J. Hall. Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges. J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard, 1. W.

Hunt, R. l. D. Hyde,J. M. Jull,D. F. Kalter, R,C.
Killen, Sir James Lusher. S. A. MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee. I. M. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter. J. R. Robinson. Ian Rocher. A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,l. McC. Spender, l. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. 1uckey.C. W. Viner, R.1. White, P. N. D.

Armitage. 1. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown. Robert Campbeil,G. C -. s s , M . H . Charles. D. E. Child.l. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T.

NOES

Jacobi. R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly. R.J. Kent.L Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon. Les (Teller) Maher, M. J. Milton,P.

3280 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

Darling. E. E. Dawkms, J. S. DufT).M.J. Free. R. V. Fry.K. L Hawke. R. J. L Holding. A. C. Howe, B. L. Hurford. C. J. Innes. U. E.

NOES

Morris. P. F. Morrison. W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes. G. G. D. Scott.J. L Theophanous, A. C. Uren. T. Wallis.LG. West,S.J. Willis.R.

PAIRS
Dobie. J. D. M. Nixon. P. J Fife. W. C.
In Division-

Keating, P. J. Young. M. J. Mildren. J. B.

Mr Scholes-Mr Deputy Speaker, raise a
point of order. I draw your attention to the fact that the actual terms of the amendment have never been read by the Chair. I ask that they be
read so that honourable members on both sides of the House know exactly what they are voting on.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I uphold the point of order. Even though the division is under way I shall read the amendment on the premise that honourable members will be situated in accordance with their inclinations towards the topic. The amendment moved by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports reads:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'in view of the contents of the Reports and the Minister's statement, this House calls for a Royal Commission of Inquiry into the effect on Vietnam Veterans and their families of the Veterans' exposure to herbicides and pestiCides'.
Question so resolved in the affirmative. Amendment negatived. Original question resolved in the affirmative,
REDEVELOPMENT OF BRISBANE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
Report of Public Works Committee
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, I present the final report relating to the following proposed work:
Redevelopment of Brisbane International Airportremainder of works of phase I.
Ordered that the report be printed.

JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
Reports
Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield)-I present the 200th and 203rd reports of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts,
Ordered that the reports be printed.
Mr CONNOLLY-by leave-The 200th report is the annual report for 1981-82 of the Joint

Parliamentary Committee of Public Accounts. It contains a review of the inquiries conducted by the Committee during the year and issues arising from our investigations and other matters which the Committee regards as significant in its development.
Throughout 1981-82 the Committee has continued to maintain an extensive program of inquiries and research. It tabled eleven reports on significant public sector management issues, such as the administration of petroleum royalties and excise, the operation of the Government Aircraft Factories, the effectiveness of the coal export duty and the conservation and curatorial functions of the Australian War Memorial. Additionally it has tabled discussion papers on the collection and dissemination of statistics and the form and standard of financial statements for Commonwealth undertakings,
The Committee also hosted its third parliamentary seminar on management and parliamentary accountability of the public sector during the year. This seminar gave senior public servants, and executives from the private sector, as well as members of parliament, the opportunity to participate in a range of workshops, the results of which were of great value to the Committee in its inquiry into the selection and development of senior managers in the public sector.
This year is the thirtieth anniversary of the re-establishment of the joint Committee of Public Accounts and I believe that it is appropriate that its 200th report should be tabled at this time, The success of the Committee, which I have the privilege to chair, has been built on the solid foundation laid over the past three decades by successive chairmen, members of the Committee and staff as well as by its official observers and advisers, all of whom have contributed to the building of an institution which is regarded within the Commonwealth as being a significant mechanism for effective parliamentary review,
With the growing complexities of government, and the intractable problems facing all parliaments in the management of the nation's affairs, it is now becoming a matter of vital concern that parliamentarians should be given the opportunity to be kept informed of the mechanisms by which the efficiency and effectiveness in the development and conduct of government programs can be assured. The Public Service, which is by nature conservative, needs to be tested by the Parliament to ensure that a more efficient and effective system of administration is developed and maintained.

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3281

The Committee wishes to record its appreciation to its secretary, its advisers, both seconded and permanent staff, for their excellent work throughout the year. In addition, the Committee wishes to thank officers from the Department of Finance and the Public Service Board as well as the Principal Parliamentary Reporter and his staff for their valuable assistance and other officers of the parliamentary departments who have supported the Committee in its activities. I commend this report to honourable members.
The second report, the 203rd, is a progress report prepared by the Joint Committee of Public Accounts at the request of the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton) last September to enable him to examine various options on the basis of the Committee's inquiry into the effectiveness of existing legislation and procedures for dealing with abuse of the medical benefits system. This report contains 45 recommendations directed at streamlining and strengthening both administrative procedures and existing legislation. During the inquiry to date the Committee has received considerable evidence on the abuse by some doctors of the health insurance arrangements. We have been shocked at the extent to which some members of this highly respected profession have gone to find ways of profiting from the system. It
may be recalled that the inquiry was undertaken as a result of the Department of Health's estimate that at least $100m per annum is being lost in medical fraud and overservicing. While there remains some doubt about the precise figure, on the basis of evidence before the Committee we believe that the annual amount is certainly no less than $100m and could well be higher.
I must emphasise at this point that the Committee believes a substantial majority of doctors are not engaged in either fraud or conscious overservicing, nevertheless there are members of the
medical profession who are defrauding the Australian community or consciously providing excessive services on a large scale as a means of supplementing their incomes. The medical profession occupies a position of great significance in our society, not only with respect to maintaining the health of the community but also because its members occupy the unique position of having access on the basis of trust to more than $1.5 billion annually from taxpayers and health fund contributors. Regrettably, some members have abused that trust, and thus have compromised the high standing of their professional colleagues. Whatever steps the Government decides to take to strengthen the monitoring and enforcement procedures it remains the responsibility of the medical profession to help re-establish the high

standards of conduct which the community expects of all its members.
The Committee has found the overall administrative response to fraud and overservicing most unsatisfactory. Despite the Department of Health's estimate that more than 2,000 doctors may be engaging in large scale fraud or overservicing, very few have been penalised. In almost seven years between July 1975 and March this year, there were only 48 successful prosecutions for medical fraud, and only 61 doctors suspected of overservicing were brought before medical services committees of inquiry. There are a number of factors contributing to this situation, including shortcomings in existing legislation, and long delays in the handling of cases by the Australian Federal Police and Crown Solicitors' offices. However, a great deal of the responsibility must rest with the Department of Health. The Committee has found its response to abuse of the medical benefits systems grossly inadequate. Despite ample evidence since at least 1975 that fraud and overservicing were occurring on a large scale, too little was done and always too late to effectively stem the loss.
This report mentions a number of areas where the Department's performance was unsatisfactory, including its failure to issue adequate guidelines to its State offices, with the result that they have adopted quite differing approaches to a common problem and have at times failed to investigate doctors even when there was strong evidence of fraud. The recommendations in the progress report focus on changes to administrative procedures for the handling of cases of suspected fraud or overservicing. We propose as a short term measure, because of the backlog in medical fraud cases requiring investigation and possible prosecution, the immediate establishment of a special national task force of experienced health, police and legal personnel to reduce the number of outstanding cases. Among the proposed permanent changes we have recommended are: Changes to bulk-billing arrangements to reduce the scope for fraud; improvements in the Department of Health's computerised detection system and extra staff for that area; establishment of integrated investigation sections within the Department of Health to cover both fraud and serious overservicing cases; appointment of medical investigations within those sections to handle apparent cases of serious overservicing; abolition of the present medical services committees of inquiry, and establishment of medical benefits tribunals, which would include medical specialists; Commonwealth-State agreement on uniform medical

3282 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

registration legislation and automatic deregistration of doctors convicted of fraud; and, finally, automatic disqualification for medical benefits purposes, where doctors are found to have provided excessive services on a large scale.
At this point, I should add there are already some moves to anticipate the Committee's recommendations. I understand that the Department of Health's medical counsellors are meeting in Canberra this week for the first time since November 1978. We have also heard that proposals have gone forward for very significant increases in staffing for the fraud and overservicing areas of the Department. The Committee has also
noted the appointment of a new Director-General for the Department of Health.
Because the subject is both controversial and complex, this inquiry has been a major undertaking by the Committee. We have so far held 48 hearings and meetings on the inquiry, and have taken over 5,000 pages of transcript, in addition to a significant number of written submissions. The effort to produce this progress report in a short time has placed great pressure on the members of the Committee and on our support personnel. I wish to place on record my appreciation to my fellow members, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and the honourable members for Barton
(Mr Bradfield), Holt (Mr Duffy), Canberra (Mrs Kelly), Tangney (Mr Shack), Northern Territory (Mr Tambling) and Burke (Dr Theophanous). I also wish to express my appreciation to members of the task force which included officers of the Committee's secretariat and a range of expert
advisers.
The report raises a number of fundamental issues of public administration and policy which extend well beyond the specific area of medical fraud and overservicing. These include: Ministerial responsibility and the briefing provided to successive Ministers by the Department of Health. In regard to ministerial responsibility, the Committee has received evidence from the Honourable W. G. Hayden, the Honourable
Ralph Hunt and the Honourable Michael MacKellar. We have not yet taken evidence from the Minister for Administrative Services, the Honourable Kevin Newman. Consequently we have reached no final conclusions regarding ministerial responsibility for the Australian Federal Police. Other broader issues include: the general relationship between central and State offices of departments; and the adequacy of the legal system in dealing with white collar crime. We therefore hope the report will have an audience beyond this Parliament and others concerned with health insurance arrangements.

Finally, I should emphasise that we have not finalised the inquiry. There remain a number of major aspects of medical fraud and overservicing which have not yet been covered in this progress report. Significant among these is the consideration of possible legislative changes with respect to fraud, and more fundamental modification of the medical benefits system to reduce incentives to provide excessive services. Although improvements in administrative procedures are urgently needed and are recommended in the report, the inescapable fact remains that no administrative or legal system in this area can be completely effective without the co-operation of the medical profession, the members of which should act with integrity and willingly accept a role along with government in ensuring that the people of Australia have access to adequate standards of health care at a cost which the community is willing and able to afford. I commend the report to honourable members.
Motion (by Mr Carlton) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Debate interrupted.
DISTINGUISHED VISITOR
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-I inform the House that we have present in the gallery this afternoon Dr Mohamed Ahmed Abdellah, member of the Egyptian People's Assembly and Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee. On behalf of the House I extend to him a very warm welcome.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
Reports
Debated resumed.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (3.8)-The 203rd report on medical fraud and overservicing which is before the House highlights the extent to which taxpayers of this country have been subsidising over-servicing and fraud by doctors to the extent of a conservative estimate of $lOOm per year. There is no dispute about this figure. There is no dispute from doctors, Ministers or the Australian Public Service. Over the period that we have considered-from 1976 to the present-about $800m has disappeared from Federal revenue. This report is a positive one in that it looks specifically at what can be done about this problem and tries to examine why the situation has arisen. The Chairman, the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly), has referred in detail to some of those positive recommendations. I wish to deal specifically with the administration of the Department of Health, and some of the fac-

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3283

tors that have led since 1976 to this massive case of fraud and overservicing.
Under the present arrangements, the Commonwealth Department of Health shares responsibility for detecting and responding to fraud and overservicing with the Australian Federal Police and the Crown Solicitor's Division in the courts. The report indicates that the Department of Health, the Federal Police and the Crown Solicitor's Division cannot escape responsibility for the fact that so little was done in this area for so long. The Joint Committee of Public Accounts identifies that a crucial factor was the slow reaction of the Department of Health to the problem.
I would like to take honourable members through some of the comments that the Committee has made in relation to the administration of the Department of Health. I will read what is principally contained in chapter 5 of the report. The Committee states:
Nevertheless the Committee believes that the Department's response to the problems of fraud and overservicing had been grossly inadequate. In almost every respect too little has been done too late. On the evidence available to us a large part of the responsibility for this must lie with the Department itself and especially its senior officers although the Committee also came into contact with many officers of the Department who were apparently performing their duties very conscientiously.
There is no doubt that that is true. But, when one is looking for criticism of the Department, when one can see there has been maladministration within the Department, I am afraid that the onus of blame must go to the senior officers within that Department.
In chapter 5 of the report, the Committee looks specifically at three areas where the Department must accept some responsibility. The first one deals with the allocation of staff. The report states:
Overall staffing levels in the areas of fraud and overservicing of the Department have not altered greatly since responsibility for medical fraud was transferred from Medibank to the Department in November 1978.
That is despite the fact that it was long recognised that fraud, especially, and overservicing, were a problem. There is no doubt that full recognition of the extent of that problem did not occur until 1981 but it was still recognised that it was a problem. There was also inadequacy in the training of staff. The report states:
Even if we accepted the claim by senior officers of the Department that they only became aware of the extent of overservicing in May-June of 1980 the Committee cannot understand why it took more than twelve months for the Department to apply to the Public Service Board for approval for additional counselling positions.
The report continues:

As far as central office staff levels are concerned inadequacies were even recognised as long ago as November 1980 when a detailed staffing proposal was prepared by the head of the Operations Branch
There is fair criticism of the staffing allocations within the Department of Health. There is no doubt that priority was not given to the fraud and investigation areas. However, the Department has a very good argument. It emphasised that at that time one had to consider it in the context of government policy. Government policy of the day was to cut back Public Service numbers but at the same time give increased responsibilities. Honourable members have to remember that during that time there was a large number of administrative changes to the health scheme. It appeared that there was a new health scheme every year. That created problems within the Department of Health. At the same time it did not have the staff numbers. Dr Howells, the Director-General of Health in evidence to the Committee on 26 October, said when asked about resources:
Where does one get these extra resources? We have had years of staff ceilings. The fat does not exist in service departments such as mine.
On the same day the First Assistant Secretary said:
You will remember that the climate in those days was one of continual cuts. It was a question of whether we could keep staff not whether we could get additional staff.
Dr Howells concludes:
The position was of making cuts.
That was the atmosphere in which the Department had to deal with all these problems of fraud and overservicing. This was when the problem was being realised-at the same time as new administrative arrangements for health were being brought in. The Department must take some responsibility for the fact that it did not take sufficient action to try to force the Government to come to terms with the issue of creating more staff in this area, particularly of fraud.
A second area that received considerable criticism in this report was the handling of suspected fraud cases by the Victorian office of the Department of Health. It is here that the Committee considerably criticised the administration of the Victorian office and, in doing so, the breakdown in communication between the Central Office in Canberra and the Victorian office was revealed. I would like to quote to honourable members some of the criticisms that have been made of the Victorian office. The report states:
. . . 41 files from the Victorian Office were examined by Federal Police officers.
They found in those files: no direct evidence of an officer of the Department of Health receiving 'kickbacks'; apparent evidence of a Health officer exercising influence or authority to

3284 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

waive or to reduce the extent of action against some of the doctors suspected of fraud and overservicing; apparent evidence of a Health officer actively condoning possible criminal fraud. . evidence of Health officers passing information to doctors under scrutiny, in the form of advising them at counselling sessions that they were under investigation; and evidence of negotiations with doctors for the recovery of money . . .
These are just some of the criticisms that have to be levelled at the Victorian office. Examination of these cases suggests that there was an atmosphere in the Victorian office that certain activities of doctors should not be investigated thoroughly. The Committee concludes:
Under the Department's decentralisation policy directors of the State offices must be held responsible for the performance of their staff although this does not obviate the Director General's overall responsibility.
There is further criticism of the time it took to establish medical services committees of inquiry. I will leave that to honourable members to look at in more detail.
We have to look at the question: Who is to blame? There is no doubt that the members of the Committee had to put responsibility on the officers-particularly senior officers-of the Department of Health. I have been very disappointed that that is the sort of criticism we have had to make. I quote a section from page 58 of the report:
We are unable to this stage to assess the extent to which these inadequacies result from deficiencies in the management skills of senior officers in the Department from negligence or misjudgment on their part or from conscious decisions to 'go soft' on doctors suspected of abusing the medical benefits system. But regardless of the reasons the senior officers of the Department, and the Director-General in particular, must take responsibility for the Department's performance in this as in other areas within the policy parameters set by the Minister and the Government.
I do not want to leave all the onus of responsibility within the Department. I have already pointed out to honourable members the difficulties that the Department experienced during this time. I think we now come to the question of ministerial responsibility.
Where does one stop passing the buck? Is there not a time when the Minister for Health at that time has to take responsibility? That is the question that the Committee has also had to examine. We made reference to this in the latter section of chapter 5 of the report. There is no debate that the respective Ministers for Health all claim that they feel that they were adequately briefed. The Committee has spent days examining the material that the respective Ministers for Health received and tried to make an assessment of how well they were briefed.
The reality of it is that the Ministers for Health in the period under considerations, Hunt and

MacKellar, did not complain about the degree of briefing. They both said that they were aware of the problem. Mr MacKellar said that, in hindsight, maybe he could have been better briefed. The reality of the matter is that we still have to face the fact that, firstly, the Ministers were aware of the problem, although they may not have been aware of the exact extent of it, and, secondly, the problem continued to exist because very little action was taken about it. I quote again from the report. The section on ministerial responsibility at page 68 states:
Nevertheless, the Committee believes that not enough was done. For example, despite all the concern on the part of Ministers and the increasing knowledge of the magnitude of the problem, adequate staffing positions were not allocated. Similarly, it took almost two and a half years for the Committee of Inquiry to be established and begin considering cases.
The report concludes:
Throughout this report, we have drawn attention to very significant problems in the response to medical fraud and overservicing. At this stage it seems that neither the Department of Health nor Ministers can escape some responsibility for these major problems.
In conclusion, I thank my colleagues on the Committee and the Committee's staff members for the considerable assistance given in the preparation of the report. I hope that the Minister for Health will look seriously at the recommendations. I hope that, as a result of this report, something will be done about overcoming the problems of fraud and overservicing.
Mr BRADFIELD (Barton) (3.22)-1 join the Chairman and other members of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts in speaking to this interim report on medical fraud and overservicing. The report is a move towards the culmination of one of the most extensive and exhaustive inquiries undertaken by the Public Accounts Committee of this Parliament and preceding parliaments. The history and magnitude of this problem have been well publicised in the Press. The matter has been well publicised in statements and in answers to questions in the Parliament. There is no doubt that the amount of unnecessary health expenditure is as high as $lOOm per annum, as stated by the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly).
There is no doubt that fraud and, more particularly, blatant overservicing have formed an integral part of some medical practices over many years, there is no doubt that this style of practice is increasing and there is no doubt that the cost of this growing problem, if left unchecked, will become an intolerable burden on the community. Statistics clearly show that claims on Commonwealth health benefit have maintained a growth

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3285

pattern similar to the ratio of medical practitioners registered in private practice. A clear pattern has emerged over the years that time spent with patients is more in line with the available man-hours of doctors rather than that of patients' needs. Individual Australians today are utilising more medical man-hours than ever before. This is happening in spite of claims and evidence that suggest that we have a healthier nation.
It is clear that gross overservicing is being prescribed by some medical practitioners just as overservicing is being demanded by many patients. Evidence presented to the Committee indicated an area of fraud. Fraud is easily recognisable because it can be defined as a remuneration claimed by a medical practitioner for a service not provided. However, the area of greatest concern to the Committee and of greatest cost to the Australian community is overservicing. That item is more complex to define. It comes within an area where doubts arise and opinions vary as to the degree of need of services in regard to a person's health and where doubts arise as to the health advantages of the provision of those services to the person. Overservicing can also be complicated by that special arrangement that usually exists and should exist between doctor and patient.
The practice of overservicing is in urgent need of control. The Committee in the interim report addresses itself to this problem and makes a number of recommendations to the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton) for implementation within his Department. Obviously some medical practitioners need to become more responsible in their actions and to have a greater awareness of the cost created by their actions. Patients also need to be more aware of the types of medical services they are receiving and authorising payment for. A significant step in this direction would be the adoption of the second recommendation of the interim report, which states:
The Health Insurance Act should be amended to require doctors' accounts and assignment forms to be as comprehensible as possible to patients. In particular, it is recommended that both Medical Benefit Schedule item numbers and simplified descriptions of services be required on all accounts and assignment forms.
In making that recommendation I am well aware that doctors are busy people and that people dislike large amounts of paperwork. However, when we consider the magnitude of this problem and when we consider-most people in the community would know of this-the lack of knowledge of the patient often for the services being provided to him, the lack of knowledge of the cost and, in some cases, the lack of concern as to the

cost, particularly in those areas where no payment
has to be made by the patient, it is clear that successive governments have not coped with the growing cost of health.
Evidence taken by the Committee clearly identifies many areas of concern. For example, it identifies deficiencies in legislation, gross lack of foresight and organising ability by the Department of Health and deficiencies in the supporting roles of the Crown Solicitor's Office and the Australian Federal Police. These conclusions are borne out in the report and were highlighted by the Chairman in his address. It was shown that during the sevenyear period from July 1975 to March 1982 only 39 of the 17,OOO-odd doctors in full time practice were penalised for fraud and 12 for overservicing. That is such a small number when it is clear that such massive overpayments were being made year after year. Is it any wonder that the Committee concludes that the response of the Department of Health to fraud and overservicing has been grossly inadequate? In those circumstances, the Department's response certainly has been grossly inadequate.
In moving further through the Committee's recommendations in the interim report, I ask the Minister for Health to take particular note of those recommendations in which the Committee looks for streamlining of the methods of detection and investigation. It is in those areas that it is imperative, if we are to overcome this problem, that quick detection be made and investigation completed quickly so that any doctor offending in the area of blatant overservicing or offending in the area of fraud can be brought before a tribunal and judged fairly and, if necessary, punished. That is the only way in which this sort of thing will be
stamped out.
In conclusion, perhaps the thing which I, as a member of the Committee, regret most is that doctors-it is only a minority of doctors-have engaged in this kind of thing. I think the majority of doctors provide a fair service to their patients and are concious of their responsibilities towards health care costs in the community. It is a shame that this minority tends to tarnish the reputation of the majority. Nevertheless the situation is so blatant and so serious that we must take note of this interim report. The Government must commence immediately to take action along the lines of the recommendations in the report. I thank members of the Committee and of the secretariat who have worked so hard and for such long hours in the preparation of this report. I look forward, along with other members of the Committee, to the time when we can release the final report on this problem.

3286 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (3.31)-1 thank the members of the secretariat of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts for their hard work on this report and their capacity to put up with considerable pressure and tension. The saga of medical fraud and overservicing is a national scandal. It is scandalous that a significant number of members of the medical profession, which is supposedly dedicated to people's welfare, are in fact involved in ripping off the public; it is scandalous that senior officers of the Department of Health and other departments have ignored the growing problem of fraud and overservicing to the point of cover-ups and possible corruption; and it is scandalous that several Ministers have failed in their responsibility to ensure that fraud and overservicing is dealt with effectively. The result of these scandals is that fraud and overservicing by doctors has cost the Australian people at least $700m, and probably much more, in the last seven years. One key to what has gone wrong is, 1 believe, revealed by Dr Eccles-Smith, a medical counsellor in Victoria and one of several courageous people who provided evidence to the Committee notwithstanding attempts by senior officers to intimidate them. He said:
Some C.H.D. personnel and some of the profession profess the view that if a doctor is a 'good chap' then he is not capable of misuse of item numbers to his financial advantage.
A 'good chap' appears to be associated with a good social background (private school of some standing), member of Rotary, holding a senior hospital or university appointment, . . . etc. It is my observation that many doctors appear to be 'good fellows', but sadly this image does not mean that they are incapable of fraud.
The problem has been that too many people have ignored for years real evidence of fraud and substantial overservicing because they refuse to believe that doctors would engage in this sort of thing. A case in point is the Victorian Director of Health, Dr Webb, whose record in and attitudes to these matters are, in my view, nothing short of outrageous. Dr Webb and other senior officers of his division had the audacity to tell the Committee, even after overwhelming evidence had been provided about the fraud and overservicing detection system, that they did not believe that substantial fraud and overservicing were taking place. Soon after that the Australian Federal Police seized 41 files which, when analysed, showed evidence of Health Department officers waiving or reducing the evidence of fraud and overservicing. They also showed evidence of a Health Department officer possibly condoning criminal fraud. The honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) has given detail of these Victorian cases, which are disgraceful. The Committee concluded on that issue as follows:

Examination of these cases suggests there was an atmosphere in the Victorian office that certain activities of doctors should be not investigated thoroughly, for example where a doctors claimed that errors were unintentional (no matter how frequent).
Many questions arise from this sorry picture of inactivity. I cannot go through them all, but let me consider a crucial one. Where does the responsibility lie for this outrageous situation? Firstly, it seems clear to me that the Victorian Director should be required to stand down until an investigation of what went wrong in that division is completed. 1refer especially to the inquiries of the Australian Federal Police. We cannot say exactly what went wrong but we can say this: Dr Webb had an excessively close relationship with certain echelons of the medical profession, which clouded his objectivity to an extraordinary degree. Let us contrast this situation with the treatment meted out by the Australian Medical Association to the Western Australian Director of Health whose section was one of the few to pursue fraud and overservicing with some vigour. The AMA in that State hounded the Director over the case of the famous Dr Low, a man who had defrauded the Commonwealth of tens of thousands of dollars. The Western Australian Director was finally forced to resign from the AMA.
The responsibility also lies to a consideraable degree with the senior officers in the central office of the Department of Health, especially the Director-General. Other colleagues have dealt with this issue in their contributions. But the brunt of the responsibility under our system of parliamentary democracy must lie with the Ministers and the Government. There is no question that anyone reading this report can come to no other conclusion than that the Government was remiss in its duty and that Ministers were led by the nose to a point which constitutes severe negligence. Nowhere is this more clear than in the evidence given by the former Minister for Health, the honourable member for Warringah (Mr MacKellar). It should be stressed that the former Minister appeared before the Committee late in the piece after much of the public evidence had been given and publicised in the newspapers, including the evidence from the 41 Victorian files. The honourable member for Warringah assured the Committee of his great and continuing concern about fraud and overservicing, yet he made the following extraordinary remark:
The Department at no stage has sought to protect doctors suspected of being guilty of overservicing or fraud. Any suggestion that the Department has been soft on this area I think . . . wrong.
There then ensued the following exchange, which I read from the transcript:

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3287

Dr THEOPHANOUSWhat evidence do you have for that?
Mr MacKELLAR--On all occasions, the Department has never put to me the proposition that we should go <;asy on a doctor. In fact, the reverse has occurred. I had given instructions that we should be tough on them.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Do you expect that if the Department, let us say, hypothetically, had the intention of going soft, as you put it, they would come and tell you?
Mr MacKELLAR-Do you watch the series 'Yes, Minister'?
DrTHEOPHANOUS-Well, I have.
Mr MacKELLAR-it is a very accurate series. They may not say 'We are going to go soft on them'; but if they really wished to do that, they would find some way of putting a proposition that any contemplated action should be of a lesser nature. They did not do that, let me add.
Dr THEOPHANOUSYou are sure of that?
Mr MacKELLAR-I am not aware of any activity of that nature.
The extraordinary thing about these comments is that the former Minister had earlier that day heard evidence that senior officers of his Department had slashed seven key paragraphs from a memorandum which was to go to him informing him of the dire need for more resources for the fraud and overservicing detection system. This is a crucial matter, because the FOD system plays a central role in detecting erring doctors. Yet the Committee has shown beyond a doubt that insufficient resources were provided for the FOD system and that submissions made for more resources were rejected. They were simply ignored. Furthermore, on the question of briefing, it has been shown that the Department, which had been providing monthly reports on fraud and overservicing to the previous Minister for Health, the present Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt), stopped providing the reports to the honourable member for Warringah when he became Minister without telling him about it. When asked about this the former Minister said, 'I cannot explain that'.
It can be seen that the former Minister's responses were contradictory. He cannot explain strange failures of the Department to brief him but he was nevertheless satisfied with the briefings he received. It is clear that the most gracious interpretation we can put on this is, to use the former Minister's own analogy, the worst case of the Yes Minister phenomenon that we have seen for some time. The former Minister appears to have simply accepted assurances and walked around with his eyes closed. The fact is that when the Minister took over, the FOD system had been developed and could have been put to work immediately. Instead, it suffered long delays. At the same time there were blatant attempts to frustrate

investigations and the recovery of money in various offices of the Department throughout Australia.
This is not to say that the ex-Minister bears responsibility for this inactivity by himself. It is clear that other Government Ministers believed the problem was not serious and that it did not need to be given high priority. Thus when Mr MacKellar finally accepted in May 1981 that the problem was substantial he wrote to the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) to express his concern that not enough resources were provided by the Australian Federal Police. The honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy), who will follow me in this debate, will speak on this matter. But it is clear that over and over again the Minister for Administrative Services failed to recognise the extent of the problem-in fact refused to recogni5e it-until he was shown the FODS data. After he was shown that data-this is in the report-he expressed concern but nothing was done.
This is a very serious matter indeed. It is an unacceptable situation. There are still many questions to be answered in relation to the involvement of Ministers. What is the explanation for the attitude of the Minister for Administrative Services? Why was so little done even after he supposedly changed his view about the importance of the matter? Prima facie it would appear that the Minister for Administrative Services simply could not give a damn about this problem and the extent of it. Certainly this is the attitude taken in his letters. Perhaps he has answers. If he does have answers I invite him to appear before the Committee as soon as possible to explain the extraordinary behaviour of the Department of Administrative Services and the Australian Federal Police. 1 refer also to the role of the Attorney General, Senator Durack, whose office in Perth was clearly frustrating the progress of prosecutions. He also has some explanations to make. We require those explanations before we will be satisfied that the Government has done enough.
In conclusion, we have worked very hard in putting forward a number of tough recommendations to stop this problem. We insist that the Government take the recommendations seriously. If the Government does not take them seriously and does not act on the basis of them we will have more to say about this matter.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (3.42)-ln speaking briefly to the presentation of the progress report of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts I recognise that there are two roads down which one can go in a matter such as this. One can seek

3288 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

to apportion blame and responsibility or to put forward recommendations as to how the situation can be improved and remedied. The Committee, in a very considered and balanced way, examined the first road-the apportionment of blame and responsibility. We concluded, with respect to the role of the Department of Health, the role of the Australian Federal Police and especially the role of past Ministers for Health, that we are as yet unable to make final conclusions as to who is totally or partially responsible in this matter. I draw the attention of the House to our comments in the progress report. With respect to that matter, the Committee will look at it further in the new year.
With respect to making recommendations as to how the situation can be improved, I stress that this is a progress report, not a final report. Being a progress report, the Committee's work to date has been to examine the existing medical benefits payment system and within that system, firstly, to suggest areas in which urgent government action should be taken and, secondly, to offer a number of options for improving the present system in order to reduce the incidence of fraud and overservicing and better to pursue fraud and overservicing where they persist. The final report of the Committee seeks further discussion of the existing system.
The progress report deals with the extent of fraud and overservicing. It is the Committee's view, as has been said by my colleagues, that the amount of overpayment by the Commonwealth to doctors exceeds $100m per annum. The Department of Health estimated that this amount is approximately due 50 per cent to fraud and 50 per cent to overservicing.
Fraud is largely a matter of fact, whereby a claim is made for a medical service which was not provided. The Committee recognises, however, that overservicing is a much more complex matter, being largely a matter of argument and often of medical judgment. Fraud and overservicing exist within the current health insurance system in which, as the Committee correctly described, the majority of medical services are provided on a fee for service basis with substantial third party payments. This fact led the Committee to conclude on page 31 of the report as follows:
The combination of fee-for-service medicine and widespread third party payment of medical and hospital costs, without appropriate safeguards, provides few incentives for doctors or patients to economize on the provision of necessary or unnecessary medical services.
In line with that conclusion the Committee sought to make recommendations which it believes, iffollowed by the Government and the Minister for

Health (Mr Carlton), will provide some of the appropriate safeguards which are necessary within the present system. Among other things, the Committee recommends that doctors' accounts be made more readily understood by patients, thereby improving the chances of patient surveillance over the accounts and improving doctors' accountability to their patients. We recommend that there be a tightening up of the bulk billing arrangements to ensure that patients sign assignment forms in the presence of their doctors and only after the service has been provided, thereby eliminating the circumstance in which assignment forms are signed in advance and patients are totally ignorant of what subsequently may be put on them.
The bulk of the recommendations are directed towards improving the administrative arrangements and what one can call the policing roles of the Department of Health and the Australian Federal Police in order better to detect fraud and overservicing and better to deal with its handling and prosecution when it is detected. Many of these recommendations will have a primarily preventive rather than prosecutorial effect, but in the main they must be described as dealing with the manifestations of the problem rather than its fundamental causes. We have to ask ourselves this question: Is the medical profession more fraudulent or prone to excessive servicing for monetary gain than any other service, vocation or profession? Clearly in my view, the answer is no. The reason for much of the fraud and overservicing lies with the health system.
It is one thing to tighten up the administration and policing of the system-the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee progress report, if adopted, will substantially do that-but it is another thing to examine the fundamentals of the system more extensively. That is the task that the Committee has set itself for the months ahead. Briefly, we have canvassed changes to the medical benefits system and set ourselves matters for further consideration which include an examination of the possible modification of the medical benefits system to reduce inbuilt incentives for overservicing and possible revision of the medical benefits schedule. My view, as a member of the Committee, is that the medical benefits schedule is far too complicated and needs to be simplified. We need to remove from it the inbuilt incentive to overservicing. Of course, if a doctor sees a patient for a little longer he can attract a higher fee. The option for a cheaper or a dearer form of service is open to him. It is human nature to opt for the dearer procedure.

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3289

It is not so much bulk billing that is at fault. Page 35 of the Committee's report states:
The only statistical analysis that has been carried out on bulk-billing showed that there was no greater use (or abuse) of the services where doctors bulk-billed as compared to patient-billing.
Evidence from officers and former officers of the Department of Health concerned with detecting fraud and overservicing support this result. However, it has to do with the nature of the relationship between the provider and the user whereby we have a system that involves substantial third party payment. In this relationship there is a lack of accountability between the provider and the user. There is also no sense of fraud, abuse or ripping off the system if, in fact, the loser is the Commonwealth, because this fraud is not seen as ripping off fellow taxpayers. It is seen as taking money from some amorphous Commonwealth to which one does not have any personal responsibility.
If I take my car to the local garage for servicing there is a direct relationship between me as the owner of that vehicle and the mechanic. I have an understanding to a certain extent of what that mechanic will do with my vehicle. If I am not happy with that service my relationship is direct with that mechanic. I do not rely on some third party payment. Of course, I am not equating our bodies and human health with motor cars. I simply use that analogy to draw attention to the fact that the patient does not have that same direct relationship with the doctor. The patient is not in the possession of the same sort of knowledge which enables him to make the same sorts of judgments as the owner of a motor car would make about the servicing of his vehicle. Certainly, the patient does not have the same sort of financial responsibility to pay totally for the care or service as the owner of a motor car has when he takes it for a service.
These are the sorts of matters which the Committee will have to examine in the coming months. They relate to the essential fundamental of our system which, at the moment, is a fee for service system with third party payment. Those two elements together have reduced the level and sense of accountability that the patient and the doctor have between one another and the patient and the doctor have with respect to the Commonwealth.
I say to the Minister for Health that although we are speaking about our own work this is indeed a very valuable progress report. The Minister will find in it recommendations and conclusions about the present system. I believe the present system can be much improved if the Minister takes note and account of what the Committee has said. We,

as a Committee, look foward to doing more detailed and extensive work so that we can report on the fundamental nature of the system. We hope that the work we have done to date will elicit public comment and that it will not be too many months down the road when the Committee, in company with the Minister, can come to grips with this very difficult area.
Mr DUFFY (Holt) (3.53)-Arising out of some of the matters raised by the previous speaker, the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack), I would like to start by clarifying one matter. Although this is a progress report I refer honourable members to chapter 5, paragraph 119, where the Committee states:
Throughout this report, we have drawn attention to very significant problems in the response to medical fraud and overservicing. At this stage it seems that neither the Department of Health nor Ministers can escape some responsibility for these major problems.
It is true that further evidence has to be taken in relation to many of these matters but at this stage the report quite clearly states that neither the Department of Health nor Ministers can escape some of the responsibility. At this stage I wish to turn to the responsibility of the Government in an area where there has been a massive rip-off of public funds and, particularly, to the Australian Federal Police who have been badly treated in relation to this whole area of medical fraud simply because they have been left with inadequate resources. In the submission to the Joint Committee of Public Accounts by the Australian Federal Police dated September 1982 paragraph 19 states:
At present, however, the unavailability of skilled resources in AFP divisions is a significant factor when determining the effectiveness of any concerted action taken to suppress medical fraud, or for that matter any form of criminal activity.
That submission is something to which the Government will have to pay very close attention as a matter of urgency. In evidence before the Committee on 12 October the then Acting Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, Mr J. C. Johnson, in answer to a question at page 2680 of the transcript stated inter alia:
It is my duty to take whatever action I can to persuade the government system to provide the AFP with sufficient resources to undertake these investigations.
Further in that evidence Mr Johnson stated:
But all I can do, as a police commissioner, is to ensure that the proper arguments are put before government to get us the level of resources we need, both in manpower and equipment and that sufficient people are placed on particular areas of crime to investigate it.
Clearly, unless the Government is prepared to give to the Australian Federal Police adequate manpower and other resources it will not be able

3290 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

to handle medical fraud or, as was said by the Acting Commissioner, for that matter any form of criminal activity. That is a matter on which I certainly hope the Government takes action as a matter of urgency. I hope it does not treat this report as a progress report in that regard. I want to continue my remarks on that point because I think the significance of it is such that the Government as a whole must bear some responsibility in relation to it. When the former Minister for Health, the honourable member for Warringah (Mr MacKellar), gave evidence to the Committee he was asked at page 3309:
Quite obviously you were concerned about the resources of the Australian Federal Police. Is that correct?
In reply to that question the honourable member for Warringah said: 'Yes'. One of the problems which seemed to arise in this area was that everybody was concerned about the various matters. People were concerned about the failure of the Department of Health to act. Previous speakers have dealt with the obvious inadequacies within the Department of Health. But when we look at what happened once Ministers of the Government realised that a problem existed, as the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) indicated earlier we see that it was a matter of too little too late. In May 1981 the honourable member for Warringah wrote a letter replying to a letter from the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman), a copy of which we do not have because of the fact that that letter was provided on a confidential basis. Nevertheless, in a public hearing part of that letter was quoted by the honourable member for Warringah. In that letter he said:
However, I view with some disquiet the implication in your last paragraph that the AFP should reduce the priority for allocation in regard to specific offences under my legislation.
At that stage, in May 1981, it was patently clear that the then Minister for Health was concerned and that the concern had been conveyed to the Minister for Administrative Services, but nothing really happened. There was nine months delay after that letter was written before any action was taken. That is where further evidence has to be taken because at this stage we are not clear as to why there was a delay for a period as long as nine months on a matter as crucial as the issue which had been raised by the then Minister for Health in his correspondence. It took until February 1982, nine months later, before the Minister for Administrative Services received a briefing on the magnitude of the problem. It was, in fact, nine months before there was a follow-up and it was made known to him what the real problem was. In relation to that matter I refer again to the report of the Committee. I refer to paragraph 115 and the

following paragraphs of chapter 5. The report states:
In some related areas the Department did raise with Ministers the need for additional resources. For example. in May 1981 Mr MacKellar wrote to the Minister for Administrative Services expressing concern at suggestions that the Australian Federal Police should reduce the priority given to medical fraud investigation.
That was the letter of May 1981 from which I quoted previously.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will refer to another honourable member by the electorate he represents or refer to him as the Minister at the time but not by name.
Mr DUFFY-Mr Deputy Speaker, I am quoting from the report of the Committee which refers to the honourable member as Mr MacKellar.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-In those circumstances, the Chair apologises.
Mr DUFFY-The next paragraph states:
Mr MacKellar has acknowledged that he was concerned at the time about the level of resources made available by the AFP. He wrote to Mr Newman again in November 1981, and eventually arrangements were made for Mr Newman to receive a briefing from Health officials in February 1982. . . . Following that briefing, the Secretary of the Department of Administrative Services acknowledged that previously neither he nor the Minister had any idea of the magnitude of the problem, but that Mr Newman had indicated that he was now firmly convinced that the AFP must give the Department of Health full support and looked to some additional staffing proposals then before the Government to enable the Police to do just that.
Obviously, in looking at that sort of evidence, the Committee had to say what it said in paragraph 118 of chapter 5. The report stated:
The Committee is concerned that the AFP have been unable to provide adequate trained police for the investigation of medical fraud, and wishes to discuss this matter with the Minister for Administrative Services. If necessary we will make further observations in the final report.
That matter is still under investigation. The fact remains that it is another example of the situation in this Parliament where, over the past few months, we have heard trenchant criticisms of the Public Service. In this case the Department of Health was criticised and justifiably. The Australian Taxation Office has been under criticism from time to time. The Government reacts to what happens when matters become public. It is certainly not good enough for a government to react only after an article drawing attention to the problems of medifraud is published in the National Times. It is not good enough, when papers are publishing articles on taxation day after day that the Government then looks at tax avoidance. It is too little too late, as was said

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3291

earlier today. Irrespective of what further evidence is taken and what determination this Committee makes in the future, the Government must act now in relation to the Australian Federal Police. The action which has been taken is inadequate because, as was said many times in evidence, it takes time to train police for this type of specialised work.
I consider this matter crucial. It is impossible to deal with any other aspects of the report in the time available. That is the only matter to which 1 particularly wanted to refer. In closing, 1 express my appreciation, as many other honourable members have, of the work done by the secretariat of the Public Accounts Committee. They worked long hours over a long period on this inquiry. I also thank my fellow members on the Committee. This was a difficult report to prepare. It involved a matter of considerable significance for this Parliament. At times there were difficulties in coming out with a report in which we were able to reach a consensus. It is a credit to all members of the Committee that the report reached the stage that it has today.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (4.5)-1 am surprised that all Opposition speakers on this matter this afternoon have tended to concentrate their remarks on the report on the area of ministerial responsibility. 1 think they have ignored the general thrust of the report. They have ignored the fact that it is a progress report and that most of the recommendationsprobably 40 out of 45-do not even touch on this area. They have tended to smear the issue and get it off the tracks away from where it should go. If one looks carefully at pages 63 to 69 of the report, it is quite clear that the Ministers have faced up to their responsibilities in dealing with this inquiry. The Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) acknowledged-the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy) quoted this straight from the report-that he accepted the extent of the problem and he indicated that he was convinced of the need for support. The next paragraph of the report refers to the announcement by the Minister for Administrative Services on the recruitment and training of additional police. Surely that shows that the matter is being addressed and was being addressed by the Ministers at the time. This report is very positive. It is of specific interest in two main areas. One is the involvement of government agencies and government officials. It is worth sheeting home the point that was made in paragraph 2.6 of the introduction to the report. It stated:
One of the major difficulties is that no single organisation takes full responsibility.

1 think that has unearthed the key to the problem when it comes to looking at government agencies.
The second part of the report refers to the interest groups which have a professional stake in this report. 1 refer to the medical groups and the specialists. 1 think we all accept that the great majority-probably 95 per cent to 98 per cent-of doctors are keen, dedicated, reliable and professional people. They deliver their services well throughout our community. It is unfortunate that a few squirmy, smart little rats have obviously infiltrated the medical system and put at stake the professional reputations of some of their colleagues. For this reason 1 wish to highlight that it is not the Government alone that has to address this problem. The medical profession has really to come to grips with how it will shake out those rats. I think it has become evident that representatives of the medical and specialist colleges have not wanted to get involved in the areas of government relationships and administration. They seem to be a little too sanctimonious. They want to stick to dealing only with professional, medical or health issues. They have to get involved in the ethical and moral position. They must get fully involved. Only when they start to grab the rats by the tails and throw them out of their colleges will we see a lot more happening.
Forty-five recommendations were put forward by the Committee. I did a quick count a moment ago and I believe that 28 to 30 of them are a direct result of inefficiencies within government agencies and require attention by the bureaucracy, particularly at senior management level. The great majority of those 28 to 30 recommendations refer to the bureaucracy of the Commonwealth Department of Health. Twelve or 14 of the recommendations require political attention, legislative changes and changes to regulations. Only three of the recommendations impinge on the requirements for changes in the professional organisations. There are implications throughout this report for all other areas of government administration. They should take very careful note of the report. As the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) said, when there is third party involvement, when someone else is paying the piper and the Commonwealth Government is providing the cash for the lucky dip, we certainly have to face up to it.
1 believe there is also a general lack of appreciation in the community of the real costs of health services. We must make sure that the general community fully understands the relationships between doctor and patient in regard to health care and the resulting costs. It should understand

3292 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

the relationships between doctors and government and insurance providers.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (4.10)-1 just want to congratulate briefly the Joint Committee of Public Accounts for presenting a report which is at once both courageous and constructive. It is courageous in that the Committee was prepared to examine and be critical of the responsibility of Ministers in this field. It is courageous in the sense that the Committee was prepared to examine a particular governmental department and, again, be critical of its laggard response to this very serious problem. It is courageous too in that the Committee has been prepared to recognise that this Government's Public Service ceiling policy has prevented many departments, including the Department of Health, from being able to respond to new challenges in their fields. I commend it for its courage.
Secondly, it is a peculiarly constructive report. There is an enormous amount, particularly in the administrative field, which has been suggested in this report and which it is hoped the Government will take up. The report has clearly pointed out the need to supplement in terms of numbers and quality the elements in the Department of Health which are overseeing fraud and overservicing. I think it is particularly sensible in the way it has talked about the lines of authority in the Department of Health, which have been one of the problems at the heart of the difficulties the Department has faced in this field. It is tremendously important in the stress that the Committee gives to the co-ordination between the Department of Health, the Attorney-General's Department and the Australian Federal Police in what is a difficult matter of co-ordination. Nobody pretends otherwise. I think that the Committee has well recognised this.
I particularly commend the Committee for its very courageous and constructive decision about the proposed Medical Benefits Tribunal. The procedure that the Committee offers us, I think, is a real way of overcoming the lags that have developed in the existing Medical Services Committees of Inquiry. I note that the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) said that I am glad to see this coming from the Liberal benches-bulk billing is not a particular source of this problem. I agree with him that there are particular problems in relation to bulk billing which need to be effectively covered. But, as the survey evidence suggests, this kind of fraud occurs in both fields-in the direct billing field and in the bulk billing field.

I recognise that the report is only an interim report and, therefore, that it is unfair in some ways to criticise it for things it has not done. Let me just say that I hope that the Committee in its future deliberations will give particular attention to the need to overhaul the existing legislation so that doctors do not escape the penalties of their iniquities because of technical flaws in the law-a point which we have been arguing for many months. I hope also that the Committee will take up the very vexed issue of the presentation of generalised evidence to the courts. I do not pretend that there is any simple answer to that extremely difficult problem. Like retrospective legislation it involves serious challenges to the nature of law as it exists in this society. I am not pretending that this Committee has an easy task, but I hope that it will face that problem.
Finally, let me say that the Committee has to my mind established fairly conclusively that the estimated $ 100m lost in overservicing and fraud is a conservative estimate. Therefore, we have before us a major problem that needs correction. I note that the present Minister for Health (Mr Carlton) has been particularly active in dealing with possible malpractice in the pharmaceutical benefits field, even though he has not presented much evidence to this House of malpractice in this field. He has now no further excuse for procrastination in this field. I hope that he will act immediately. I can guarantee him full support from the Opposition.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah) (4.14)-Like other speakers this afternoon, I welcome the presentation of this interim report of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts. The honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) has described it as courageous. I do not argue with that description for a moment. In fact, I can say that while I was the Minister for Health I set in train the discussions with representatives of the Public Accounts Committee which eventually led to the establishment of the inquiry whose interim report has come forward today. I think that is at least one way of demonstrating that there was no attempt in any way to hide or bury evidence or activities which could reflect upon the Department of Health or the Government. That was a genuine attempt to deal with a very difficult problem.
Naturally enough, I listened carefully to the remarks that members of the Committee made in relation to the interim report. Unfortunately, I am not in a position to reply to individual statements made in the report because, like other members, I simply have not yet had a chance to read it all. I hope that people will read it carefully,

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3293

particularly in relation to the question of the legal difficulties involved in proving fraud and in proving overservicing. We have here-I know this is an overworked expression-virtually a unique situation in that we have a multiplicity of small cases. The fraud is not large fraud in itself, involving a great number of small amounts ranging, say, from $10 to $50. They involve services given or not given to patients many of whom are old and infirm and services given, in many cases, over quite a considerable period.
When one investigates those particular services or those claims by doctors in relation to services
allegedly provided, obviously a massive difficulty is associated with that investigation. There is the matter of the doctor-patient relationship. I regard very strongly the sanctity of a doctor-patient relationship. I am quite certain that nobody in this House would welcome the possibility of everybody's medical records over the years suddenly being exposed to public gaze. There is a very real difficulty in relation to the sanctity and the privacy of the individual involved in investigations by police of doctor-patient records. Obviously, this matter has been of concern to parliaments and individual members of parliament. I remember when some raids were carried out by the Australian Federal Police in Queensland. Senator
Gietzelt raised in the Senate the question of the privacy of patient records. He asked whether it was really necessary for this action to be carried out by the Australian Federal Police. There is the difficulty of proving the cases in the courts because, as I have already mentioned, in many cases they involve old and infirm people who have difficulty in recalling precise details about services provided. For instance, one of the main areas of overservicing or fraud relates to the length of consultation between a doctor and his patient. Can one really remember at 18 months' distance whether one saw the doctor for 10 minutes, 20 minutes or 40 minutes? Is one prepared to swear in a court of law that one saw the doctor for a prescribed number of minutes?
Of course, overservicing is a particularly difficult area simply because many patients believe that their doctors are very good doctors if they provide a great number of services to them. They do not see it as overservicing; they see it as particular attention being paid by their doctors to their specific problems. So, what a professional peer group would regard as overservicing, the individual doctor may not regard as overservicing. Certainly the patient may not regard it as overservicing. I recall that in my period as Minister for Health we found it very difficult indeed to convince patients of many of the doctors we

looked at for overservicing that, in fact, the doctors were-to use that overworked expressionripping off the system. One of the real difficulties that we had in framing changes to the legislation was the legal problems involved. The honourable member for Bonython has raised one aspect of it-the aspect of generalised evidence coming forward. That is only one aspect of it. We have to look at the doctor-patient relationship. We have to look at the privacy of medical records and preserve as far as we can the sanctity of the relationship between the doctor and his patient.
I will not go into the question of where the blame should lie except to say that I believe that the evidence shows-I speak as the former Minister for Health-that from the time. I became the Minister for Health, literally one of the first things I did was to write to my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services about this problem. Certainly, everybody knew there was a problem of fraud and overservicing. Action was taken during my period as Minister in both those areas; in relation to overservicing with the tightening up of the Medical Services Committees of Inquiry and in relation to fraud where we brought in-it is in legislation now-the most severe sanctions against practising doctors yet introduced. Certainly, more needs to be done. I welcome this report because people have had the chance to sit down over a long period and hear evidence from a great number of sources, consider it and put forward their propositions. I am not sure, because I have not read the recommendations yet, whether the propositions are realistic but certainly they bear examination.
Finally, one must always bear in mind that hindsight is 20-20 vision. All of us, no matter what we are doing, whether we are Ministers of State or individuals, would certainly do things differently with the benefit of hindsight. I can only say that there was no attempt whatsoever to soft peddle on those members of the medical profession who were abusing their privileges as doctors. There was no attempt to hide the fact that malpractice was going on. There was a continuing attempt to bring these people to book. I finish by saying that we cannot legislate to abolish fraud and overservicing or abuse of the system. We can bring in legislation which we believe is appropriate but we will not succeed until and unless we have the full co-operation of the profession involved in the area where we are taking action. Unless we can add to the legislative pressure, the peer pressure of the professional groups involved, we will not succeed in stamping out these iniquituous practices. That

3294 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

is why I spent so much time developing a cooperative spirit with the professional bodies, particularly the Australian Medical Association. I am glad to say that during my period as Minister for Health we had a complete reversal of public attitude in relation to fraud and overservicing by the AMA to the extent that it came out publicly and supported the actions the Government was taking. So, it is important that we legislate and that the legislation is appropriately framed and deals with the problems. But it is also immensely important that peer pressure from the professional groups involved bears down upon those members of those professions which are abusing the system.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) (4.25)-1 had not intended to comment at this stage of the debate on the report by the Joint Committee of Public Accounts on medical fraud and overservicing, but because serious criticism and allegations have been made by certain members of the Committee, I felt that 1 had to make a few remarks just to set the record straight. May I begin by saying that 1 express my gratitude to the Chairman of the Committee for making it quite clear that evidence still had to be taken from me. As far as he was concerned, that meant that the criticism levelled at ministerial responsibility does not, at this stage, apply to me. That contrasts fairly sharply with the sorts of comments and unjustified attacks that were made by the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) and the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy).
Mrs KellyHe just stated the facts.
Mr NEWMAN-It is not fact. It is not explained fact, that is the point. First of all, 1 make the point that when 1 give evidence to
members of the Committee the sorts of things that I will be saying to them are that whilst the report quite clearly demonstates the enormity of the fraud and conspiracy that is being perpetrated by members of the medical profession it has not taken into account the tremendous problem of crime which faces the country in all sorts of other areas. It is for that reason that in May 1981 certain directions were given to the Australian Federal Police which took into account that overall problem. The overall problem is being made very clear to us by the subsequent reports of, for example, Mr Costigan. We have major problems in tax evasion, in drug trafficking and so on, just to mention a few. The Committee has to look at the overall problem that faces not only the AFP but also the Government in apportioning objectives, priorities and people who carry out the necessary investigations in that wide area of crime which

really is a tremendous problem facing the country at present. The Committee has not heard what sorts of resources the AFP now has in relation to other police forces around the country. To give one example, we have about 360 to 370 detectives in the AFP. That is one part of the AFP, but it is perhaps the biggest proportion of any police force in this country. Evidence that I will give to the Committee will show that in the very period to which the honourable member for Holt refers, that is, 18 February 1982, asking why certain things were not done when briefings had been given, the AFP had tremendous commitments to the Stewart Royal Commission, to joint task forces and to the Costigan Royal Comission.
Mrs Kelly-That is in the report. We have had evidence on that. It is acknowledged.
Mr NEWMAN-Honourable members interjecting should listen for a moment. I thought the Committee was supposed to be very keen on giving unbiased, objective reports. The way that the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) is carrying on and the sorts of comments made by the honourable member for Holt and the honourable member for Burke demonstrate a fairly political attitude to the Committee's work. I think that if they carryon like that they will only do injustice to the work they are trying to do.
Mrs Kelly-You are just oversensitive; that is your problem.
Mr SPEAKER-I have indicated that I will not allow continual interjections. I indicate to the Minister that he should ignore the interjections and proceed.
Mr NEWMAN-As I was saying, what I will be showing the Committee is that at that very time, in February 1982, when finally, the full extent of medical fraud was revealed not only to me and the head of the Department of Administrative Services but also to the Commissioner of Police, about 35 per cent of the detective force was being deployed to meet the requirements of all those other royal commissions and joint task forces. I foreshadow those things to demonstrate to the House and, 1 hope to those honourable members who have been critical, that there are other things they have to take into account before they draw any conclusions. The honourable member for Holt had no inhibition in making quite unjustified attacks on me a few moments ago. The only other point I want to make is that the honourable member for Holt, when he was talking about the urgent need for the Government to react to the report and to give the AFP further resources, carefully made no mention of the fact that in evidence given to the Committee it was

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3295

told that the AFP had already been given 350 new recruits. Those 350 new members are the total that the AFP can now cope with to train efficiently without making any difference to the standards which it requires. That has been done already. It is happening. If the honourable member for Holt had been really objective he would have made sure that he said that in the comments he made. That is all I want to say. I look forward to giving evidence to the Committee. From the evidence that I will give to the Committee I hope that the role of the AFP and the Department of Administrative Services will be seen in its proper context.
Debate interrupted.
APPOINTMENT OF PARLIAMENTARY LIBRARIAN
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that His Excellency the Governor-General, in accordance with a recommendation by the President of the Senate and me, has appointed Mr Hillas MacLean to the office of the Parliamentary Librarian. Mr MacLean, who is 53 years of age, joined the Parliamentary Library in 1979. He was appointed Head Librarian in 1980. He commenced acting as Parliamentary Librarian on 9 July 1981 when the former occupant of that office, Mr H. G. Weir, ceased duty.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor)-Mr Speaker, I address you briefly to add the congratulations of the Opposition on the appointment,of Mr Hillas MacLean. I think his appointment will be welcomed by honourable members on both sides of the House. He is a very conscientious officer. I think there will be a lot of satisfaction that an appointment has been found within the already existing staff of the Parliamentary Library. He has had distinguished service both in this Library and in the New Zealand Library. We would like to wish him a long and happy tenure. We congratulate you, Mr Speaker, and the President on the appointment. While I could not quite accurately describe it as an expeditious appointment it is indeed an excellent appointment.
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health)-On behalf ~f the Government I join with the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) in his remarks about the new Parliamentary Librarian. I, too, think it is an excellent appointment.
JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
Reports Debate resumed.
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar-Minister for Health)-I will not speak at any length on these

reports by the Joint Committee of Public Accounts. I am sure everybody will be pleased to hear that at this stage. I merely wish, on behalf of the Government, to thank the Committee and its Chairman, the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly), for their work in bringing forward a progress report. It was something that I particularly asked the Committee to do shortly after I became Minister for Health earlier this year because I thought it would be of great value to me and to the Government in looking at this quite difficult problem. I merely say at this stage, not yet having had a chance even to read the report fully in the time that it has been available, that it appears to be a valuable contribution in taking forward the analysis of what is now a very complicated problem. I certainly will be looking to it to see which recommendations can be taken up expeditiously and I will not merely be waiting for the normal six months period of response to a parliamentary report.
In the meantime I wish to say one or two things. Members of parliament, Ministers and former Ministers can speak for themselves in this House. If they are criticised severely in a report then of course they can defend themselves. The members or Ministers who have been criticised in this report have not yet had the opportunity to read it thoroughly and to respond directly to the criticisms. No doubt they will do so in due course. I wish to put in a word for the two groups of people who will come in for criticism who cannot stand in this House to defend themselves. The first group comprises officers within the Public Service, not only in the Department of Health but also elsewhere. I was a little disturbed, if I may say so, by the fact that the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) named an officer of my Department earlier on. I find, on a quick reading of the recommendations in the progress report, that this officer's name is not mentioned. I am referring to Dr Webb, the head of the Victorian division. There does not seem to be a recommendation put forward by the Committee relating to Dr Webb. I was a little disturbed that the honourable member for Burke named that officer, who cannot defend himself in this House. Other officers will be criticised. I merely ask honourable members of this House to observe the necessary proprieties and courtesies about those people, to understand that they are civil servants and that they have to be defended by members of parliament as they cannot defend themselves.
I wish now to say something about doctors. During the seven months that I have been Minister for Health I have been very conscious of the professional integrity of most doctors. One of the

3296 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Tariff Proposals

most damaging things we could do to the profession would be to view this report as an attack on doctors. If honourable members read the introductory sections of the report-those bits that I have been able to read in the time available-they will see that the Committee has been very careful to distinguish between the professional behaviour of most doctors and that of the few who indulge in unsatisfactory practices. It will be most unforhlnate if, in debates in the House or in commentaries by the Press on this report, this is put out of context and there is a generalised attack on the integrity of members of the profession. I am deeply conscious of the role that the medical profession plays in delivering health care on a minute by minute, hour by hour, day by day basis throughout the whole length and breadth of this country. During some of the hearings of the Committee earlier this year-I do not blame the Committee for this because it is a necessary part of hearingsthe morale of the medical profession was put under very severe pressure. I think we have to be very responsible indeed in picking out the specific things we must do to correct the mistakes and to constrain the activities of the minority. We should follow the wording of the report in this regard, which is punctilious. I hope that the behaviour of members of the House during subsequent debates similarly will be punctilious. I thank the Committee very much for producing this progress report with great speed under very difficult circumstances. It will be a valuable document to me. I assure the House that I will do my very best to give it my full attention at the earliest moment.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hodgman) adjourned.
TARIFF PROPOSALS
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (4.37)-1 move:
Customs Tariff Proposals No. 26 (1982).
The Customs Tariff Proposals I have just tabled relate to proposed alterations to the Customs Tariff Act 1966. Proposals No. 26 (1982) which operate from tomorrow introduce tariff changes arising from the Government's decisions on recommendations made by the Industries Assistance Commission in its reports on wood and articles of wood and orange and tangerine juices.
On 25 November 1982 the Minister for Education, Senator Peter Baume, tabled in the Senate the Government's response to the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Trade and Commerce on Australia's forestry and forest products

industries. The Forest Products Industries Advisory Council report on Australia's forest products industries and the Industries Assistance Commission report on wood and articles of wood and foreshadowed the announcement of the Government's decision on the lAC's recommendations. The Government has departed from the lAC's recommendations in respect of the proposed reduction in assistance on mOUldings and nonsquare dressed timber. The Government considered that given the general depressed levels of economic activity the immediate introduction of
the reduced level of assistance could have had a detrimental effect in the short term. For similar reasons the Government has decided not to terminate the present tariff quota on thick plywood but to continue the quota until 30 June 1983.
Goods covered by the lAC report will be dutiable as follows: Wood in the rough, roughly squared and certain rough sawn timber will continue to be free of duty; logs and flitches, wood charcoal, wood wool and wood flour, dressed timber under by-law and staves will be dutiable at minimum rates; most early stage processed timbers, such as rough sawn wood and veneer, will be dutiable at 5 per cent; beadings and mouldings, dowelling and non-square dressed timber will be dutiable at 20 per cent, phasing to 15 per cent over two years; hardboard and particleboard will be dutiable at 28 per cent, phasing to 20 per cent over four years; plywood will be dutiable at 37 per cent, phasing to 25 percent over a four year period; and the remainder of the goods under reference will be dutiable at 15 per cent on implementation. In addition to the various changes to the Customs tariff the Government has decided to withdraw the provisions contained in the Customs regulations enabling the manufacture-inbond of wood and articles of wood as recommended by the lAC. The Government has also
decided that the assistance to wood based panels will be reviewed five years after implementation as recommended by the lAC. The rates proposed by the Government are designed to reduce disparities in assistance between goods having similar production processes and which compete for similar raw materials and in similar markets.
In relation to the report on orange and tangerine juices the Government has decided to terminate the existing variable tariff arrangements for orange and tangerine juices and replace it with a composite tariff in line with the recommendation of the lAC. The new arrangements will not place excessive adjustment pressure on the industry because the tariff will be reduced gradually. A new floor price, reducible over five years and set, initially, at a higher level than that recommended

Environment and Conservation

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3297

by the lAC, will also give the industry protection against sudden reductions in world prices.
The Government has accepted the lAC's conclusion that the previous variable tariff resulted in a number of adverse effects which outweighed the benefits the tariff gave the industry through a stable domestic price structure. In particular, it created an excessively high level of protection compared with other industries and was a cost to the community both in terms of higher consumer prices and the diversion of resources to orange growing from industries receiving less assistance.
The new composite tariff will comprise an ad valorem duty of 10 per cent plus a specific duty of 7Sc per kilogram of total soluble solids. The specific duty will be reduced after the first year by Sc a year to SOc after five years. There will also be an additional duty equal to the amount by which the Customs value is less than a floor price initially set at $1.2S per kilogram of total soluble solids. After the first year, the floor price will be reduced by Sc a year to $1 per kilogram of total soluble solids. The Government has also decided that assistance to the industry will be reviewed by the lAC within five years. A comprehensive summary of the duty changes has been prepared and is being circulated to honourable members. I commend the proposals to the House.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (4.4S)-1 will not delay the House more than a few seconds. This is one of many matters which comes before this House relating to tariffs and Customs. They are extremely important and growingly so in the Australian economy. It is my belief that there should be much more debate on the whole area of tariffs. So many slogans are mouthed outside the country, and inside the country that it is probably time this Parliament had a full scale debate on tariffs and where we stand on the matter. I seek leave to continue my remarks later.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce)-For the information of honourable members and on behalf of the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) I present Industries Assistance Commission reports on wood and articles of wood, and orange and tangerine juices.

STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION
Report
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah)-On behalf of the Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation, I present the second report of the Committee on the inquiry into hazardous chemicals, together with the transcript of evidence and extracts from the minutes of proceedings.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr MacKELLAR-by leave-The report I have just tabled is the second report of the Committee on the hazardous chemicals inquiry. The Committee tabled the first report on chemical waste disposal in April this year. The purpose of this inquiry has been to examine legislative and administrative arrangements to ensure that all chemicals are properly assessed, hazards made known and appropriate regulatory controls implemented. The inquiry covered the manufacture, transport, storage, use and disposal of chemicals with occupational health being of particular interest. It has been a wide-ranging inquiry as the Committee sought to ensure the comprehensiveness of arrangements. The report does not set out to assess or evaluate individual chemicals but reference is made, where appropriate, to particular substances for illustrative purposes. The Committee has included four studies to illustrate the extent of the hazards of just a few chemicals and to examine the way in which they are regulated.
The Committee has canvassed the kinds of hazards posed by chemicals and found that where chemical hazards are immediately obvious they tend to be better regulated than those which do not become obvious until long after exposure. Carcinogens and mutagens are in this latter category. The Committee has heard evidence of large scale disasters where many people have been seriously affected by chemicals. The Committee has also heard of numerous instances of lesser damage which nonetheless are cause for serious concern. Unregulated chemical hazards can lead to enormous personal, social and economic costs. Chemicals playa large part in our everyday lives and our current standard of living and well-being is dependent upon chemical products. It is essential that such gains are consolidated by controlling any associated deleterious effects.
The Committee has examined the assessment and subsequent control machinery for chemicals in Australia. There are a number of deficiencies in these arrangements, not least of which are the gaps in their coverage. The Committee believes that the overall control of hazardous chemicals in Australia is poor, particularly when compared

3298 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Environment and Conservation

with other developed countries. The Committee does not believe that the fragmentation between State and Commonwealth jurisdictions and the resultant lack of uniformity are acceptable. The principal regulatory mechanisms where they exist are pre-marketing assessment leading to assessment of some kind; labelling requirements; sales restrictions; and exposure or emission limits. The Committee looked at the bodies responsible for the assessment of pesticides, poisons, pharmaceuticals and industrial chemicals. These are: the National Health and Medical Research Council committees; the National Advisory Committee on Chemicals; the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee and the technical committees on agricultural chemicals and on veterinary drugs. Most industrial chemicals, as well as cosmetics and toiletries, do not currently require assessment and clearance prior to marketing. A voluntary notification scheme for industrial chemicals is being operated by the National Advisory Committee on Chemicals. The Committee has recommended that a mandatory system should be introduced as soon as possible. This is best achieved by the Commonwealth fully exercising its constitutional powers. These should have effect until each State and Territory can implement its own legislation of a similar standard.
The Committee believes that all environmental assessments of chemicals should be undertaken by the National Advisory Committee on Chemicals. The Committee has found that the Public Health Committee structure of the NH and MRC is not sufficiently comprehensive. Important areas such as carcinogens and mutagens are inadequately covered. Some committees do not meet frequently enough to adequately fulfil their functions. The Committee found health authorities were generally slow in coming to grips with the problems posed by hazardous chemicals, tending to play down their significance rather than instituting effective controls. The Committee has recommended the establishment of a co-ordinating council with the major assessement bodies as members. This should require few additional staff but ensure that the range of assessment and regulatory processes are both comprehensive and coordinated. For example, the occupational health aspects of most industrial chemicals are not being assessed under the present structure. Such gross omissions should not continue.
The testing on which Australian assessments are made is carried out overseas. It is essential that the integrity of this data is assured. International machinery is being established to ensure further the acceptability of data from other countries.

Australia lacks any significant chemical testing facilities of its own. The Committee believes that Australia should establish testing facilities of its own, not so much to conduct testing of new chemicals but to shoulder part of the international burden of testing existing chemicals. Such facilities would provide training in specialist assessment skills which are in short supply in Australia and internationally. There is considerable misunderstanding of the nature of chemical carcinogens and mutagens which hampers their effective control. As well as improvements to the relevant parts of the NH and MRC, the Committee has recommended a public information campaign to explain the nature of carcinogenic hazards so as to place them in perspective and encourage individuals to take an increased responsibility for their own health.
There is a need for a much greater degree of disclosure of the hazardous nature of individual chemical products than occurs at present. The presence of hazardous ingredients, the nature of the hazards and procedures for safe handling, use and disposal must be provided by the manufacturer or supplier of a product. Assessment and registration procedures are at present shrouded by excessive secrecy. They should be made much more open to public scrutiny while still protecting essential trade secrets. Transport accidents, fires and other emergencies involving hazardous chemicals are of increasing concern. The Committee has examined and made recommendations on means of reducing the risks involved and providing emergency services with necessary information. These cover transport, storage and handling of hazardous chemicals. Adequate labelling of containers and vehicles is an essential part of this process.
It is necessary for labelling requirements to be comprehensive and uniform throughout Australia. Labels must readily convey the hazardous nature of the material together with correct storage, handling and emergency procedures. This information frequently needs to be conveyed to non-English speakers. The Committee has recommended that manufacturers and suppliers be required to provide product safety data sheets for any potentially hazardous product they sell. Much more detailed information wiIl be provided than they can put on a label. There is a need for much more chemical information to be made readily available. This is an international problem and those seeking information range from lay people to specialists, such as toxicologists. The Committee has recommended a co-ordinating council to ensure that the range of information needs in Australia are met, are cost effective and

Environment and Conservation

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3299

best use is made of overseas data banks. Easy access to information is an important aspect.
Hazardous chemicals have one of their greatest impacts in the workplace. In the absence of proper controls high levels of exposure over long periods can occur. Legislative and administrative arrangements are weak and enforcement of the few provisions is limited. There are few, if any, work places where potentially hazardous chemicals are not used. The split responsibility for occu-
pational safety and health between labour and health authorities has contributed to the ineffective control of chemical hazards. The time lost due to industrial accidents and disease is about four times that lost due to industrial disputes. Information on the hazards of many products and awareness by employees and employers are frequently lacking. Regulatory authorities at present seem unable to disseminate the amount of information required. The problem is not confined to Australia and there are international workplace hazard information systems being established.
The number of chemicals involved, the number and variety of workplaces and the substantial
training required for inspectors mean that it is not feasible to provide enough inspectors regularly to inspect workplaces and enforce standards. Work
place health and safety committees, with equal employer and employee representation, are necessary to the operation of sound occupational health and safety procedures. Information has to be made available to those in the work place so that they can be fully aware of the hazards involved and make a contribution to their own health and safety. Medical practitioners frequently fail to identify the occupational origins of diseases they treat. Better medical training is necessary along with better occupational health services. Workers compensation legislation is not as comprehensive in its coverage of chemically induced disease as it is of other injuries.
Other countries have established single national organisations to deal with occupational safety and health on a tripartite basis with equal representation of governments, employers and employees. The Committee has recommended that such an approach be adopted in Australia with Commonwealth legislation overcoming much of the fragmentation that exists at present and enabling a high standard of uniform provisions to apply in all workplaces throughout Australia. The Commonwealth has State responsibilities in the Australian Capital Territory. The Committee is extremely concerned that many of these have been neglected. Basic legislation covering environmental protection, occupational health, pesticides, consumer goods and the transport of dangerous

goods, is absent. Chemical hazards exist in the Australian Capital Territory as they do throughout Australia. It is irresponsible of regulatory authorities to await various tragedies before introducing legislation. Legislation should anticipate and prevent disasters rather than being a ritual response to them. The Committee has made a number of specific recommedations concerning legislation in the Australian Capital Territory. The Commonwealth is the largest single employer in Australia and is responsible for the occupational health of its own employees. All departments and authorities are required to observe a code of general principles on occupational safety and health but evidence indicated that most were unaware of the Code and its implications.
While the Commonwealth has power over imports and exports of hazardous chemicals, only a few categories of chemicals are controlled in this way. Similarly, under the Trade Practices Act, few standards have been set for the chemical safety of consumer goods and few unsafe chemical goods have been banned. The Committee has recommended greater use of the trade practices powers to control chemical hazards. The Commonwealth has extensive powers under the Constitution which allows it to regulate most chemical hazards. The Committee has recommended that these powers be exercised to their fullest extent. Commonwealth legislation would then continue to apply until such time as States and Territories enacted similar comprehensive legislation. Only a few copies of the report are available at present. At least one will be available in both the Table Office and the Parliamentary Library. The normal number of printed copies will be available within the next two weeks.
In tabling this report, the Committee wishes to draw the attention of the House to a related matter, namely, responses to committee reports. At present there are four reports of this Committee which were tabled more than six months ago and for which responses are still awaited. Of particular concern is the Committee's report on South West Tasmania which was tabled over two years ago and on which the Government has not yet advised the Committee of its response to its recommendations.
I remind the House that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced on 25 May 1978 that the Government would respond to committee reports within six months of tabling. I think it is worthwhile to repeat what the Prime Minister said on that occasion. In referring to the six month response policy, the Prime Minister said:

3300 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Environment and Conservation

The procedure I have outlined reflects the Government's firm intention to see that the work of parliamentary committees does not pass unheeded. We need to use to the full the talents and resources available in this House and in the Senate. One important way in which this can be achieved is the further development and enhancement of the parliamentary committee system
I can only express disappointment and concern that no statement has been made to the House on the Committee's recommendations prior to yesterday's announcement relating to South West Tasmania. There is no indication that the views of the Committee were even taken into account when the decision was made. I am not suggesting that the Government should necessarily have accepted the Committee's recommendations. Governments are elected to make decisions. I strongly believe, however, that the Government prior to yesterday's decision should have advised the House on its view of the Committee's recommendations. The Committee wrote as late as 26 October 1982 to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) asking when a response could be received on the South West Tasmania report. We have not yet received an acknowledgment of that letter.
The Government often refers matters of a controversial or political nature to committees to assist in the decision making process. The Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) recently referred to the Committee for inquiry the question of aircraft noise. The Committee welcomed this referral but it is hoped that this inquiry and future reports will receive proper and timely response. My colleagues on both sides of the House will be well aware of the hard work and time required to produce the many worthwhile committee reports. The courtesy that the House should expect from any government is a brief statement accepting or rejecting Committee recommendations within a reasonable period of a report being tabled.
Mr HOWE (Batman)-by leave-The report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation on hazardous chemicals represents in many respects a shocking indictment of the failure of the Government in Australia to deal with what is regarded as one of the most important environmental issues in the world. The report tells a story of apathy, indifference, ignorance and ineptitude on the part of the Australian Government and various State governments in dealing with the issue. At this early point I express my thanks to the staff of the Committee who assisted in the production of what I believe is a very important and good report. The Committee received a large number of submissions from employers, environmentalists, consumer representatives, experts and, especially,

trade unions concerned about the welfare of their members in the work place. I believe the submissions from and the contributions by representatives of affected workers represented a particularly important contribution to the inquiry. The material collected will represent perhaps the most important body of evidence on the subject of the inquiry anywhere in Australia, including information available in the Public Service and universities.
In this sense the inquiry was a path-breaking inquiry in that it drew attention to potential problems in advance in many respects of widespread public concern in this country. Indeed, the report should help to raise concern about this important matter. I believe that one of the important functions of parliamentary committees is to reach out into the community and investigate an area of potential concern so that action can be taken. It is said that in the field of occupationalenvironmental health, public health, which so much of this report is concerned about, Australia should trail so far behind so many other developed countries, as the report so amply demonstrates.
It is impossible adequately to discuss the subject without reference to the massive growth in the chemical industry throughout the world. Between 1965 and 1975 the industry doubled its output, becoming as it is today a $400 billion industry concentrated on the developed world. The industry represents one of the miracle industries of economic growth in the post-war period, fostered as it has been by a relatively small number of multinational companies which dominate the industry in countries throughout the world, including Australia. In Australia it has been one of the fastest growing industries, tripling in size during the I 970s. The industry here is controlled by international companies with 75 per cent of the industry's output being controlled by these companies. This high rate of foreign ownership should be compared with the figure of 34 per cent for manufacturing industry as a whole.
The scale of the industry also is reflected in the number of individual chemicals now being manufactured. Currently somewhere between 50,000 and 70,000 chemicals are being manufactured world wide. Each year hundreds of new chemicals are introduced, often without any effective assessment of their potential effects on human health or the environment. In the face of this massive growth in the chemical industry the countries in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development began, particularly in the last decade, to move to regulate and control

Environment and Conservation

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3301

the industry. More than 10 of the 24 OECD countries have moved to introduce strong legislative controls. One is almost tempted to say, of course, that Australia has not. Whereas in the European Economic Community there has been strong recognition of the importance of the problems associated with the chemical industry and a number of directives have been issued to member countries effectively regulating the industry, it is claimed in Australia, even though we are a single nation, that State rights make it extremely difficult to develop a national approach.
As the report suggests, the control measures that exist in this country at present are generally fragmented and inadequate. The rate of introduction of new chemicals has been so great as to outstrip the ability of regulatory authorities to assess the impact on health or the environment. We
have certainly not developed any comprehensive legislation, or any significant national legislation, to control the hazardous impact of chemicals on our human or physical environment. As I have suggested, the key issue in this report has to do with public health. I believe the report raises some basic questions about the adequacy of the approach in this country to public health. I refer very briefly to the report of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts on medical fraud and overservicing tabled this afternoon. It would seem to me that in this case, where we are aware of the leakage of perhaps tens of millions of dollars each year, there is no doubt a great deal of outrage in the community. But in an area such as public health where, as a result of a failure of government to regulate and to act to ensure that costs that may be associated with the development of an industry are not passed on to the public in general in human and financial terms, there is not the same outrage or concern.
I argue that in the long run it is public health that is the key to reducing the national health bill, not so much increased expenditure in the treatment system. It raises, as I suggest as an example of this concern, the failure of the Commonwealth and States effectively to regulate carcinogenic or mutagenic substances to which people may be exposed within the general context of discussions about the impacts of chemicals on people exposed to them. As the Chairman of the Committee, the honourable member for Warringah (Mr MacKellar), pointed out there is some sensitivity in this country to acute effects. Of course, in the case of some immediate effect-stinging in the eyes or whatever-people are likely to go to a nurse or medical practitioner and report that condition. However, very often people are being exposed to substances which have chronic or long

term effects and no effort is made to make them aware of the dangers or to educate the medical profession or people with responsibility for health in the industrial area as to the fact that there may be involved in the association with particular substances dangers which will not be immediately obvious.
The issue of cancer, which is the subject of some discussion in the report, is extremely important to us all. Currently one in four of every Australian who dies does so as a result of cancer. In the report there is some discussion of the environ-
mental causes of cancer. I think that it is generally agreed that at least 80 per cent of all cancers are induced by environmental factors which, at least in theory, are quite preventable by intervening in a way which anticipates the onset of the cancer rather than seeking to treat the cancer after it has actually been induced.
During this inquiry there was considerable con-
cern expressed about the fact that people exposed to industrial chemicals appear to have very little protection in terms of regulation. I think we are aware of the fact that people in work places in various parts of Australia are exposed there to carcinogens. Of course, the most dramatic example of that has been the exposure of workers in various locations-mines, factories and car plants-to asbestos. We know just how dramatic a killer asbestos has turned out to be-not in the short term but in the very long term. The fact that asbestos has been a killer has been known, at least by the insurance companies-they get on to these things very early-since early in the century. Therefore, in the report there is considerable discussion of the question of occupationally induced cancer and, particularly, the potential role of some carcinogenic chemicals in inducing cancers.
I think that what struck the Committee very much was the complete lack of information available in this area. We were able to draw quite a lot of information from overseas but in the Australian context there was very little information at all. There were no figures available even on the volumes of various chemicals produced in Australia. There was no information on what chemicals are actually in use in Australia. It would appear that very few chemicals, certainly very few industrial chemicals, are tested for toxicity in Australia. There is rarely any evaluation of chemicals in Australia from the point of chronic as opposed to acute effects. Australia has had no history-indeed, one could say there was no prospect of it-of epidemiological studies in Australia. There is no national cancer register through which it would be possible to make correlations between the incidence of cancer and, for

3302 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Environment and Conservation

example, living in the western suburbs of Melbourne where there are huge petrochemical complexes and where one can be exposed to the kinds of emissions that were involved in the Goodrich disaster. People who are exposed to chemicals, particularly in the work place. often can get no access to information about the chemical composition of a substance to which they may be exposed. Workers for Kodak (A'asia Pty Ltd), for example, have had to fight that company through the Miscellaneous Workers Union to get access to information about the precise composition of chemicals to which they are exposed every day. I think that information, which was given to the Committee by trade unionists, was received with very great concern.
The fact that there is so much ignorance means that Australians are often being used, by those who produce chemicals, as guinea pigs, with
consequences which may not be realised for generations but which nevertheless in the long term could be extremely serious. This is not to say that every chemical has a toxic affect or may cause cancer. The report indicates that very few chemicals of the total produced are carcinogenic but the reality is that there is little or no attempt on the part of the various departments of health to inform people of dangers to which they may be exposed. This story of neglect means that associated with this industry is a story of personal, social and economic costs, to say little of environmental costs which certainly at this point have never been calculated. It is, of course, in the absence of statistics, impossible to say what the costs associated with occupational disease may be but we know that occupational accidents represent in terms of days lost a bill of $4 billion a year, or more than four times the days lost through industrial action. If the bill for occupational induced disease were added to this the overall result could be a very much higher figure. This means that hidden costs, which could be avoided if we were prepared to regulate this industry properly, are being borne by the Australian public. It is extraordinary that the current Minister for Health (Mr Carlton) should on so many occasions accuse people who are concerned about this issue of multinational bashing, while the national health bill is being inflated as a result of a clear failure on the part of the Commonwealth Government to construct a proper approach to public and occupational health issues.
The report documents the clear lack of effective legislative and regulatory machinery in Australia today. It establishes that the committee structure, through the National Advisory Committee on Chemicals, the Australian Agricultural

Council, the National Health and Medical Research Council and the other relevant bodies, is cumbersome, underserviced, not comprehensive and lacking government commitment. The Committee heard evidence that many of the National Health and Medical Research Council committees were not meeting because there was no money for fares; that the staff of the National Advisory Committee on Chemicals was lacking adequate resources, with no more than three staff administering the voluntary notification scheme; and that that scheme was not working because more than 50 per cent of the companies contacted in the NACC's preliminary survey failed to provide information about the chemicals introduced by them since 1974. The evidence showed that while the industry says it is in favour of selfregulation it is not prepared voluntarily to provide the Department with information which is clearly crucial if there is to be an effective regulation of and care is to be taken in the industry in Australia.
The report documents in a great deal of detail the sad situation which exists in this field today. It deals with the lack of commitment to comprehensive legislation or to establishing administrative machinery which is effective and comprehensive. The problems of the Federal Constitution are used by many as an excuse whereas other countries such as the United States of America have managed to establish effective Federal legislation-relatively speaking, at least-and administrative machinery. The report documents not only the complete absence of Federal occupational legislation but also glaring inadequacies in the field of occupational health at the State level. It covers the division of powers between industry and health; the lack of effective factory inspection systems; the lack of proper labelling of substances used in the work places, let alone multilinguallabelling for a work force which is drawn from so many different countries; the great lengths to which workers have to go to get access to information about substances which they believe to be dangerous; the lack of adequate lists of specified substances in workers' compensation legislation resulting in a failure of workers affected by serious disease, particularly chronic disease, to get adequate compensation; and the lack of effective legislation at State or Commonwealth level guaranteeing people's right to know what is in a product to which they are exposed.
The report makes a number of suggestions to government about what might be done to establish an effective system of regulation of the

Environment and Conservation

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3303

use of chemicals in Australia. Together, this report and the previous report suggest a cradle-tograve system under which chemicals are ';ontrolled from the point of conception to their
ultimate disposal. In particular, this report suggests the need for a drastic overhaul of the present regulatory material and the need for a national co-ordinating committee to take overall responsibility for the process of regulation and particularly the process of notification and assessment of all new chemicals. Considerably more resources need to be made available to this area to ensure that all chemicals are effectively assessed, whether in Australia or as a part of some kind of international assessment program. Australia should have some part in that international assessment program, either through an upgrading of the Commonwealth Institute of Health or through the funding of other research centres around Australia. There is a need for comprehensive legislation under which notification, assessment and labelling are controlled and all of the issues to which I have been referring are effectively dealt with.
Furthermore, the Committee places considerable emphasis on the need for a national occu-
pational safety and health authority with powers to ensure that a national approach is taken to this area of occupational safety and health. The Committee believes that such an authority should be established on a tripartite basis and that committees should be established in every work place involving equal numbers of workers and management. A national approach is needed to the public health problem which exists in this country of which this report, I believe, in many ways is simply a symptom of a very much wider problem of the need for a basic change in approach by the
medical profession and people concerned with health administration. In a modern society everyone is exposed to chemicals through hair dies, cosmetics, cleaning fluids, plastics, paints, solvents, and so on. These material& are all-pervasive. This report documents four case studies. Each one in its own way illustrates the inadequacies of regulation in this country on the one hand and on the other the very considerable dangers that exist for people who are exposed in any significant way to substances which have dangerous effects.
I hope that this report will stimulate wide discussions in the community. I think it is an important report, particularly for working people in this country. I remember that I was enormously impressed by members of a particular union who were employed in the dry cleaning industry. They simply talked about conditions in the average dry cleaning plant and what it meant to work in that

situation without having the right to know to what they were being exposed and without having any effective rights to intervene. One hopes that this report will do much to encourage the Government to think about the issues involved. I certainly hope that the Minister for Health, as well as the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh), will read it.
Finally, I support the remarks of the Chairman of the Committee with respect to South West Tasmania. I think it is a complete disgrace that a committee of this Parliament that carried out a study of a particular issue and reported to the Governm~nt so long ago has been completely ignored by the Government of the day, yet the same Government has the effrontery to ask that Committee to take on an inquiry because it has a political problem with respect to aircraft noise. That is absolutely outrageous. If we are to have committeesjoint committees-if we are to ask members of this Parliament to work on them and in doing so to traipse around the country, the Government ought at least to have the decency to respond to the reports of those committees. The Committee put out four reports-none of which has been responded to~as the Chairman of the Committee outlined. I think honourable members on both sides of the House ought to jack up on that. It is not good enough. We are wasting our time. If we are to be ignored, the Government certainly ought not to refer matters. We ought to know that it is not interested in what is produced. The Chairman's remarks were apposite. The point is not made in a partisan way, but all members ought to be concerned about not being taken seriously by the Government when we present reports to the Parliament.
Mr Fry-I want to add my congratulations to
the-~
Mr Bourchier-He has not sought leave.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)~Order! Is the honourable member seeking leave to speak?
Mr Fry-I seek leave.
Leave not granted.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXPENDITURE
Membership
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I wish to report that Mr Speaker has received advice from the Government Whip that he has nominated Mr Chapman to be a member of the Standing Committee on Expenditure in place of Mr McLean.

3304 REPR ESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Delegation to the Nordic Countries

AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE NORDIC
COUNTRIES
Report
Mr JULL (Bowman)-by leave-I present the official report of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to the Nordic Countries and propose to make a short statement in connection with the report.
This delegation was led by Senator John Martyr and I believe it had one of the most constructive visits that could be available to a delegation such as ours. In the preface of the report thanks is given to those who organised the visit, both in the Nordic countries and here in Australia. That thanks is generous indeed as, although the schedule was a very hectic one, many areas of concern and interest were covered. The visit provided a tremendous opportunity for the members to participate in a very real way in debates of common interest, to learn of developments taking place in Scandinavia and Finland which are of interest to Australia, and to examine areas of potential trade which obviously can be of great benefit to all countries concerned. There have, of course, been consistently close and good relations between Australia and the Nordic regions for over 100 years. There has been a considerable migration of people from those parts to Australia over that time. Despite this, our delegation broke new ground inasmuch as it was the first official parliamentary delegation to visit Denmark and Finland.
The report gives a comprehensive background to the political situation in all four Nordic countries and their foreign affairs interests and, importantly, points up areas of future trade expansion, especially in the areas of minerals-nickel, wolfram, coal and uranium--and the further promotion of canned fruit. In the case of Sweden there would appear to be good prospects for the future sale of Australian wine through the Swedish Government's liquor monopoly. Tourism, although not often thought to be an export industry, can certainly be developed between the two regions. There has been a promising growth in the number of Swedes and Danes visiting Australia in recent years, despite the fact that no direct air links by either national carrier exist. There is immense interest in Australia in the Nordic region through close family ties and examination and exploitation of this market should be undertaken by the Australian Tourist Commission and Qantas Airways Ltd.
The report also focuses attention on the delegation's visit to the Oskarshamn power station,

to which some 2,400 tonnes of Australian uranium will be supplied during the period 1982 to 1996. I commend those sections on pages 24 and 25 of the report, especially as the management of the Oskarshamn plant is involved in the Ranger development in the Northern Territory. Despite the number of safeguard treaties with Sweden there were aspects of the possible reprocessing of Australian uranium which should be noted.
The delegation also spent time in discussions and inspections of social services. While Scandinavian social services have often been held as the best in the world, pressures are certainly now on them. The financial pressures are so acute that there is some doubt as to just how long some of them can continue. This was especially evident in Copenhagen where the Mayor expressed real concern at the continuation of that city's program. In Denmark overseas borrowings are financing social services and adding to the national debt. Australia could well take a lesson from this situation. The report, in its conclusion, acknowledges the contribution made by the Australian representatives in Stockholm and Copenhagen but points to a further need for more diplomatic activity in both Norway and Finland as well as in the area of trade promotion.
I am sure that all members of the delegation join with me in expressing thanks to Mr Ingemund Bengtsson, Speaker of the Swedish Parliament, for his invitation to the Australian Speaker for the delegation to visit Sweden, and to the governments and parliaments of Denmark, Norway and Finland for their help and hospitality, and to Nordic private industry and Australian Department of Foreign Affairs officials both here and in the Nordic regions. Our thanks should also be expressed to Senator Martyr for his leadership of the delegation and to the secretary of the delegation, Mr John Porter. I believe this was a most comprehensive and fruitful visit and I commend the report to the House.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifiey)-by leave-As time is very precious today I will keep my remarks unusually short. I wish to make one or two points. First, I also thank John Porter for the excellent job he did as secretary to the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to the Nordic Countries. He was very conscientious and the delegation could not have been better served. Secondly, I thank our host countries. Sweden, of course, issued the original invitation. They were very good hosts to us throughout the visit, which we enjoyed tremendously. They gave us every opportunity to find out all the facts that we wished to inquire into. They did not restrict us in any respect. I could go

Delegation to the Nordic Countries

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3305

on a lot more about that but I think it has been covered well by the Chairman of the Committee. I know that another member of the delegation, the honourable member for Henty, Mrs Child, will soon refer to the same matter.
I wish to make one point only, and it is the only point which one could say is a little controversial; that is, the leadership of the delegation. I wish to make it clear that I do not in any way denigrate the leadership of Senator Martyr. He was most conscientious indeed and was very aware of the duty imposed on him. But I think it is important that these delegations should be led by a Presiding Officer or a Minister. I think it denigrates the delegation and the host countries if that is not so. Last year the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) led a delegation to India, and he did an excellent job. He worked his heart out. But we received criticism from the Indian Government. We were informed that it was looked on rather sadly that we did not have a Minister or Presiding Officer with us. If a delegation is led by a Presiding Oficer or a Minister the delegation meets much more senior people. For that reason it is then a far better fact finding delegation and
ascertains much more information than it would otherwise. That is the only point I wish to make. I think it is very important indeed that the Government should consider this point and keep in mind that these countries are our friends and have gone out of their way to be good hosts. Surely common decency requires that we should send a Minister or a Presiding Officer to lead a delegation and thereby ensure that we will be much more successful. Then the host country and the delegation would not feel that they were being denigrated.
Mrs CHILD (Henty)-by leave-I agree with what the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) had to say. I think he put the facts very well; I do not need to go through them. The Australian Parliamentary Delegation to the Nordic Countries had an excellent and diverse program. However, there is one note of warning. In the enthusiasm of each of the four countries to make sure we did not miss anything they almost killed us with kindness, food and overwork. I think it is necessary for members of future delegations perhaps to have half a day off here and there so that they can collect their scattered thoughts, and also their laundry.
I would like also to put in a word about the admiration that all of us felt for Norway and, in particular, for the way in which the Norwegians have handled their North Sea oil bonanza. They tell us that they will have a $2 billion surplus this year, which must make most other countries very envious. Norway's unemployment rate is about 1t per

cent. I think most of this prosperity has been generated by the fact that Statoil owns the Norwegian North Sea oil. Norway refines its own oil. Its oil is owned by the Government. Every petrol bowser in Norway is also government-owned. There is also an 85 per cent tax on oil which comes out of their sea and which is drilled for by other companies. I think a lesson can be learnt from that. It is a pity that earlier Victorian Liberal governments did not learn that lesson before they gave away our oil. Full congratulations go to Norway; I think it has done a great job.
The honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) mentioned the reprocessing of uranium in Sweden. I would like to mention briefly, as my colleague, the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Armitage) and I have mentioned in the House before, that Australia sells uranium to Finland. Finland sends that uranium to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics for processing. The uranium comes back to Finland. When we inquired what happened to the waste we found that it was returned to the USSR. This is Australian uranium. I think the House, the relevant Minister and the Government should take note of the fact that it does not really matter much what safeguards we have; we cannot control where the waste finishes up. I would also like to pay tribute to John Porter, our Secretary, not just for the help and company he gave us but also for the report. It is an excellent report and I commend it to the House.
CHRISTMAS ISLAND AGREEMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Newman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr NEWMAN (BassMinister for Administrative Services) (5.32)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide for the winding up of the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission and the termination of the Christmas Island Agreement with New Zealand. As indicated in the Schedule to the Bill, both the Australian and New Zealand governments have agreed to these changes being made. Honourable members will recall that in June 1981 the Christmas Island Agreement Act was amended to enable an Australian Government company-the Phosphate Mining Co. of Christmas Island Ltd-to replace the British Phosphate Commissioners as the managing agents of the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission. As I indicated in my second reading speech on that legislation,

3306 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Construction ofChemical Milling Facility

those amendments were of an interim kind, and a completely new Christmas Island Agreement was to be negotiated with New Zealand.
The legislation now before the House takes that process further. Article I in the Schedule provides that the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission shall cease to function as soon as practicable, following which the Christmas Island Agreement will terminate in accordance with Article IV. As to Article II, the intention is that the assets of the Commission on the island-the phosphate rock, buildings, plant etcetera-will pass to the Phosphate Mining Co. which will then mine the phosphate deposits in its own right rather than as managing agents. Agreement is close to being reached with New Zealand on arrangements which will operate in future between the two countries in respect of island phosphate. This agreement will be embodied in an exchange of notes which will begin to operate when the legislation before the House comes into force. It will be tabled in the House in due course.
Just as the 1981 legislation affecting the Christmas Island Agreement paved the way for the British Phosphate Commissioners to be wound up, so does this legislation spell the end of the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission. The Commission was established in 1949 by the Australian and New Zealand governments after they had, on 31 December 1948, purchased the assets on the island of the Christmas Island Phosphate Co. Ltd. That company had been mining phosphate on the island since the 1980s. The purchase price was £ 2,690,000 sterling. The original 1949 Agreement was revised in 1958 when Christmas Island became an Australian territory.
The Commission always has been an unusual organisation. There are three commissoners, but no employees, the Commission having always had managing agents-for 32 years the British Phosphate Commissioners and since July last year the Phosphate Mining Co. of Christmas Island Ltd. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the present commissioners-Mr M. C. Timbs, A.O., the Australian Commissioner; Mr W. D. M. Bremner, C.M.G., the New Zealand Commissioner, and Mr W. B. Martson, OBE., the Joint Commissioner. It is a measure of the relationship between Australia and New Zealand that a body under the authority of both of them could for 24 years be responsible for conducting a mining operation on a territory under the authority of one of them. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.

CONSTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL MILLING FACILITY, FISHERMEN'S
BEND, VICTORIA
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (5.36)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969 and by reason of the urgent nature of the work, it is expedient that the following proposed work be carried out without having been referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works: Construction of a Chemical Milling Facility for the Government Aircraft Factories at Fishermen's Bend, Victoria.
The proposal is for the provision of a facility which will be used for the chemical milling of aluminium and titanium aircraft components. Chemical milling is an iterative metal removal process accomplished by the repeated immersion of suitably masked metal components in an acid or alkaline bath. Further elements of the process include associated cleaning, mask stripping and waste removal. The FA 18 aircraft chosen for the Royal Australian Air Force incorporates aluminium and titanium chemically milled components. Offset work for the FA 18 project includes a substantial airframe component consisting of 60 aluminium and 62 titanium chemically milled components per aircraft set. The proposed facility will allow production of these components.
The proposal involves the extension and conversion of an existing building and the modification of part of a building currently nearing completion. The work comprises the following elements: Pre-cleaning, masking, scribing and etching facilities for aluminium components; precleaning, masking, scribing and etching facilities for titanium components; and effluent treatment equipment. The estimated cost of the work is $4.7m at November 1982 prices. This does not include specialised machinery and plant to be funded by the Department of Defence Support which is estimated to cost $1.6m at November 1982 prices.
It is essential that the chemical milling facility be fully operational by March 1984. If the facility is not available then there will be an irrecoverable loss of work to Australian industry. In order to avoid this loss of work it is necessary that construction of the facility be commenced in early January 1983. Additionally, any delay in commissioning the plant beyond March 1984 would deny Australian industry time to progressively build up the rate of production of chemically milled components during the critical initial learning phase.
In view of this tight timetable, it is not feasible for the project to be referred to the Public Works

Navy Vessels and Shipbuilding Facility

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3307

Committee for consideration and report. It is urgent that this project proceed since any delay to the commencement of production is likely to lead to the importation of components at the expense of local production. If the House agrees to support this motion, detailed planning and construction can proceed.
Mr BUNGEY (Canning) (S.39)-1 want to make some very brief comments indeed on this matter. As Chairman of the Joint Committee on Public Works 1 have been briefed on this proposal by officers of the Department of Defence Support and the Department of Transport and Construction. I accept the urgency, the need and the very tight timetable. I also accept the urgency with which this work for a chemical milling facility at the Government Aircraft Factories at Fishermen's Bend has to be completed. To that extent, I am agreeable and raise no objection on behalf of the Committee to the exemption now being sought. I know that the FA 18 project and particularly its offset program are running to a very tight schedule but I draw to the attention of the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) and the Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner) that this is the second exemption that has been made in relation to the offset program for the FA 18 project. I hope that the rest of the works which are necessary can be organised in such a way that they will be available for scrutiny by the Public Works Committee. In this case I raise no objection to the exemption now proposed.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (S.4l)-The Opposition supports the urgency of the matter before the chamber but, at the same time, we endorse the remarks made by the Chairman of the Public Works Committee, the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey). We do not wish to delay the decision on the matter. It has our support.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
CONSTRUCTION OF ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY VESSELS AND
SHIPBUIDING FACILITY
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (S.4l )-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969 and by reason of the urgent nature of the work, it is expedient that the following proposed works be carried out without having been referred to the Parliament Standing Committee on Public Works:
Construction of RAN minehunter catamarans and shipbuilding facility
The proposal is for the construction of two Australian designed minehunter catamarans and the associated shipbuilding and repair facility which is

required to allow production of the vessels. The catamaran design employs a glass reinforced plastic and rigid PVC sandwich hull, the first of its type in the world. The construction and major repair of the hull require the use of a unique shipbuilding facility with environmental control equipment. Special construction processes are involved. The minehunter catamaran has been selected as the replacement for the aging ton class wooden-hulled minehunters. These vessels are reaching the end of their effective lives being in the order of 30 years old and are considered substantially ineffective by modern standards.
The cost of the construction of the two catamarans and the associated facility is estimated to be $23m. It is essential that a contract be entered into by December 1982 to allow the replacement minehunters to be commissioned on schedule. Any delay in entering this contract would result in a critical gap in the Australian Defence Force's minehunters capability. In addition any delay to the contract would postpone employment creating shipbuilding activity. In view of this tight timetable, it is not possible for the project to be referred to the Public Works Committee for consideration and report. If the House agrees to support this motion the detailed planning and construction can proceed.
Mr MORRISON (St George) (S.44)-On behalf of the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) and the Opposition, I hasten to assure the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) that the Opposition does not oppose the motion. Indeed, we welcome the decision to proceed with the construction of the minehunters. I must confess that it is very hard to comprehend the Minister's sudden realisation that he has a tight timetable and that the construction of the Royal Australian Navy minehunter catamarans is now regarded as urgent. I refer the House to the 1976 White Paper which states:
61. The mine countermeasures (MCM) force consists of two minehunters and one minesweeper all of the Ton Class. Navy is examining a new concept in MCM vessels which should provide a more flexible and effective minehunting capability. This envisages an Australian-designed and developed glass-reinforced plastic craft fitted with modern minehunting and mine disposal equipment.
62. The Government has decided to proceed with the initial prototype design and acquisition of long lead items for two prototype vessels. The objective is to have a new operational minehunter craft entering service during the first half of the 1980s.
That part of the 1976 White Paper, like most of its other features, was incorporated in the five-year program for defence that was approved by the Labor Administration in 1975. But the mine countermeasures, the catamarans, suffered the same

3308 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Navy Vessels and Shipbuilding Facility

fate as many of the programs incorporated in the 1976 White Paper when there were heavy cutbacks. They were affected by the first lot of heavy cutbacks by the Liberal-National Country Party Government in the defence area. In fact, the Government has an appalling record in the defence area of persistent cutbacks in pronouncements that it has made.
As the Minister quite rightly pointed out, the Government is replacing the Ton class minehunter which is well over 30 years old. It is a wooden-hulled boat. It certainly does not have the facilities and modern equipment necessary to undertake the mine countermeasures which we on this side of the House believe are a very important part of our concept of the defence of Australia. The old wooden-hulled jobs are the only mine countermeasures that we have.
The Minister put forward that this is a matter of urgency. The program has been around since 1975. It is therefore a weakness in the administration of the implementation of programs by the present Government that all of a sudden there is a great rush to get it underway. As I said, we will not oppose the proposition. We only wish that these vessels had come on stream a lot earlier. Prototypes will be constructed. In that sense, the entire project is more than five years behind schedule. The operational vessels, not the prototypes, should have been in service before 1985. At that stage the first prototypes will now still be on the slips. We do not oppose the proposal; we welcome it. We hope that the Government will pay due regard to this type of equipment which we believe is important. It is not highly glamorous equipment but it is very effective. Certainly, in terms of the dangers that might be presented to Australia, as effective mine countermeasures capacity is vital to the Australian defence forces.
Mr BUNGEY (Canning) (5.48)-As Chairman of the Public Works Committee, I inform the House that I and the Vice-Chairman, the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon),
have been advised by the Department of Defence and the Department of Transport and Construction of the background to the need for urgency in this matter. We have agreed to raise no objection to the exemption. Part of the reason for the exemption and the need for urgency is the fact that only quite recently a ruling from the Attorney-General's Department indicated that the construction of vessels comes within the power and review procedures of the Public Works Committee. Before that I do not think anyone realised it. Therefore, I think there is justification for urgency in this case. If Public Works Committee scrutiny took place it would delay tenders

which, I believe, are at a very advanced stage and ready to be called. Mr Deputy Speaker, you will be very pleased to know that the program will provide substantial employment in your region of Australia, Newcastle.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SECURITY 1941-46
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Mr Speaker has received the following message from the Senate:
The Senate transmits to the House of Represenetatives the following Resolution which was agreed to by the Senate this day:
That Mr President be authorised to grant. in his discretion, access by Dr Sheila Shaver, of Macquarie University, to all or part of the evidence or documents taken in camera by, or submitted on a confidential or restricted basis to, the Joint Committee on Social Security of 1941-46, and to permit Dr Shaver to make copies of any such evidence or documents to which she is granted access.
The Senate requests the concurrence of the House of Representatives in this Resolution.
Motion (by Mr Viner) agreed to:
That the message be taken into consideration forthwith.
Motion (by Mr Viner) agreed to:
(I) That the House concurs in the resolution transmitted to the House in message No. 343 of the Senate, viz.:
That Mr President be authorised to grant, in his discretion, access by Dr Sheila Shaver, of Macquarie University, to all or part of the evidence or documents taken in camera by, or submitted on a confidential or restricted basis to, the Joint Committee on Social Security of 1941-46, and to permit Dr Shaver to make copies of any such evidence or documents to which she is granted access.
(2) That a message be sent to the Senate acquainting it of this resolution.
CUSTOMS TARIFF (ANTI-DUMPING) AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 8 December, on motion by Mr Peacock:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr PEACOCK (Kooyong-Minister for Industry and Commerce)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill and the Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill 1982 as they are related measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3309

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.51)-
Firstly, I apologise to the House for the absence of my colleague the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford), who would normally have had the carriage of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill and the Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill
in the House. Unfortunately, he had to go back to Adelaide. While I have almost dual carriage of this sort of matter, I will be filling in on his behalf. I apologise to the House for his absence.
The Opposition is supporting these two Bills. However, as I shall explain later, whilst we will not oppose the motion for the second reading of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill, we will be moving an amendment at the second reading stage. At the outset, it ought to be noted that the need for a second reading amendment could well have been avoided if the Government had devoted sufficient resources to enable expedient dumping investigations to be made. As a result of the Government's small government philosophy, Australian manufacturers must now wait over nine months for a dumping decision. One could almost say that that situation is pregnant with possibilities. Australia is particularly sensitive to imports being dumped here because of Australia's relatively heavy reliance on tariffs as opposed to non-tariff barriers and because of our rather small domestic market. For instance, a shipload of dumped shoes will obviously have a greater impact in Australia than say, in the United States of America. Moreover, unlike many of our trading partners, we do not rely on nontariff barriers to protect our industries. That might be a matter for some regret. A country with a sophisticated import licensing system virtually needs no anti-dumping legislation. It is therefore essential, particularly in these times of massive world over-capacity, that the Government ensures that Australia has an effective anti-dumping system which will provide a quick and efficient investigation process. Only then will Australian industry be adequately protected from unfair overseas competition.
The amendment that we will propose goes part of the way towards ensuring effective anti-dumping procedures for this country. To that extent, I can applaud the moves of the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock). The Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill amends section 14 of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act. The Bill removes an obligation on the Minister not to take action which is inconsistent with the obligations of Australia under international agreements relating to trade. This section is being used, in conjunction with the

Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act, by foreign exporters to frustrate anti-dumping procedures, to the detriment of Australian industry. These exporters are appealing against decisions by the Government to impose cash securities. There is some evidence that the decisions are being appealed against, not in order to review the decision, but rather as a tactic to delay the whole anti-dumping investigation process. The nature of the legal appeals system gives appellants a period of reprieve in which they can continue to import without penalty. Exporters of goods to Australia are, therefore, using existing law to prevent the Customs authorities from taking provisional anti-dumping and countervailing securities.
It is well accepted also that whatever agreements this country has made with its trading partners it is not appropriate for these obligations to be the subject of litigation within the Australian courts, and the Opposition does not oppose that principle. These agreements, we believe, are best considered at a government to government level. The Opposition, therefore, supports this amendment, but in passing notes the irony that on the very date this amendment was announced the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) was parading on the world stage pointing to himself and his Government as the archangels of free trade. I do not think it would be terribly cynical to suggest that it appears that there may be a certain double standard in operation.
The Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill of 1982 amends section 42 of the Customs Act so as to remove any doubt as to whether cash securities can be imposed for the purpose of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act. Customs has, as a matter of practice, assumed that the Customs Act already gives the necessary power to impose cash securities in a situation where the Department has made a provisional finding that a prima facie dumping case exists. But because of the length of time taken to finalise a dumping investigation it is essential that there be adequate procedures to ensure interim protection during that period. Cash securities, of course, can provide this interim protection. The Opposition welcomes any measure to remove doubts as to the validity of the imposition of cash securities for anti-dumping purposes.
The Government has already introduced regulations removing the scope of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act from decisions to take cash or other securities. The anti-dumping process is an administrative response to a commercial problem and as such to be effective must catch the horse before it bolts through the gate. By

331 0 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

allowing a review of a decision to impose securities imports continue to enter the country. By the time a final decision is made the injury has been done. Clause 6 of the Customs Securities (AntiDumping) Amendment Bill merely supersedes these regulations. As a result, foreign exporters will no longer be able to frustrate Australia's anti-dumping machinery. It IS noted that aggrie:ed parties will still retain their right to appeal a~am~t the final determination. To some extent this will act as a check against capricious administrative action. But I think it is fair to say at this stage that the cost of trying to obtain a prerogative writ in the High Court of Australia is somewhere in the vicinity of $20,000 to $25,000. So this precludes the possibilities for all sorts of people to take that sort of action.
However, despite these changes, the Government in our view has not gone far enough. The Australian Labor Party does not intend to see Australian industry being destroyed by unfair import competition. I put the emphasis on the word 'unfair'. Of course, we recognise the need as a major trading nation to import, just as we need to export. But one particular difficulty which Australian industry has to deal with in competing with dumped imports is that the burden remains on our industries to show that goods are being imported below their normal prices and that material injury has been incurred. Along with the Metal Trades Industry Association of Australia and the Australian Industries Development Association, the Labor Party considers that this imposes too grea. a burden upon Australian industry. We do not mind at all being associated with groups such as the Me~al Trades Industry Association and thl:: Australian Industries Development Association in sharing that view. The fact is that a dumping action tends to come at a time when an industry is on its knees. These industries are in no position to spend valuabl~ resourc~s on gathe~ing evidence to substantiate a dumpmg allegatIOn. Consequently, we intend to move a second. reading amendment to show that we would shift the burden of proof from local producers and the Department towards importers after a prima facie case has been established at the completion of interim proceeding. Under the amendment importers, once a prima facie case has been ~stab lished, will have to prove that there IS no dumping. This would ensure that only bona fide complaints proceed and would relieve Australian industry from the costs of substantiating allegations once a prima facie case has been established. Such a measure would go a lot further towards protecting Australia from unfair trading

practices which are costing this country thousands of jobs.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (8.0)- Before the suspension of the sitting for dinner I was talking about the amendment that I intend to move at the end of my speech. The Opposition is trying to ensure that only bona fide complaints proceed. We believe that the amendment we are moving will relieve Australian industry from the cost of substantiating allegations once they have established a prima facie case. Such a measure would go a lot further to protecting Australia from unfair trading practices which are costing this country thousands of jobs. We also wish to indicate in our second reading amendment that we would, on taking over government, seek to impose penalties upor. any additional imports negotiated during the investigation period. Although the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act provides for dumping duties to be applied retrospectively, this provision is limited in general to 90 days. Given that most dumping allegations are taking over nine months to clear up there is a clear need for provision to be made for penalties to be payable where an importer continues to flood the Australian market with additional imports. This is particularly relevant for the period during which preliminary investigations are proceeding. The final matter included in our second reading amendment relates to reducing the maximum period fl)r investigation to 24 weeks and to ensuring that a preliminary prima facie decision is reached within a maximum period of 12 weeks. Industrv groups have long been calling for a reduced investigation period. What this of course means is that the Government will have to commit itself to providing sufficient resources to reduce the time from the present average of nine months. This is most unlikely. This government has never been able to appreciate that in these times Australia needs an efficient and responsive public administration system. Instead, it has preferred to run down our public services to the extent that they now fail to be effective.
I am quite sad in a personal sense that we even have to offer qualified support to the amendments the Government is moving. Anti-dumping agreements were set up for specific reasons. They were not set up as a protection device. Maybe, if this is the Government's rationale, we should think of non-tariff barriers such as exist in the the United States of America, if we insist on extra protection for beleaguered Australian manufacturing industries. We are subverting the real and proper reasons for being signatories to the General

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3311

Agreement on Tariffs and Trade arrangements and the associated codes if we are going to use anti-dumping as a protection device. It seems to me very strange that just at the time that GATT is meeting to discuss actions against protectionismled, if one can believe the trumpetings of the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), by Australia-an announcement was made that an Australian law will be changed to provide that it is unnecessary to observe the procedures of those agreements to which we are signatories. GATT grew out of the Atlantic Charter and the mutual aid agreement. Australia, of course, subscribed to those principles. GATT was debated in this
House as far back as 1946 and was adopted by the trade organisation legislation of 1948. It seems to me that a fundamental agreement that was set up basically to prevent world wars should not be the subject of change on the grounds on which the Government is now changing it. It is probably a measure of the real problems that manufacturing industry is now facing that the Opposition is even in a position of needing to support the amendments the Government is putting forward. So, there is a deal of hypocrisy about the Government's attitude with regard to protection. There is the rhetoric of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) about the North-South dialogue.
Korea is a fairly good example. It is a developing country, and a pretty good case in point. There are more dumping actions against Korea than most other countries. Much of it is action against secondary dumping; that is, the Koreans are retaining as imports cheap, raw materials which are also available to Australia. Action against secondary dumping is prohibited by GATT but not in terms of the way in which we look at our arrangements with GATT. Of course, we have a large trade imbalance with Korea. It is importing enormous amounts of iron ore and coal from Australia, some of it direct from Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd as part owner of iron ore and coal developments. Therefore, it seems to me to be a curious state of affairs when BHP starts railling against Korea for allegedly dumping steel in Australia. But I suppose one might even question whether Korea should be considered a developing country. I watched on television a couple of weeks ago a newsreel depicting the huge stadium that has been built in Seoul to accommodate the 1988 Olympics-an Olympics that Australia could not afford to run. But Korea can find the money necessary to run these Olympics. I have no doubt that it will make a great success of 'them. Yet it has protection from Australia as a developing country. That is another thing at which we should perhaps look.

Article 37 of GATT provides that before any dumping action is taken against a developing country discussions should be taken with that country on a government to government basis in order to overcome the problem. But the bilateral trade agreement we have with Korea provides that trade between the countries shall be in accordance with GATT. That action, of course, would exclude Customs officers from going to Korea in order to check out or to make decisions about the cost of manufacturing the goods that Korea is allegedly dumping in Australia under section 5 (2) of the Customs Tariff (AntiDumping) Act. Customs officers cannot go there as it would bring trade officials into the act.
Perhaps the statistics say something quite eloquent. The European Economic Community-I am sure that the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock) would agree that it is no slouch at protecting its interestshas imposed provisional dumping duties 30 times in 10 years. Australia, nevertheless, imposed them over 100 times in three years. We now have something like 100 cases under consideration. Coupled with the present practice of conducting seminars trying to encourage manufacturing industries to invoke dumping complaints, it is little wonder that there is such an enormous stream of complaints that the anti-dumping section is understaffed. I am pleased that at least the Minister has given some assurance to the House that something will happen so that that sort of imbalance is reduced.
Mr Peacock-An 80 per cent increase.
Mr JOHN BROWN-That is very good. Eighty per cent is probably not enough but it is a start. We have to get the wait down from nine months. We are concerned with the rundown in Australian manufacturing industry. That has happened under the control of this hapless, unimaginative and derelict Government. Perhaps the new Minister will give it a new impetus. I am pleased to say-I will give him the credit-that at least there seems to be the start of a new look at the problem. I hope for Australia's sake that he is successful. There is no doubt that the Minister is also concerned about the desperate plight of Australian families who have been the victims of the deprivation and the misery that comes with unemployment.
For those reasons we are supporting these Bills, not because we believe that the principles under which the Government is bringing this legislation into the House are correct but simply because it is at least some sort of move to try to help Australian manufacturing industry to get back on its feet. We believe that there is a basic flaw in the

3312 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

philosophy that this Government has consistently pursued. Overseas we are free traders. The Prime Minister is always parading himself overseas as a free trader. When he comes home, of course, he is an arch protectionist. We believe that a whole new set of arrangements, as set out in our amendment, could lead to a situation whereby the changes the Government is now pursuing would not be necessary. The effect of these changes could allow the Bureau of Customs to take action based on frequently inadequate, often misleading and sometimes false information in ways which could cause grave and unjustifiable loss to importers. There have been several notable cases in which this has happened in the last couple of years. The case of C. R. Lawrence Pty Ltd importing hams from Yugoslavia is a pretty good example. The case of the tarpaulins imported from Korea is another. Dumping action, taken in an unjustified fashion and taking a long time to resolve, caused immeasurable difficulty to the importers involved. Eventually, when an appeal was lodged, they were found to be correct and it was found that dumping was not taking place. Nothing the present Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act can do can interfere with the administrations of the Customs Tariff (AntiDumping) Act provided the Bureau of Customs is
acting correctly. Its existence is, however, a deterrent to capricious and ill-based action.
The present spate of cases, which is the justification for the Government removing these appeals, all relate to the one issue; that is, whether the imports that are coming in from New Zealand at the moment are subsidised by the New Zealand Government in an illegal way, a subsidy that entitles this Government to impose counterveiling duties. The hearing of one case would solve that whole point. We know there is a whole spate of cases to be heard, but the hearing of one case would solve that. As the Minister would be well aware, many of the requests for assistance by way of dumping are requests for additional protection from undumped goods which normally are dealt with by the Temporary Assistance Authority or the Industries Assistance Commission. I was heartened this morning to hear in the House that the Minister is strengthening the protection that is available under those bodies. I think that is a positive step forward for which I will also give him credit.
I stress again that the practice in dumping cases of Customs imposing arbitrary 'normal value' and collecting cash securities while an investigation is completed almost always ensures that imports of that commodity are halted while the investigations are made. This takes six months or more.

Even when it is found that the goods in fact were not dumped, the uncertainty and further delay of additional references made to the TAA and lAC brings trade in that commodity to a standstill. That has happened in a large number of cases where legitimate imports have stopped while spurious complaints have been investigated. That sort of behaviour I know, and I am sure the Minister knows, has provoked a considerable disenchantment, by several of the embassies in Canberra, with Australia as a trading nation. I certainly believe that it does nothing to enhance our image as a reliable trading partner. Now a situation is emerging where we are losing part of our traditional markets, for instance, meat to the United States of America. Some of those countries which
find unfair barriers erected against their trade in Australia are quite likely to take action of a kind that will not suit us. I am sure that they will take action because the option certainly is available. The measures proposed by the Government are not to deal with legitimate protection of our industry; they provide a licence for unfettered administrative decision to exclude any import no matter how unfair or unwarranted that action maybe.
I would like to turn to a couple of the provisons that are covered by these Bills. I will qualify my remarks by saying, as I said at the outset, that we
support these amendments that the Government has moved not that we think the principle under which it moved them is correct, but because they are the first step towards providing protection for Australian industry that should have been provided in other ways. But if this is the only way the Government can find to do so, we are prepared to support it.
I would like to refer to the matter of the withdrawal of appeals under the Adminsitrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act. There is plenty of
information to demonstrate that there is no case for arguing that appeals to the Federal Court of Australia under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act are widespread or have hindered Customs in carrying out dumping investigations. The only thing that appeals achieve is to ensure Customs follow the rules laid down in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade AntiDumping Code which, by virtue of section 14, are rules which apply to the anti-dumping Act. If the right of access to the ADJR is removed one cannot get relief under that Act unless, as I pointed out earlier, one is sufficiently wealthy to seek a prerogative writ in the High Court of Australia if one has $20,000 or $25,000 to spend.
If section 14 is repealed even appeals to the High Court will be unlikely to succeed because

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3313

the rules which are to be followed in investigations will have been removed from the Act. The appellants will not be in a position to point to any way in which officials have breached the rules, since there will not be any rules. Section 14 should be withdrawn only if alternative rules are written into the Act. My request to the Minister is that something be done about improving the quality of the Act.
Having said all that, and not wishing to be cast in the negative role, perhaps I can offer a few suggestions as to how I see improvements can be made in the system. I hope the Minister will take heed of them. It is my belief that the Government should make arrangements whereby the entry of imports into the country, at a price significantly below that which has been the price in the past or at significantly increased numbers, should trigger
off an alert which is then investigated by Government officers.
I give an example of a hypothetical case of electric motors of a specific size which in the last three years have been coming into Australia at the rate
of 10,000 per annum at an average price of $100 each. Statistics suddenly reveal that 10,000 have landed in the first three months at an average price of $70 each. There is a prima facie case that the goods are being dumped. In that case Customs, if well organised, could well ask the importers what the circumstances were or alert the industry concerned that there was a possibility that the goods were being dumped. In the normal course of events, those motors would be in the country and selling for several months before local producers became aware that anything unusual was occurring. It would take them a further three or four months to get together as an industry and to decide that imports were being dumped and were damaging them. They could then make the appropriate application to the Department. That application would proceed through normal channels. So, it might be nine or 12 months before any effective action was taken.
Governments have access to information and the facilities to analyse it in a way that individual manufacturers and industry associations do not. The Government should use them for the benefit oflocal industry. Many times in this House I have requested a royal commission to examine all the activities of the Bureau of Customs and it had nothing to do with the import of black and white or colour television sets. It is merely my belief that the Bureau of Customs is such an important arm of government that it should be clothed with the proper powers, facilities and staff to do what it should be doing, that is, to protect Australia from unwarranted imports and also to protect

Australia's image from unwarranted exports of goods that cannot pass muster in Australia but we are still exporting to Third World countries to our detriment. I believe that if proper facilities were set up-surely, the Government has the capacities to have monitoring and computer systems linked to other countries-there is no reason why this could not happen.
The present procedure for overseas domestic value determination is this: If a complaint is received, Customs examines the complaint, hears the views of the Australian manufacturers and what overseas domestic prices are, and then sends an investigator overseas to verify this belief. Presumably governments overseas do a considerable amount of work in recording domestic prices of various commodities for their own purposes and they make them public. We already have diplomatic missions in those countries and there is no reason why they should not collect official government information, price lists and other materials which will give guidance as to whether dumping is occurring.
The thrust of what I am saying is this: In the present system, the Government takes no initiatives of its own but reacts only after an industry complains that a number of producers have gone to the wall. The action that is taken is so draconian that all undumped as well as dumped goods are affected. Governments do have resources to monitor and initiate inquiries in a way which would cut the time for effective action by, at my guess, at least four months. I suggest that the mere knowledge here and overseas that the Australian Government was taking such an initiative would discourage prospective importers and overseas exporters from selling at prices which constitute dumping. There is no question that goods are being dumped in Australia. I would not in any way suggest otherwise.
Mr Armitage-It is very widespread now.
Mr JOHN BROWN-As the honourable member for Chifley adds, it is widespread; there is no question about that. But I cannot in any way believe that the number of dumping charges that have been made in Australia are all legitimate. While I object in principle to this appeal under the provisions of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act being taken away, we are quite happy to support it-apart from the fact that we do not like the principle-if that is at least a first step along the way to improving our dumping procedures. To that end, I move the following amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:

3314 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

'whilst not opposing the provisions of the Bill, the House is of the opinion that further amendments to the Principal Act and related legislation are required to-
(I) ensure that a prima facie decision concerning dumping is reached within 12 weeks and that the total investigation period is reduced to a maximum of 24 weeks,
(2) shift the burden of proof from Australian industry once a prima facie case of dumping has been established, and
(3) enable penalties to be imposed on any additional imports negotiated during the investigation period'.
The Opposition reluctantly supports these propositions. I say 'reluctantly' advisedly. We are concerned about the breakdown of Australian manufacturing industry. No doubt dumping has had a considerable amount to do with the demise of a lot of our industries.
Mr Hyde-What about the wage hike?
Mr JOHN BROWN-The Government will address itself to that matter, so it claims. Let us see how the Government goes at the end of six months, because that is probably all it will get. We believe that dumping is occurring. We do not like the procedures under which our present dumping legislation works. We think the whole matter needs to be revamped. The principle needs looking at and the mechanics of it need a thorough overhaul. However, to exhibit the fact that we are also concerned about Australian manufacturing industry, probably more concerned than the Government, we are prepared to support the legislation in a limited fashion, having moved the amendment that I have outlined.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr ArmitageYes, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra) (8.21)-1 am glad that the Opposition supports these measures. I was not quite sure from the vacillating remarks of the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) whether he does or does not. I gather now that he does. Of course, the Opposition could not forbear to move an amendment to convey the impression that it is more concerned about assistance to Australian industry than the Government. I have some news for the Opposition about virtually all the matters that the Opposition raises in its amendment so far as they are relevant. Paragraph (2) of the amendment is not relevant. There is no question of the onus of proof being on industry or on the importers in this matter. The Department of Industry and Commerce conducts investigations and has to establish the matter. Apart from that, we are in fact moving in the directions the Opposition suggests anyhow. Purporting to be more concerned about Australian industry than the Government really ill becomes an

Australian Labor Party which opposes this Government's wages freeze because that proposal is potentially the most important single measure there is to assist the profitability of Australian industry and its capacity to employ people in 1983.
I turn now specifically to the Customs Bill. As honourable members on the Opposition side of the House averred, there is no question but that there is a large incidence of dumping of goods. It has increased very significantly and constitutes a significant threat to Australian industry, primary and secondary, and must be combated. I believe the priority the Government is affording to this measure is a clear message of the Government's concern at the increasing incidence of dumping and its adverse effects on earnings and jobs in Australia and of the Government's clear intention to do something effective about it.
The thrust of the present legislation is to remove the situation that presently prevails; namely, that exporters of goods to Australia, overseas producers, have been able to use-and with success in a few cases, are increasingly likely to use-existing law on purely procedural legal grounds rather than on the merits of an alleged dumping situation, to prevent the Customs authorities from taking cash securities as a provisional anti-dumping measure pending the final determination of a matter. There is no doubt that without the capacity of the Customs authorities to do this as an interim measure, effective anti-dumping action is virtually impossible since the final definitive determination of these matters inevitably takes quite some time. That is referred to in 'the amendment of the Opposition. I will return to that. But by that time, of course, the damage to Australian industry often has been done.
Accordingly the Customs Securities (AntiDumping) Amendment Bill affirms the rights of the Customs authorities to impose these cash securities, and also remove from the scope of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act the right of appeal against decisions to impose securities under the Customs Act. I stress that it is the right of appeal at this provisional stage which is involved. At the stage of the final determination that there is dumping, and upon the imposition of an appropriate additional duty there is provision for appeal under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act as well as the procedures provided for in section 15 of the anti-dumping Act itself. There is, of course, also the possibility of appeal to the High Court.
The only point that I want to stress is that in respect of this provisional stage the decisions involved, although preliminary, are responsible

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3315

decisions-decisions arrived at after considerable initial consultation and investigation according to established procedures which are entirely in line with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Anti-Dumping Code. They are decisions which as often as not favour the importer-too often manufacturers would aver-as they do, the Australian producer. Further, the cash securities required must after 120 days, if no anti-dumping duty is imposed, be returned to the importer or overseas exporter.
The second main element of the package is the repeal by the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill (No.2) of section 14 of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act. The honourable member for Parramatta had a good deal to say about this provision, but it is this provision which has provided the basis for the successful appeals under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) legislation and could provide the basis for appeal to the High Court with the precluding of appeals under the ADJR legislation by the present measure. At first sight as perhaps my colleague the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) would urge, it would appear to be unwarranted to repeal this section because it provides that the Customs authorities will not issue a notice-the reference is to a notice of the final determination of the rate of anti-dumping or countervailing duty which is:
. . . inconsistent with the obligations of Australia under any international agreement relating to tariffs or trade.
While the proposal to remove this clause may run into something of an emotional block, the fact is that this is something of a motherhood clause in the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act. The truth-I believe this is the essential point in this connection-is that the whole of the Australian anti-dumping legislation reflects and implements the philosophy of GATT and the provisions of the GATT anti-dumping code in particular. That is a code to which this country has acceded, which is more than can be said of some other countries, including some that are close to Australia. In that sense, since the Act in its entirety reflects that code, this general clause is superfluous. Yet it is the basis on which the procedural legal appeals against the imposition of provisional penalties have been mounted. Hence this measure to repeal this clause. I emphasise the point that its repeal does not entail that the anti-dumping legislation as a whole is anything other than consistent with the GATT code.
Australia can hold its head high when it comes to international trading relations. Indeed many would say that the truth of this matter is that Australia, in its international trading relations,

conducts itself in a way that can only be described as pretty pure, if not lily white, as compared with many other countries. For example, protection is afforded by this country largely via the tariff and is very visible-in contrast to the much greater reliance overseas, as the honourable member for Parramatta mentioned, on non-tariff protection which is especially true of Japan, to mention the country of greatest importance to us in trade. Further, it is rather ironic that this very legislation was largely precipitated by a court action by a group of New Zealand firms, in particular the softwood timber case, a court action which includes the New Zealand Government as a party via the New Zealand Forestry Commission. I suggest that that shows gall in that New Zealand has refused to accede to the GATT AntiDumping Code.
In addition to this legislation to remove the scope for the thwarting by overseas interests of reasonable Australian Government anti-dumping action, it should be noted that the Government-I emphasis this-has given approval to increase by some 80 per cent staff in the anti-dumping division of the Department of Industry and Commerce with a view to reducing the period in which to finalise anti-dumping cases. The honourable member for Parramatta mentioned a period of nine months for a typical case. Some cases have taken less' than that; others regrettably have taken much longer. I stress that with this increase in staff, and more effective procedures, the aim is to reduce that period to 120 days, which is a lesser period than the 24 weeks proposed in the Opposition's amendment. The honourable member for Parramatta might thus note that action is already in hand on the Government side to do better he proposes.
Mr Peacock-That has been superseded.
Dr EDWARDS-The amendment has been overtaken by events. That is not unusual, of course, in relation to proposals by the Australian Labor Party.
In conclusion, as we have an agreement with the Whips to limit the length of our remarks, I take the opportunity to say that the Government well recognises that since the downturn in economic activity, largely precipitated by the prolonged overseas recession, manufacturing in Australia has been going through a rugged period. The situation it is in-the undermining of its competitiveness, the squeeze on profits and the rapid decline in the capacity to employ-has been exacerbated by the great upsurge in wages, an increase of 17 per cent on average to September,

3316 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

together with shorter working hours, for which industry itself must accept some responsibility.
Be that as it may, I take this opportunity to assert that the Government is firmly committed to a strong and viable manufacturing industry in Australia, although some manufacturers I talk to seem to doubt this assertion. I concede that there have been some ups and downs in the apparent commitment of the Government, leading to a degree of unpredictability and uncertainty. However, brief review of recent measures which the Government has undertaken indicates the logical policy package we have in place-in contrast with the mishmash of proposals, especially for more planning and more bureaucracy, that comes from the Labor Party. It cannot even get agreement between the members on its front bench.
I mention briefly the 19 July industry package which provided for the three or five-year depreciation period and for depreciation on income producing buildings, and the increased allocations for industry programs, especially for export development and industrial research and development which are provided for in the Budget, all of which should assist management to effect the structural change and technological development which is essential to a strong future manufacturing industry. There is also the provision for more effective anti-dumping action which we have been discussing here and the wages pause for 1983 which is substantially in place. As I said earlier, that is the single most important measure to assist industry's profitability and capacity to employ in 1983, yet the Opposition is doing its best to subvert it. Further, the Government is moving to speed up the temporary assistance process. General preference is to be given to Australian goods in Government purchases and there is to be a prompt review-this is a matter which was referred to by the Opposition-of developing countries' preference policies.
In that context it has to be recognised that the operation of highly sophisticated multinational manufacturing establishments in developing countries, ultising the numerous taxation and other benefits offered by governments in those countries, is surely outside the original purpose of developing country preferences which were to afford tariff preferences to the truly indigenous products of developing countries. That matter has to be addressed urgently.
Finally, I recognise that some sections of industry have been calling for even more drastic action against imports, including blanket import restrictions. I think that was implicit in some of the things the honourable member for Parramatta

said. However, that could be only a desperate measure of last resort. I believe we have to avoid that at all costs. Indeed, as the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock) pointed out in Question Time, such measures would not address the fundamental problems facing Australian industry; they would have adverse flow-on effects on costs and jobs elsewhere in the economy; and they could also be detrimental to the wider issue of Australia's trading relations generally. But there is in place an important package of assistance for Australian industry. These Bills, in particular, are part of that. I commend them to the House.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley) (8.36)-1 support the amendment moved by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown). Fundamentally I support this amendment to the Act. In actual fact, I think it is well overdue. I have already had a private discussion with the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock), and he knows my view on this matter. My view is that when dumping occurs far too much time is taken to prove the case finally and to get the necessary action initiated to protect the Australian industry which is suffering from that dumping. I think this amendment will certainly help the position in that it will stop the importers going to the courts and causing further delay. By the time the proceedings are finalised the industry could be absolutely bankrupt and have to close down. I will deal with that matter specifically in a few moments.
I wish to make the point that, like the honourable member for Parramatta, I have a great deal of light to medium industry within my electorate. Also, with my past banking and industrial development experience I have seen a fair bit of industry and I have had to go into matters on a cost basis and so on. For that reason I am still convinced that Australian industry, particularly in times of recession, must receive assistance, help and protection. After all, it means jobs. I will refer to a case which came to my attention within the last fortnight. This is a case of a company-a foundry-which makes castings. Three years ago it spent $5m in restructuring. It has the most up to date equipment in the world. It is suffering from the effects of the dumping of castings from Japan and the Philippines which are manufactured with exactly the same equipment as this company has. The company has been able to prove dumping from Japan and the Philippines and, of course, it has now come to the cash deposits stage. But it has taken quite a while to get there. Of course, if this legislation does not go through, one can bet one's life that the whole matter will go to court. During

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3317

this period this company has been forced to reduce the number of its employees. It has done this almost as much as it possibly could and almost entirely by not filling positions when they became vacant. But that still means that Australian jobs are being lost.
I say to the departmental officers that the general manager and managing director were both very appreciative of the assistance they received from the departmental officers. They made that point. I am not making any criticism of the departmental officers. They have acted expeditiously within the provisions of the existing legislation. This is just one example. The company gave me the list of the foundries that have closed in recent years throughout Australia. Frankly, the situation is horrifying. It is a pity that I did not bring the list with me this week. I did not realise that I would be speaking on this Bill. I would have liked to quote it. It gives the number of foundries which have closed in Australia each year. Finally, we will get to the stage when there will be very few left in the country. The reason for the closures is that in some cases the foundries would not restructure. In the case that I have cited, the company did restructure. It spent $5m only three years ago. As I said, the competition the company is copping from overseas is competition from castings made with exactly the same equipment as that company is using in this country.
Mr Hyde-What is the turnout per man? How does that compare?
Mr ARMITAGE-I will deal with the honourable Professor Hyde-I mean the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde). Mr Deputy Speaker, the Professor's sole claim to economic expertise, of course, is that he is a wheat farmer. To be quite frank I am concerned. I have expressed my feelings on this matter quite seriously and they have nothing to do with politics. We come across these problems some times on both sides of the House. I am concerned at the growth of the free trade lobby. It started with Maxwell Newton. Honourable members will recall Sir John McEwen who, even though he may have been in opposition to us, was still a very great Australian. Finally, Sir John McEwen instructed the Commonwealth Police to raid Mr Maxwell Newton's premises. Of course, he was influencing the Press lobby by advocating free trade. It turned out that he was representing Japanese interests in making those advocacies. I am fully conversant with the fact that we have to trade with Japan. It is a major trading partner with Australia. I am very much aware of that, having had the tactical experience of handling exports control and so on.

Mr Les J ohnsonWhere was this?
Mr ARMITAGE-In the exchange control department of the Reserve Bank of Australia. For that reason, I am fully appreciative of that need. I think we have to take into account the historical significance. When I was a lad, even a box of matches was imported.
Mr Les Johnson-You are going back a long way now.
Mr ARMITAGE-Not as long as it would be for the honourable member to go back. Even a box of matches was imported. We had a very small industry base although we had a steel industry. In 1929, the Scullin Government introduced the tariff machinery for the protection of Australian industry. From that time Australia's industrial base began to be built. It was given a tremendous boost during the war years by need. We had to develop our industrial base. It continued to develop until about the mid-1960s. We then had a modern industrial base and we developed very quickly. But in the mid-1960s too much of our industry-I am being critical here-started living on its laurels. It did not restructure as it should have and modernise its equipment. I believe that, from the mid-1960s, a great deal of our industrial problems started. I still say that it is essential that a country like Australia must retain its industrial base. There are people who say today: 'Oh, it is only 20 per cent or 22 per cent of our total output'. They are forgetting that, if we did not have that, we would be subject as a nation to the wide variations in commodity prices of primary products. That includes mining as well as rural products. We would go back to having the sort of economy that we had up to the 1930s.
The world, unfortunately, under the influence of Professor Friedman is forgetting the lessons that it was taught. We are going back, in fact, to the policies that were followed in the second half of the 1800s through to the 1930s and the advent of Lord Keynes, who brought forward policies which brought the world out of the Depression. Australia was one of the last countries to adopt his policies. Once again we were too conservative. It was recently said by Kenneth Galbraith in an article I read on a seminar in Germany that if Lord Keynes were alive today he would not advocate the same policies as were advocated to overcome the problems of the 1930s. Galbraith said nevertheless that he is quite sure that, whatever Keynes's suggestions were, they would have been far better than the suggestion coming from the Friedman school. Galbraith made the point that

3318 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

he himself presided over a period when his economic policies were successful, whereas his colleague Friedman presided over a period when those policies were unsuccessful.
We are doing so in economics and we are doing so in trade. Quite frankly, I think the honourable member for Moore and his dries ought to reassess their views. I do not think that they are doing a service to Australia. I mean this very seriously. Not only those people on the honourable member's side of the House but also many other people, including academics and so on, are advocating letting market forces have complete sway and make the decisions with which we must live. I fully accept that at all times industry must be updating itself. It must be updating its equipment. That is essential. Otherwise, it must finally fall, protection or no protection. I think I adequately dealt with that earlier.
In times of recession, such as now, of course we are getting the dumping of goods. I was in the United States of America recently and people there were complaining about that. They are experiencing dumping of goods as well. We are not on our own; we are not Robinson Crusoe in this regard. For that reason, I support this amendment, which I think is a sound amendment. I repeat it. It states:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the provisions of the Bill, the House is of the opinion that further amendments to the Principal Act and related legislation are required to-
(I) ensure that a prima facie decision concerning dumping is reached within 12 weeks and that the total investigation period is reduced to a maximum of 24 weeks,
(2) shift the burden of proof from Australian industry once a prima facie case of dumping has been established, and
(3) enable penalties to be imposed on any additional imports negotiated during the investigation period'.
I strongly support that amendment. Unless that amendment is accepted we will get to the stage where, when dumping is proved and action is taken to stop it under the provisions of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act, too much time will have been used and many companies will be on their knees before the necessary corrective action is taken.
I am glad that the Minister for Industry and Commerce did mention that some action will be taken in regard to the Temporary Assistance Authority. I think once again it is imperative to deal with these references to the Temporary Assistance Authority because there will be a lot under the circumstances. This economy will go downhill very quickly, unfortunately, in the next

6 months. There will be many such references. But it should be made easier to refer proposals to the TAA. Its staff should be dramatically increased. Already those references are taking far too long to be determined. There needs to be an increase in the TAA 's investigatory staff, et cetera, so that such determinations can be reached in a speedy fashion. I think it is completely essential.
I should also mention that when I meet people in industry-I do quite a lot of this, naturally, as the honourable member for Parramatta would do with an area such as he represents-I get a lot of complaints. I think Government members should realise this. These complaints are from people who have been their friends. They are the types of people who weighed in for their election expenses. They are the people who are today saying that they are concerned. They use the words: This Government' is now advocating a reduction of preferences', as exampled by the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) just recently and by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). They are actually doing this at a time of recession, when other countries are also in recession, ensuring that goods are being dumped on other markets or, if not dumped, certainly sold at bargain rates in other instances. I give an example. A chap from Australian Consolidated Industries Ltd, a bottle manufacturing organisation, told us that it was negotiating a $30m order with the Philippines. President Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore went to his company and said: 'If you can get this order from the Australians, I will reduce your company tax from 40 per cent to 5 per cent'. Needless to say it got the order. Straight after that, President Lee Kuan Yew issued a blistering attack on Australia for its protection of its industry. Yet that is what really occurred. I think that is a good example of the fact that so many of these people who are crying out so loudly against our protectionist policies are using various devices--much more protective-in order that their industries are looked after.
I conclude by once again making the point that Australia must have an industrial base. If not, we are subject to the ups and downs of the commodity markets and we go back to the very bad days of the past. As long as we have that industrial base we have something solid to our economy. Secondly, I support the amendment moved by the honourable member for Parramatta. In fact, I second it. I support it because I believe that, whilst this particular proposal goes part of the way towards overcoming the delays in determining dumping and taking protective action against it,

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3319

nevertheless, the Bill needs much further amendment to speed up the process to ensure that when dumping occurs it is learnt about as quickly as possible because it will be a while before the companies even know it is happening. If the process is speeded up our companies will be able to remain in business, instead of being forced out because protective action is taken too late. I support the amendment.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (8.53)-The House is pressed for time. I thank the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) for his co-uperation in letting me into this debate at all. There are two grol!pS of arguments relevant to these Bills. The first concerns economics and trade issues. The second concerns natural justice and civil rights. First, I will deal with the economics. Dumping occurs when goods are purchased for import to Australia at prices below that at which they are sold or below that determined by normal practice in the country of origin. It is a much more restrictive test than that applied by the Trade Practices Act in Australia to prevent predatory pricing which permits a producer to clear his stock at marginal cost without penalty either to buyer or seller. When dumping occurs it involves a decision by a foreign supplier, be it a nation or a company, to provide goods or service below cost. It involves a decision to subsidise Australian consumers and to raise Australian living standards at the expense of the dumpers.
To take a current dumping case, if fertiliser is being dumped in Australia at the moment-as is alleged-Australian consumers of fertilisers, including those who eat crops which have been fertilised, are richer than they otherwise would be. What does that do to employment? Clearly, the dumped product displaces jobs in the competitive domestic industry. Equally clearly, every consumer of dumped goods, for example, fertiliser, has a higher disposable income with which to employ people. Since the process of dumping actually transfers a little wealth to Australia the employment gains at any given wage level bring into being slightly more jobs than the dumping destroys. So there is a net employment gain albeit small.
Why then is there all this hue and cry against dumping? Firstly, it is possible, at least in theory, that an importer will temporarily reduce his prices to disrupt or to remove a local industry only to raise them again later. However, this can occur only where the organisation generating the imports is strong enough to withstand the period of

loss and, in the profit phase of its dumping endeavour, will not face other international competition. These are possible but very rare circumstances, most often claimed by Australian producers facing dumping or often merely facing a more efficient foreign producer-a point which has already been made by honourable members opposite. Secondly, Australian producers are concentrated and organised whereas Australian consumers are diffuse and not organised. The producers' interests have more political clout. I suggest that that clout is independent of the economic merits of their case. European Economic Community type dumping in Third World markets, of course, is a loss to us. But it should be, and usually is, welcomed by Third World markets.
I turn now to the equity arguments. When dumping is alleged the Bureau of Customs makes a preliminary investigation. If it believes there is prima facie evidence of dumping the Australian importer is required to lodge cash securities with the Bureau, which may hold the securities without interest for 120 days. The securities are retained either in part or in full if, following detailed investigations, dumping is found. The demand for the cash in itself inhibits imports and, on occasions, can impose a serious, and I believe unjust, burden on the importer.
The Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Bill 1982 and associated measures before the House seek to limit the right of appeal of importers faced with demands for cash securities where the Bureau has acted wrongly in law. These Bills also restrict the capacity of an import-competing industry effectively to cry foul. For example, the Darling Downs dairy factory claims that, at the moment, blue vein cheese is being dumped to its detriment. I believe that the officers of the Bureau of Customs conscientiously endeavour to administer the law in an even-handed manner but the task is impossibly complex. Deception is practised by both sides. Inevitably the officers possess less than the wisdom of Solomon.
I will use the example of a citizen who approached me for help to show what can happen in these circumstances. This chap imported from Korea. Following a complaint by two Australian manufacturers, cash security of 48 per cent was demanded of him on 13 August 1981. On 17 September 1981 this amount was reduced to up to 30 per cent, whatever that might mean. On 31 January 1982 it was reduced to 15.9 per cent. On 4 June it was reduced to 12 per cent. Faced with such demands the importer had no option but to cease importing the line. He is now in receivership. Although no one circumstance is likely to be

3320 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Customs Tariff Amendment Bill

the sole cause of his financial difficulty, the demands of the Bureau of Customs must have added to his troubles.
That the Department's actions had been wrongly based was conceded to me by the previous Minister on I September 1982. There is no doubt that some Australian producers are done material damage by goods purchased outside Australia at prices below the foreign producers commercial prices, though this clearly benefits Australian consumers. I have no difficulty believing that importers sometimes seek to delay anti-dumping action by legal challenge. I do not believe, however, that it is wise or fair that the Crown, however good and fair its officers may be, should have powers to bankrupt which are essentially the prerogative of its officers.
This legislation takes away a brake against the misuse of those powers. Before that brake is removed an alternative should be devised: Interest might be paid on the deposits, securities other than cash might be accepted and the Department might rely on a warning that it might seek dumping duties from the date of the warning but not deny the business the use of the money. A new section 14 of the anti-dumping Act which requires the Department to adopt its present procedures might replace the general requirement to observe international agreements. In the meantime I believe the dumping Act should remain unchanged. I fear that doubtful dumping claims will both lower Australian living standards and increase unemployment. I emphasise the words 'increase unemployment' and do serious and unjust injury to some importers and a much greater number of users of imported goods, some being intermediate goods in other industrial processes. At all events there is a need to have a safeguard that the exercise of administrative discretion is as transparent and as open to public scrutiny as possible.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (9.2)-As my colleagues have pointed out, we are not opposed to the provisions of the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill (No.2). In fact, we, as well as those involved in Australian industry, are quite delighted and surprised to find the Government taking any action at all to protect Australian industry. However, anti-dumping procedures in Australia have been totally inadequate, cumbersome and costly for a long time. In the crisis we have now firm and decisive government action is necessary to protect the industry and those left employed in the industry. Dumping is disastrous and has been disastrous to an ailing Australian industry.

The anti-dumping measures of yesterday have been over legalistic and time consuming with up to nine months for a hearing to be terminated. I support my colleague, the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown), in the practical amendments he has moved. It is difficult for the industry to take action against suspected dumping. Usually the industry wanting to take action is already in trouble and cannot afford the action, the nine months wait and the cost. Even if it does take successful action, after a nine-month delay the damage is done anyway. Dumping is rampant
in Australia, as is secondary dumping. Importers and retailers et cetera will argue that they are entitled to buy at the best price they can. I emphasise they are not entitled to buy at dumping prices which decimate Australian industries. I think that should be emphasised. I agree with my colleague, the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Armitage), in that Australian industry has to maintain a share of the market. That is absolutely imperative to what is happening in Australia today. We believe we should aim to restrict the anti-dumping assessment period to no longer than 24 weeks. I was interested to hear, I think it was Dr Edwards, who pointed out that a period of 120 days is being sought. If he can achieve that, I will congratulate him considerably. The time that has been consumed in hearings has sent some firms to the wall. Enough of them are going to the wall already without us sending any more. If Customs had had the staff in days gone by it might have been able to terminate hearings quicker. I was delighted to hear also from Dr Edwards--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member should be referred to by his electorate of Berowra.
Mrs CHILD-I am sorry. I could not remember his electorate. I am also glad to hear that Customs is to have more staff. The manufacturing industry in Australia is in extremity. In particular the clothing, footwear and textile industries are on their knees. I support part of the package the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock) has revealed for increased short term protection by granting industry greater access to its short term assistance mechanism. But I add that it is all too little too late. Some companies, faced as they are with strong buyer resistance on the home market, will be into liquidation before they can use that faster track to the Temporary Assistance Authority.
The Minister made it clear at Question Time this morning that his Government has been astonished at the rate at which the recession has affected both industry and jobs. I cannot imagine why he is astonished as a few short discussions

Customs Tariff Amendment Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3321

with any manufacturer or retailer, specifically in the clothing, textile or footwear area over the past nine months, would have got the message across. Dumping is hurting industry and jobs; imports are hurting industry and jobs. I think the Government should have had the guts to increase the level of imports in the good times and also the guts to fine tune them in bad times. No other comparable country would allow the level of imports that we have to continue at the rate it is when thousands of workers are losing their jobs every week and industry has its back to the wall.
If honourable members look at today's unemployment figures, they will see that 16,000 people have lost their job in the past month. It would be interesting to know how many of them came out of the manufacturing industry sector. One of the things that I think we lose sight of is that buyer resistence is at an all time high because the consumer has completely lost confidence in recovery. Wholesalers are not getting repeat orders; retailers cannot move what they have off their shelves and, for the life of me, I cannot see how the Government's wages freeze will help. Australians are frightened of unemployment. Those who can are saving savagely in case next week they get the little note in their pay slip terminating their employment.
At the moment, Australians have record savings and it is in this climate that they will not spend. With wages frozen, they will have less to spend; they will have less inclination to spend. Demand will drop again and prices will rise. Understandably, if one is selling less one has to charge more for what one is selling; more jobs will go; we will have a higher welfare bill and lower taxation receipts; and confidence will totally evaporate. I urge the Minister to rethink his atitude to some restriction on imports. I am not suggesting that to restrict imports will have some dramatic effect nor am I suggesting that, bearing in mind our balance of trade, we should drastically reduce imports. But I think it would pay the Government well to have a look into some areas in which we are being totally decimated. Other countries have their ways of restricting imports and I think Australia could well do the same.
Mr LUSHER (Hume) (9.8)-1 wish to make only a brief contribution to the debate. Basically I support the comments that have been made by my colleague the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde). Having not heard some other contributions, I believe it is probably not fair that I comment on what they said.
Mr Hyde-Very reasonable!

Mr LUSHER-l am unlike a lot of other members in this House who do say a lot about things of which they do not have any knowledge. I would like the House and the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock) to be aware that I am not totally happy with the legislation. The problem that I see is that there is a need to differentiate between a proper and speedy procedure to deal with genuine dumping and the availability of a procedure which, when used improperly, can be used to provide unintended and unwarranted protection. That is fundamentally the problem that I have. I think that we certainly need a fast track procedure where the dumping is genuine. In the present circumstances, the procedures that apply are too slow. There are innumerable cases of industries which have been affected by dumping. The damage that has been caused has been significant. But the procedures that are required to be followed under existing provisions to determine that damage, prices in the country of origin and all those sorts of matters that need to be determined are too slow. By the time action is taken, when dumping has been recognised and acknowledged, the amount of damage to the industry is altogether too serious. It is very often the case in some of the agricultural and horticultural industries that the market for the crop for that season is totally disrupted by dumped imports and by the time the dumping has been satisfactorily proved and action is taken the harvest has been dealt with and the producers have suffered immeasurable and irrecoverable damage.
From my experience in representing a rural electorate and representing some industries which have been the victims of quite improper dumping, the situation is that the fast track certainly needs to operate so that those industries can get relief from unfair and improper international trading practices quickly. On the other hand, proper protection is needed for the importer and for the Australian consumer against mischievous claims of dumping where dumping is not necessarily going on at all; it is just that the imports are more competitive and the Australian producer of like goods is not too happy about it. I think we can say with a fair degree of certainty that the present system is operating too quickly and that there have been instances of cash securities being required or anti-dumping action being taken and, after further inquiry, it has been determined that there was no dumping at all and that those securities should not have been sought or that action should not have been taken. I think there are arguments on both

3322 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

sides that in some circumstances the existing system can be too slow and that in other circumstances it can be too fast.
One of the concerns that I have is that much of the support for the changed procedures is coming from the people who are constantly clamouring for higher protection rates and less import competition. That leads me to believe that they see the new procedures as a back door method of eliminating import competition and achieving higher effective protection from imports. That is not the intention of the legislation. The legislation certainly is not designed to do that. 1 am concerned about the lack of appeal procedures that now seems to exist. I am also concerned about the lack of compensation or protection-if that is the right word in this context-for people who are adversely affected, or may be adversely affected, as a result of having been the victim of an improper decision which was made departmentally and at some cost to themselves and which it was ultimately determined should not be made.
I support the remarks made by the honourable member for Moore. I make the point that 1am not totally happy with the legislation but, in the circumstances, I have no intention of opposing the legislation. What I want the Minister to do is to report to the Parliament on a regular basis on the way in which the legislation is administered and decisions are made. I understand that these matters are gazetted. I understand also that most members of parliament and certainly most of our constituents do not read the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette. That is something that seems to be limited to public servants.
Mr Hyde-All my constituents do.
Mr LUSHER-Over in Moore the electors religiously read the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette, I am told. In Hume they do not. I think most of us in the Parliament do not regard the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette as essential reading on a weekly basis. I think that what is happening ought to be exposed to scrutiny, at least in the first couple of years of the operation of the new procedures, so honourable members will have an opportunity to assess how it is going, what sorts of applications are being made, whether in those cases where genuine relief is required it is being provided effectively and speedily, and whether frivolous cases are being put forward and decisions are being made on them. That was the case in the example given by my colleague the honourable member for Moore. In that case changes were made and finally all the restrictions were removed, but by that stage the fellow had gone broke. If the Minister is prepared to make

available to the Parliament, say towards the end of each of the two sessions each year, a statement of the operations under this new system, honourable members at least will have an opportunity to assess whether in their view the thing is being done properly. Perhaps we can argue at that stage for changes if we are not happy about the way it is going. If the Minister is prepared to make that sort of concession, 1 think we ought to allow the procedures to be tested and be prepared to make adjustments, if necessary, further down the track.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Peacock) read a third time.
CUSTOMS SECURITIES (ANTI-DUMPING) AMENDMENT BILL
1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 8 December, on motion by Mr Peacock:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Peacock) read a third time.
SOCIAL SECURITY AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Wilson, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minlster for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security) (9.20)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Social Security Amendment Bill 1982 proposes to amend the Social Security Act 1947 in two areas. It has been introduced in response to anomalies in the operation of the Act that have come to the Government's attention recently. The budgetary implications of the proposed amendments are relatively minor. The Bill proposes to pay family allowance to the parents of unemployed school leavers during the six-week period

Social Security Amendment Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3323

they are not qualified for unemployment benefit. It will also extend eligibility for sickness benefits to a number of people to whom it should be paid but who are presently excluded because of the wording of the legislation. It will also enable, for the first time, all sickness beneficiaries who are otherwise eligible to receive supplementaryrental-allowance.
Assistance for Parents of Unemployed School Leavers
Under current provisions when a student child over the age of 16 years ceases to be a full time student, family allowance ceases to be payable from the following family allowance period. Where a school leaver does not immediately or quickly obtain employment, there is a six-week waiting period before unemployment benefit becomes payable to the former student.
Thus there has been a relatively short period during which no specific support has been available to families for the maintenance of an unemployed school leaver. This has created difficulties ~or some families where the parents are on low Incomes.
The Government now proposes to treat such a child as a student over the six-week period or the relevant part of that period. In this way payment of family allowance, including handicapped child's allowance and double orphan's pension, can continue during the period the child remains un~mployed and otherwise qualified. Similarly, the amendment provides that where the school leaver is the child of a pensioner or beneficiary, additional pension or benefit for the child shall continue to be paid for the relevant part of the deferment period. The amendment will operate from the family allowance pay period which commenced on 15 October 1982 and in relation to pension and benefit instalments falling due on or after 1 November 1982. The cost of this initiative is estimated as some $5m in a full year at the current rates.
I also take this occasion to mention another initiative affecting student children but one for which legislative amendment is not required. As from the beginning of 1983 the amount of income which a student may have while attracting family allowance or additional pension or benefit is to be increased. The Government has decided to increase the amount of income which a student may have while continuing to be regarded as a dependant from $1,800 to $2,500 for those living at home. For students living away from home, the limit has been raised from $2,600 to $3,600.

Sickness Benefit
Under the current provisions of the Social Security Act, a person may qualify for a sickness benefit if he is temporarily incapacitated for work because of sickness or accident and has thereby suffered a loss of salary, wages or other income. The loss of income must arise from an incapacity for work. Legal advice provided to the Department of Social Security has indicated that this loss of income requirement is met only where a claimant was actually receiving income immediately before the incapacity occurred or where he would have definitely received an income if the incapacity had not occurred. Accordingly, it has become necessary to assist people adversely affected by this requirement by providing special benefit.
To overcome this anomaly, the Bill extends eligibility for sickness benefit to two categories of people who may currently be disadvantaged. First, eligibility will be extended to people who are able to show that, but for their incapacity, they would have been qualified to receive unemployment benefit. The rate of sickness benefit paid to these people will be limited to the appropriate amount of unemployment benefit. This limitation ensures precisely comparable treatment with unemployment beneficiaries who become incapacitated for work and are transferred to sickness benefit.
Eligibility will also be specifically extended to former invalid pensioners and recipients of sheltered employment allowance, and to former recipients of rehabilitation allowance who had previously been paid sickness benefit, invalid pension or sheltered employment allowance. Such persons may not be eligible under the more general new provision since they may not be eligible for unemployment benefit. The rate of sickness benefit paid in such cases will reflect the previous pension or allowance payment. The initiatives governing payment of supplementary-rent-allowance to sickness beneficiaries are significant. At present a person who is transferred from unemployment benefit to sickness benefit is not qualified to receive supplementary allowance. Similarly, an incapacitated person who has not suffered an actual loss of income but who is granted sickness benefit under the new provision would not be eligible for supplementary allowance. The Bill extends eligibility, under the normal conditions, to both of those groups. Thus for the first time all sickness beneficiaries otherwise eligible will be able to claim supplementary allowance. Consistent with the relevant provision governing the payment of supplementary allowance to sickness beneficiaries, eligibility for the allowance will commence after a six week period.

3324 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982 Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No.3)

A further minor but important advance in this area contained in the Bill is a provision which enables all pensioners who were previously receiving supplementary assistance or incentive allowance to receive supplementary allowance immediately on transfer to sickness benefit, rather than wait for the six weeks qualifying period. The cost of the amendments to the sickness benefit and supplementary allowance provisions is estimated at $2.5m in a full year at current rates. The amendments to the sickness benefit and supplementary allowance provisions will take effect as soon as the Bill receives royal assent.
This Bill corrects important anomalies in the Social Security Act which have been drawn to our attention as a cause of hardship to certain groups in the community. It is a Bill that I believe deserves the support of all honourable members. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
HEALTH LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL (No.3) 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 10 November, on motion by Mr Carlton:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (9.27)-1 would like to congratulate the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton), who is not in the chamber, by saying that at least on the occasion of the presentation of this Bill he has produced an argument to try to justify this legislation which prohibits States from imposing an out-patient levy on the private health funds. As I shall point out, his argument is a thing of shreds and patches but we must at least be thankful for getting any argument at all. On the last occasion the Minister tried to smuggle this prohibition through the Parliament by including it in the omnibus Health Acts Amendment Billthat is, with all the other Budget health legislation with which it had nothing to do. This prohibition of the Victorian out-patients levy had nothing to do with the Budget. It was not related to or included in the Budget. The Minister endeavoured to smuggle it through and, on that occasion, he produced no argument whatsoever for prohibiting this out-patient levy. That may have been simply discretionary-to avoid any arguments-or he may simply have not had worthwhile arguments on that occasion. His speech on that occasion contained two sentences on this subject, each with an unargued assertion. At least on this occasion the Minister has advanced beyond that primitive and rather superficial level of argumentation.

The aim of this Bill is to render invalid the health levy imposed for out-patient services by the Victorian Government. Since July the Victorian Government has imposed a levy on the Victorian health funds to cover the cost of outpatient services rendered to insured persons in public hospitals. Instead of hospitals and funds having to deal with individual charges and payments to and for insured patients a simple levy computed on the basis of membership for each fund is imposed to cover the costs of these outpatient services rendered to members of the funds. I argued on 20 October 1982 that the outpatient levy was a remarkably cost efficient system, greatly reducing the transaction costs to both the health insurance funds and the public hospitals.
Those arguments have never been refuted by the Minister and, therefore, I do not intend to repeat them at length. But as the Minister has frequently justified other actions in the health field on the grounds of cost efficiency, I wish to summarise them and remind him of the salient points. Firstly, the levy enables a saving of several million dollars as the result of eliminating individual outpatient accounts. Secondly, it eliminates payment lags and payment gaps to the public hospitals which were inherent in the previous cumbersome system. Thirdly, the replacement of financial staff by health staff will be possible in our public hospitals as a result of the abolition of much of these accounting procedures. The cost efficiency arguments are so overwhelming that the New South Wales Parliament last week passed legislation imposing a similar out-patient levy. Similar action is contemplated in the new year by the Government in South Australia. I noted that, in introducing the legislation in New South Wales, the Minister for Health concluded his speech by saying:
The levy will assist in controlling unnecessary administrative costs and ensuring maximum value from each health dollar.
I have no doubt that, if they remove their ideological blinkers, the health Ministers in Western Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory will come to a similar conclusion to the Minister for Health in New South Wales. I think it is a great pity in this instance that the Federal Minister's commitment to administrative efficiency has been sidetracked by ideological sign posts.
Let us now turn to his and the Government's arguments for disallowing the levy. Let us turn to what in the Minister's words were the main principles at stake in this legislation. In his speech in introducing the Bill, he advanced five significant arguments to justify the disallowance of the outpatient levy. Two of these arguments are matters

Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No.3) 9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3325

of Liberal high principle. They relate, first of all, to the division of authority for the hospital system between the Commonwealth and the States and secondly, to the principle of user pays. Two further arguments are more mundane-the alleged incompetence of the Victorian Government and the alleged excess money raised by the outpatient levy. His fifth argument is that the tax or levy is discriminatory against the insured, the pensioners and non-Victorian taxpayers. It should be noted that the last argument makes what little sense it does only if the out-patient levy raises an excess amount of money over and above what is required to pay the cost of out-patient services rendered to insured patients. This last argument has very little weight unless an earlier argument is also sustained.
Let me deal with each of those five arguments in turn. The first is the argument of principle. The Minister claimed:
The Victorian Government has exceeded its responsibility for hospitals funding and encroached on health insurance, which is the Commonwealth's constitutional responsibility.
The charge of the Minister is that, by imposing the out-patient levy, the Victorian Government has stepped over some boundary line between hospital funding and hospital insurance. This is obviously a quaint notion but it is at the heart of the Government's 1981 health changes in which the Commonwealth abdicated responsibility for public hospitals and public hospital funding but retained power over hospital insurance. The Government is now learning what was always obvious. It is absurd to expect that the Commonwealth can wash its hands of public hospital funding and control unimpeded hospital insurance. The Opposition warned the Government when the latest health scheme was introduced that to divorce hospital funding from hospital insurance was a recipe for further problems. The Commonwealth cannot simply abdicate responsibility for hospital funding and expect to exercise unchallenged power over hospital insurance. It simply cannot exercise power without responsibility.
The Minister and the Government like to suggest that this divorce between hospital funding and hospital insurance was endorsed by the Jamison Committee of Inquiry into the efficiency and Administration of Hospitals and by the Commonwealth Grants Commission. In fact, neither body was prepared to endorse such an absurdity. The Jamison Committee envisaged a continuing responsibility for the Commonwealth in determining national hospital policies, priorities and objectives. The Grants Commission, while favouring block grants, believed there should be a

continuing joint responsibility by the Commonwealth and the States for policy on public hospitals. Thus, both bodies opposed the total abrogation of responsibility for hospital policy and hospital funding by the Commonwealth.
It is this artificial and absurd effort to separate hospital policy and funding on the one hand from hospital insurance on the other that is the source of the Government's difficulties. Most of the other arguments advanced by the Minister are based on the fatally flawed assumption that, in the hospital field, the Government can exercise unilateral control over hospital insurance yet wash its hands of hospital policy and funding. It just cannot exercise hospital power without hospital responsibility. Let me just note in passing one further cost imposed on the community by this abdication of responsibility for public hospitals. In annual reports from the Department of Health in recent years we have had two very useful tables comparing the utilisation of public hospitals and the utilisation of private hospitals. As a result of this abdication we got in the report this year a national picture only of the utilisation of private hospitals. No longer is there any indication or statistics about the utilisation of public hospitals. A major source of information which we need for comparing public and private hospital utilisation has been done away with.
The second argument of principle advanced by the Minister is that the out-patient levy undermines the principle of the user pays. Whatever one thinks of the cliche 'the user pays', it is scarcely relevant to the payment of out-patient fees by insured patients. Insured patients throughout Australia mostly do not directly pay outpatient fees. The standard practice is that the patient signs a form and the hospital recoups from the health fund. In South Australia, indeed, the hospitals simply bulk bill the funds for out-patient fees. It is simply irrelevant to this issue to argue that the out-patient levy threatens the collection of charges at the out-patient point of service. Outpatient charges are increasingly not collected at the point of service in existing public hospital systems.
It is probably necessary for me to repeat for the Minister why I said on 20 October 1982 that this notion is in essence a fantasy. I said:
The reason it is a fantasy is that the levy will in no way affect either the behaviour of the insured or the uninsured. Let us look at the reason for that. The behaviour of the insured will, as I have indicated, be in no way affected. Those insured mostly have had no direct charge in the past for an outpatient service. They simply pay through their insurance contributions. Under the levy they have no direct charge for an outpatient service. They pay through their insurance contributions. There is no reason whatsoever why their behaviour

3326 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982 Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No.3)

sho'Jld change and produce a shift from a private doctor to an outpatient department. Secondly, the uninsured who are not covered by the pensioner or disadvantaged persons schemes will still have to pay the full cost of the outpatient service. So, the levy will not affect their behaviour. The levy will not affect the behaviour of these groups and therefore the pattern of use of outpatient services will not be changed.
These are the arguments of high principle-that is, the demarcation of the fields of authority of the Commonwealth Government and the States and the user pays arguments. From those arguments of high principle the Minister descends to low abuse. He refers to the 'managerial incompetence' of the Victorian Government and comments on its incapacity to pursue out-patient debts. These remarks are totally unwarranted and totally unjustified. If the Minister bothered to read, rather than simply selectively quote, the report of the Jamison Committee he would find that it specifically commended the Victorian hospitals' financial systems and noted that the Victorian efforts at revenue collection compared well with those of other States.
The Minister makes much of a quotation from the Victorian Mimster of Health referring to the 'incapacity of Victorian hospitals to devote the requisite resources to the pursuit of fees for all chargeable occasions of out-patient service'. The Federal Minister completely misconstrues and ignores the context of his Victorian colleague's remarks. The basic fact about hospital out-patient departments is that they cannot-as other providers of services are able to do-refuse services to people who are unable or unwilling to pay. Patients are treated first and payments sought after treatment. The reasons for the incapacity to collect out-patient moneys-an incapacity shared by every public hospital system in this countryare many. Just let us note some of them. Firstly, it is virtually impossible in large and complex multiexited hospitals to ensure that every out-patient is channelled through the point of payment. Secondly, the cost of following up many small accounts is very high in relation to the amounts recovered. Furthermore, the costs of enforcing payment through legal action far exceed the amounts recovered. Even with bulk bill claims, many patients are not able to provide the highly specific details of membership required for payment by the health benefit funds. Indeed, many times the outpatient is a dependant of the contributor and does not have that information to hand. Perhaps, above all, the reason for this incapacity is the vast number of services involved. Even if we use the Commonwealth's own figures and assume an average of two occasions of service at $200 each per attendance we would, in Victoria, have 775,000 separate out-patient billings a

year, that is, three times the chargeable in-patient stays. If there is any incapacity it is a natural incapacity. It is for this reason that other States are following the Victorian example.
Another element of the ministerial attack on the Victorian Government is his argument that it is milking the health funds by raising an excess amount through the out-patient levy. The Minister alleges that Victoria will raise $44m through the out-patient levy, whereas it should onlyaccording to the Commonwealth--be raising $31 m. As I dealt with this point at length on the la~t occasion I will spare little time on it now. Moreov;;:r, as this Government has the costing of all five of its health schemes wrong, one can have little respect for its costing. The Victorian estimate on the basis of the first three months of its operation of its out-patient levy is that it will raise $36.3m in 1982-83. I accept that as a carefully costed figure.
Let me remind the Government, as I did on the last occasion, that that figure is based on what the Commonwealth Government originally argued the Victorian Government should raise from outpatient fees. It is, of course, still above the latest Commonwealth calculation, but the difference scarcely constitutes an argument. The Victorian Government has made it perfectly clear that it will reduce the levy yield in line with the estimate of revenue capacity as assessed by the Commonwealth Grants Commission, which is accepted as an independent arbiter, provided, of course, that the Commonwealth Government will also accept the umpire's decision and adjusts Victoria's health grant accordingly.
That effectively disposes of the main weight of the Minister's remaining two arguments; that is, firstly, that the levy discriminates against pensioners and, secondly, that the levy discriminates against other Australian taxpayers. There would be no shred of discrimination if the Commonwealth Government would accept an assessment by the Grants Commission of what was a fair and appropriate levy level. There was never much in those arguments of discrimination anyway. The Minister's expressed concern for pensioners is simply hypocritical. A component for out-patient services is included in all insurance tables approved by the Minister and the amount is included in contributions already paid by pensioners in all States. There is thus no additional payment for Victorian pensioners as a result of the levy. Indeed, despite the levy Victorian hospital contribution rates are below the levels of most other States.
Mr Carlton-Scandalous sophistry.

Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No.3) 9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3327

Dr BLEWETT-If the Minister wishes to look at the figures, he will find that the Victorian hospital figures are below those of alI other States except one. If, of course, the Government considers it unjust to include an out-patient contri- ?ution paid by pensioners entitled to free services, It should ensure that the health funds provide pensioner tables excluding the out-patient component. At the moment in every State there is included in the hospital table an out-patient component paid by pensioners. I understand that if the Minister is prepared to do that-that is, if he really believes what he is saying about the pensioners and is prepared to take that action-the Victorian Government would be happy to exclude contributions to such tables from the outpatient levy. If he is prepared to honour his words, the Victorian Government is prepared to exclude those out-patient charges from the levy as it applies to pensioners. The Minister also argues that the Victorian out-patient levy is discriminatory against other Australian taxpayers because they are required to subsidise the out-patient levy through the health insurance tax rebate. That argument is simply nonsensical at a number of levels.
First of all, there is no additional revenue involved according to the Victorian Government. If the Commonwealth Government does not agree, the Victorian Government has offered to accept adjudication through the Commonwealth Grants Commission to settle that issue. Secondly, the Victorian hospital contribution rates including the out-patient levy are below nearly every other State. If we accept the Minister's quaint argument, Victorians are in fact subsidising other Australians in terms of the health tax rebate. Therefore, perhaps he should be dealing with all these other States to make sure that the Victorians do not subsidise the health tax rebate across Australia.
Finally, the essence of the Minister's argument ultimately boils down to the fact that there should be uniform charges because if there are no uniform charges across the country some Australians in some States are subsidising Australians in other States. Yet the Minister has never made any effort to establish a standard hospital charge. I ask him whether those States that charge $120 a day for their beds should be denied that higher charge as against those States that charge $110 a day or $105 a day because the people in those States with lower charges are subsidising the health tax rebate of the States with the higher charges. The implication of the Minister's argument about discrimination is that there should be standard charges,

which I presume the Commonwealth would impose, though the Minister has shown no signs of doing so.
I simply say to the Minister in conclusion that, apart from the disagreement which this Government has with the Victorian Government about the amount of the levy, which could be settled by effective adjudication through the Grants Commission, none of his arguments outweighs the cost efficiency of the levy. As he has pursued cost efficiency throughout the health sector could he not bring himself to abandon his ideological position on this issue, settle with the Victorian Government the real dispute over the amount of the levy and let us all get on with worrying about the health condition of the Australian people?
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (9.47)-This legislation in a slightly different form, as part of another piece of legislation, has already been debated in this chamber. It has been debated in the Senate where, of course, it was rejected and it is now back in this chamber. It is very difficult to find anything new to say about it. Basically, we are dealing with two matters: Firstly, whether there ought to be an overall charge to health funds rather than individual members of funds claiming from the funds for out-patient services; and, secondly, the amounts involved. I think the second
matter basically is an argument on market forces. The Minister for Health (Mr Carlton), who in theory at least is one of those people who believe in market forces, does not seem to understand that when one starts to charge for out-patient services the number of people utilising those services obviously will decrease. Therefore, if we charge for out-patient services we will get fewer services and the amount of money going back to the Victorian Government, the New South Wales Government or any other State government and their hospitals will be less. The original estimate,
of course, was based on free out-patient services. Now those services are being charged for. Under the Victorian Government's proposal the vast majority of the population would again receive free out-patient services in the sense that they would not have to pay at the point of service. Therefore, the correct amount would be charged by the levy because the number of people attending would again increase. It seems to me to be quite reasonable that that would happen.
I think the Government is not only trying to protect the private health funds but also trying to protect the private medical practitioners against what it considers to be unfair competition. This Government sees it as unfair competition that a patient can either go to a private medical practitioner and pay the charge-$12 or whatever it

3328 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982 Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No.3)

may be depending on the time of day or the day of the week-or get free out-patient treatment. I am not sure that it ought to be the function of the Commonwealth Government to protect doctors against this sort of competition. If the Minister considers this to be one of the functions of the Commonwealth Government I think he ought to state that quite clearly.
Mr Carlton-Only if the taxpayers support it.
Dr KLUGMAN-I think many medical schemes have been proposed and have been in use by this Government in the seven years in which it has been in power. There have been free medical services with private practitioners where people just had to sign for their medical services. More people then attended private doctors. In other words, the Government was in effect subsidising those private doctors. I did not hear the Minister for Health then complaining about it.
The Commonwealth Government said to the Victorians that $43.2m would be raised from insured persons attending out-patient departments. There have been fewer visits and a smaller proportion of those people attending out-patients have been insured. I think the original estimate was 90 per cent but in fact only about 77 per cent of those attending out-patient departments have been insured. The States still have to run the outpatient services. The Commonwealth has to pay an extra amount or the States have to collect it via the funds. Some argue that this is unfair because some of the insured people do not go to outpatient departments, but that is basically no different from the general health insurance proposition where the payment each week is not related to usage, and what is commonly called community rating is introduced.
My own view is that there is great difficulty collecting the money. It is extremely inefficient to collect money at out-patients departments. I think quite sensibly the Victorian Government in July this year-I understand the New South Wales and South Australian governments are currently doing so, undoubtedly a very sensible move-decided on a better method of collecting money for out-patient services. Rather than going through the administratively costly and inefficient methods of individuals having to go to the health funds and organising payments back to the hospital it introduced a levy computed on a membership basis using the Federal Government's own figures to do away with the complicated method of collection. This enabled hospitals to provide out-patient services free of charge at the point of service.

In the case of Victoria, we were talking about approximately two million out-patient services and the cost of collection was about $2m. About $1 per service was the cost of actually collecting the amount. If the Government says that this is wrong and this is only being done by the Labor States, it is quite obvious to refer to Queensland where the Queensland Government provides all the hospital services free.
I can understand that the medical funds are complaining. As I pointed out earlier, I can understand the doctors complaining about it. I can understand the medical funds complaining because they benefit from the inefficiencies of the present system, from the fact that some people do not claim and because of the inevitable delay in claiming. They also benefit from the inevitable delay in paying the State hospitals. With the interest rates they can get on their funds they are at a great advantage. They can get 15 per cent, 16 per cent and 17 per cent interest or maybe more at odd times for their money just by delaying payments. It is an understandable attitude on the part of the funds to delay this sort of payment. At the same time it is obviously in the interests of the efficiency of the hospital system not to have to use staff for this purpose.
Very importantly also I think there is an actual lack of money in the State hospital systems. The Victorian Government has argued that if it does not introduce this system there would be a shortfall of some $20m. This shortfall would lead to an inevitable reduction of staff of between 1,000 and 2,000 from the Victorian hospital system. Quite apart from the fact that that would probably make the Victorian hospitals very much more inefficient, it is also not exactly the sort of thing we want to see at this time of very high unemployment. Some 70 per cent plus of money spent on hospitals and hospital health services is spent on wages and salaries. There are very few other areas in which the Government spends a higher proportion of taxation receipts.
The Australian Hospital Association, for which I have always had a high regard, is a fairly independent organisation even though it obviously represents the interest of the Australian public hospital system. In a Press statement it accused the Federal Government of maintaining a double standard, arguing on the one hand that the management of health services was a State responsibility and then interfering when it suited its political purposes. The statement continued:
The Australian Hospital Association strongly supports the concept of States having full responsibility for health care delivery provided the Commonwealth Government adopt and maintain national standards for health. The revenue

Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No.3) 9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3329

generated from the levy is essential to maintain current health services in Victoria.
Here there is special pleading on the part of the Australian Hospital Association. The statement finished by saying:
The Association had not been consulted about the proposed legislation-
That is this legislation-
and it can only conclude that the Commonwealth Government has responded to pressure from the health insurance industry.
I think that it obviously has responded to pressure from the health insurance industry but I think it is also important-I am pleased that the Minister, by nodding, has agreed with my proposition-that the Government has also responded to pressure from medical practitioners who, of course, are very prominent in the Liberal Party.
Mr Carlton-That is right.
Dr KLUGMAN-I hope that Hansard will note that the Minister said that that is right because those interjections are important when later proceedings are reported in Hansard. It is quite dear to me that this method is a more efficient and effective way of dealing with out-patients. I think it is less embarrassing for the staff of hospitals if they do not have to cross-examine patients when they come in as to their insurance status, how much money they have on them, whether they can afford to pay the bill, sign for debts and all that sort of thing. It is usually done at a time when the people involved are acutely ill or the relatives whom they have brought in are acutely ill. I commend the Victorian Government on thinking of this proposal; I also commend the New South Wales Government and I hope the South Australian Government and the other governments, even in the Liberal States, Western Australia and Tasmania, for adopting this method which is a much simpler method of funding outpatient services.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (9.58)-1 agree with the preceding speaker, my colleague the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) that this specific aspect of the legislation has had a very good airing. Therefore, I endorse what has been already so ably put by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) and the honourable member for Prospect. My real concern is that I would not like to see a government moving vindictively against one of our State governments for purely political reasons.
Mr CarltonNonsense.
Mrs DARLING-No, it is not nonsense; that is a concern to me. It appears to me that the only time when this Government is really interested in

States' rights is when it wishes to give back some responsibilities to those States. I can remember, particularly during the infamous razor cuts, the manner in which Government members publicly declared that they were giving different aspects of responsibility back to the States as if they were giving largesse. Of course, in what they were giving back, they were negating any previous responsibility for funding different areas and were calling on the States to fund them. At that stage the Government was happily giving back to the States the responsibility for raising funds for hospitals. In this area it seems that the tables are entirely turned now because a Victorian Labor Government has decided to move in a way which has-
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr Carlton-l require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
HEALTH LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL (No.3) 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mrs DARLING-I was outlining how a State Labor Government has put forward a proposal to introduce a levy which is seen in many areas of the health profession and by a number of leading newspapers and other media channels as something which is indeed cost efficient and I was expressing concern that the Government has quashed it in a heavy-handed way just for political reasons. I will not go through all the different comments by the media. I think the comments are encapsulated in an editorial of the Age of 16 October which stated:
The Commonwealth has no business to be interfering, at the behest of the private health funds and for dubious reasons of its own, with a perfectly legitimate and justifiable measure introduced by a State Government to reduce costs and raise revenue for its public hospitals. Ironically, the levy was prompted largely by the cost-boosting complexities of the Federal Government's ever-changing health insurance arrangements and by its inadequate and inequitable provision for hospitals in Victoria. The Federal intervention is also in strange contradiction to the Liberal espousal of State rights and responsibilities and the Prime Minister's insistence on greater fiscal self-reliance by the States.
I agree with that entirely. In fact, in view of all of the arguments for this levy, I am surprised that the Federal Government is stubbornly pushing ahead, using its numbers, to get this legislation

3330 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982 Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No, 3)

through. The reasons for following this course of
action have been well documented in the course of the second reading debate. In relation to administration it is entirely logical for the health funds to evaluate a levy based on their membership and for it to be paid in that manner rather than to bill individually the people who are so
uncomfortably located in the out-patient departments. It is ludicrous. It is cost inefficient. It will be detrimental to many ordinary Australians if it
goes ahead. It should be rejected.

Question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

40

Majority

21

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony. J. D. Baume. M. E. Bourchier. J. W. Bradfield,J. M. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,].J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean. A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fi,her, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom. R.J. Hall, Steele Harris. G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard.J. W. Hyde, J. M.

Jarman, A. W. Jull, D. F.
Katter, R. e. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian
Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair. I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street. A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner,R.t. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage. J. L. Blewett. N. Bo\\'en, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cros~, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V.

NOES

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Maher, M.J. Milton, P. Morris, P. F. Mountford, 1. G. Scholes, G. G. D.

NOES
Hawke, R. J.1.. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphrey" B. e. (Teller)

Scott, J. I.. Theophanous, A. C. West,S.l. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Dobie,J.D.M. Nixon, P. 1. Fife, W.e.

Keating, P. 1.
Young. M. 1. Mildren, 1. B.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Carlton) read a third time.

STUDENT ASSISTANCE (LOANS GUARANTEE AND SUBSIDY) BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 8 December, on motion by MrFife:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (10.12)-The Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Bill is a proposal of the Government to provide loans to certain categories of tertiary students, to provide interest subsidies to lower the effective interest rates that students will have to pay and to provide guarantees to the banks, which in the first instance will provide the funds, to ensure that the loans are repaid if not by the borrowers then by the Government. The major part of the debate on this Bill has been conducted in the Senate where the proposal was sent to a Senate Committee which reported in due course, having taken submissions from a number of interested parties, The Committee recommended that the Bill should be passed without amendment. The Opposition in the Senate accepted the view of the Senate Committee that the Bill should pass, although it took the opportunity to express some very real reservations about the proposal. I have already indicated that a Labor government would look very closely at this proposal and repeal at least the major aspects of it and replace it with a different form of loans scheme to be administered by the tertiary institutions.
The major shortcomings of the proposal of the Government are that in some cases students will be required to pay back twice as much as they actually borrow, despite the interest subsidy, Because there is such a long delay in paying back the funds students will have to pay back up to twice as much as they borrowed in the first instance. The other shortcoming of the proposal, and the

Student Assistance Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3331

major objection which I have to it, is that it directly involves the banks in the provision of student financial assistance. This seems to be a particularly objectionable proposal. I can quite understand why the banks have been prepared to
enter into this scheme because it is a matter of record that most students who go to colleges of advanced education or to universities end up amongst the higher income groups. Of course, for that reason it is in the banks' interests to obtain an association with those future clients as soon as possible.
The reality of the situation is that once a student takes out a student loan from a bank he or she is likely to be hooked on that bank for the rest of his or her life. That seems to me to be an objectionable feature of this proposal. If we are to have a loans scheme it seems to me to be a much better proposition that the loans be administered by the institutions themselves in the same way as some institutions currently administer emergency loans schemes. The institutions are far more likely to be sensitive to the interests of students, to acknowledge their current circumstances and needs and to
not have their jUdgment coloured by mercenary considerations about the future worth of an individual as a client of a bank. It is worth noting that the record of the emergency loans schemes operated by universities and colleges of advanced education has been very admirable indeed. They
have had a very great success in opening repayments of those loans. Indeed, although the loans are limited in their range they have been of substantial benefit to those students who have received them.
Another major shortcoming of this proposal is that it imposes a severe financial burden on students at a very crucial time in their lives. It is true that they do not have to commence repaying their loans until after they graduate. But in the current circumstances not all students are guaranteed of getting employment-certainly not at a level commensurate with their qualifications. There is that continuing insecurity about whether they will have sufficient income to commence repaying the loan at the time required by the scheme. The other point is that the repayments commence at the time in their lives when they will be involved in substantial outlays in terms of family commitments, purchasing a house and so on. At the time when the graduate is getting his or her first job and entering into a large range of financial commitments, the graduate will be faced with the additional burden of repaying the student loan.
For that reason it is very unlikely that students from poor backgrounds are likely to be enticed

into the student loans scheme. The student loans scheme is likely to be an additional benefit for those students who come from more privileged backgrounds and it will do absolutely nothing, in my view, to widen the access to tertiary education, which is an issue which honourable members on the Government side have mentioned persistently. For that reason they want fees reintroduced. They keep reminding us, quite rightly, that there is a huge socio-economic bias in favour of those students who come from privileged backgrounds. It is nine times more likely that the son or daughter of someone from a professional occupation will get into university or college than it is that the son or daughter of an unskilled or semi-skilled--
Mr Sainsbury-You come from a privileged background.
Mr DAWKINSI have never denied that.
Mr Sainsbury-Exactly.
Mr DAWKINSWhat has that got to do with it?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar)- Order! The honourable member will ignore interjections.
Mr DAWKINS-The point is that I acknowledge that fact, and I am perfectly happy to do so. I also happen to have a great deal of concern for those who have not had the advantages I have had and I am determined, unlike the honourable member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Sainsbury), to ensure that those kids who come from poorer families get an equal opportunity to all kinds of education.
Mr Sainsbury-It has nothing to do with it.
Mr DAWKINS-Of course it does. If one looks at the backgrounds of those people who make it through the front gate of any university or college around Australia, one finds that a very disproportionate number come from higher income families. It is quite true that the abolition of fees, on the surface, has made very little impact on the socio-economic composition of the student population but one of the points that have to be recognised is that, as a result of the abolition of fees, there has been a very substantial increase in the number of mature age entries into universities and colleges, particularly from women. My suspicion is, although there is not much evidence around, that that has done much to redress the socioeconomic bias in the student population. The point is-this is not addressed by people like the honourable member for Eden-Monaro-that the reintroduction of fees will do nothing on its own to redress that balance.

3332 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Student Assistance Bill

I refer Government members to a report commissioned by the Government which points to the fact that the reason why there has been a continual drift, in the view of the committee, towards people from more privilege backgrounds getting into universities and college has been the decline in the value of the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance and the restrictions in the eligibility for it. The report indicates that the number of students who are not in receipt of any public support at all doubled from 21 per cent to 41 per cent during 1974 to 1979. The report states:
In our view. this suggests that the shift in the full-time student population towards financing by parents-or by themselves-has led to a relative decrease in full-time university and CAE students from less privileged backgrounds.
That has happened during the term of this Government. The cause of that continual regressive shift has been identified as the failure of the Government to maintain the value of TEAS and the eligibility for it. The loans scheme does nothing to address that problem. The problem is getting worse and the loans scheme will do nothing to improve it. It is very likely that the scheme will be much more attractive to those people who can fall back on parental support when the time comes to repay the loans rather than students from poorer backgrounds who, in any event, are unused to the notion of borrowing heavily at that time of their lives and also are particularly apprehensive about their economic circumstances post-graduation.
I have acknowledged the point-I am happy to do so-that this scheme will provide some benefits to some students but I believe it is providing the wrong kinds of benefits to the wrong kinds of students, that is, not the students who need them most. But I acknowledge that some students will be forced to take out loans, largely because of the restrictive nature of TEAS eligibility. Therefore, they have nowhere to turn at the moment except to borrowing under commercial terms. The scheme provides an advantage to students who are forced into borrowing as are an increasing number. But the Government should not be allowed to ignore the fact that it has been the decline in TEAS and the restrictions in the eligibility for it which have caused this problem and forced so many students into borrowing.
The Government has made great play of the fact that for 1983 the maximum TEAS benefit will increase quite substantially. That, of course, is true. But it does not matter two bits what the value of the maximum TEAS benefit is if nobody is qualifying for it. The fact is that the Government has not adjusted the parental means test which determines whether students in the main

are eligible for TEAS. The parental means test or MAFI-the marginal adjusted family incomelevel for next year will be $12,248. That has been increased from what it is this year.
I asked the Minister who was representing the Minister for Education (Senator Peter Baume) during the debate in this chamber on the Estimates at what level MAFI would need to be in order for it to be at the same level in relation to average weekly earnings as it was in 1974. He provided me with a very useful answer. He said that, in fact, the MAFI level would have to be $16,915. That is very close to $17,000. In fact, for next year
it will be something like $5,000 less than that at $12,248. That is the real problem. That is where the real exclusion occurs in relation to the eligibility for TEAS. That is why there are so few students who are qualifying for the maximum TEAS benefit. That is why the level of the maximum TEAS benefit has become almost irrelevant in terms of a measurement of the value of the TEAS program. The most urgent requirement is to lift the parental means test levels to ensure that more students qualify if not for the maximum TEAS benefit then for a higher level of TEAS benefit than they are currently applying for.
The Government, when it announced the loans scheme, said quite explicitly in the report of the razor gang that the loans scheme was to operate as a replacement for increases in TEAS-that is, quite clearly the Government intended to freeze TEAS at its then current level and when students whinged about the fact that they could not live on TEAS they would be told: 'We now have a loans scheme. Go around to your nearest friendly neighbourhood bank, take out a loan and stop your complaining'. That was the intention at the time. The Government has shifted its ground a bit since that time. Of course, the greatest evidence of that shift has been the long overdue increase in the maximum TEAS benefit. That, I am sure, is welcomed by many students although the Government did not, as I indicated, make it accessible to very many more students.
But the point is that the Government has never specifically abandoned the description of the loan scheme which it gave in the razor gang report as a replacement for TEAS increases. It has always been a very real concern on the part of students that once a loan scheme is put in place it becomes an excuse, a reason, an alibi, for the Government not increasing TEAS benefits or not increasing the requirements for eligibility for TEAS. As I say, the Government can always say: 'If you don't like the amount of TEAS you're getting you can always go to get a loan'. That has always been the problem. Even though we have had assurances

Student Assistance Bill

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3333

from the Minister for Education and from officials who came before the Senate committee that this is to be seen as a supplementary scheme, I for one am not prepared to take those assurances at their face value. I would have thought that the best way to introduce this scheme would be to precede it by a legislative requirement that TEAS be indexed on a regular and mandatory basis and that the means test cut-off points be indexed also on an automatic and mandatory basis. I think if that has been done and if that is what the Government means when it says that this is a supplementary loans scheme, the opposition to the loans
scheme would have been far less.
Mr CarltonIs that your policy commitment?
Mr DAWKINS-The Opposition has a policy commitment to progressively restore the value of TEAS benefits and to restore the means test to the level it was. Once the restoration had been achieved-of course, that cannot be done overnight-we would provide for the indexation of both those elements. Otherwise we are always going to have this haphazard approach every couple of years of handing out a small amount of increase or adjustment to the means test which
really does not compensate, so the scheme becomes progressively worse and worse and excludes more and more students. In that regard, I simply do not want to take up the time of the House. I just want to say that the Government has recently been presented with what constitutes an extraordinary indictment of its education policies in relation to declining participation rates in schools and in higher education. The report entitled, 'Learning and Earning' might have included the word yearning too, because in this country I am sure we have an enormous untapped talent which is yearning for an opportunity to participate effectively in the education process. But people are simply not doing so. They are deserting our educational institutions in droves. There is an enormous flight from learning which this Government has not begun to appropriately address.
If one looks at this report for the peak years of participation one finds that in terms of higher education the peak participation rate in universities for males was in 1974, and 1975 for females, in advanced education, 1976 and for higher education as a whole it was also 1976. If we look at participation rates in schools for males we find it is even worse. The peak participation rate in schools was in 1972 for males and 1978 for females. We have a very serious problem in this country. If we are trying to provide the sorts of skills which we obviously need and if we are to have any sort of economic recovery-anything that means anything to provide the sort of job

opportunities for people in the future, we are not going to do it with an undereducated population. I think it is a matter of great concern for the whole country. This report identifies student assistance as being absolutely crucial to ensuring that we turn around those retention rates, that we encourage more and more of our talented young people to finish their schooling and to go on to universities and colleges.
If one looks at the abilities and the achievements of these kids who are falling out of the education process, one finds the largest fall has been amongst the highest achievers. I would be surprised if even this Government would be particularly pleased with that development. It is an absolute disgrace that in this country we should find our best and brightest young people deserting our schools and abandoning our universities and colleges. That is why this whole loans scheme is so irrelevant. It is of monumental irrelevance to the problem of encouraging greater participation in tertiary education. Even more than that, it is of monumental irrelevance in terms of trying to address the inequity of opportur-ity and of access which currently exists and '" hich increasingly favours those who already come from privileged backgrounds.
As I have indicated, the Opposition is not opposing this proposal. It does provide some limited benefits-the wrong kinds of benefits-to some students, though not the students who need them most. But because it provides some benefits and because there is absolutely no indication that the Government is going to do anything else we will not oppose the proposition. However, I do foreshadow the fact that a future Labor Government will review the scheme and repeal those sections of it which are objectionable and take the banks out of the process to turn it into a proper emergency student loan scheme administered by the institutions themselves. At the same time we would address the serious problems of access and the serious problems of providing real, meaningful financial assistance to students which is something that this Government has abjectly failed to do.
Mr FISHER (Mallee) (10.35)-1 am pleased that the Opposition has finally been forced to acknowledge the value of this budgetary promise and the fact that tonight we are legislating for the Tertiary Student Loans Scheme. The 1982-83 Budget was very significant in that it significantly increased student assistance schemes. The Stude!1t Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Bill is part of the Federal Government's continuing support in widening the options for students.

3334 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Student Assistance Bill

I wish to restate some of the changes that were made in August and mention some of the legislation that has already passed through this Parliament. When the Government made its decision in the August Budget it had in mind the high level of youth unemployment, the lower participation rates in education and the difficulties facing many very low income families in meeting the costs of their children remaining at school or attending a tertiary institution. Since that Budget was brought down the Government has decided on a number of changes to the student assistance program and has subsequently legislated for those changes.
Allowances under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme-TEAS-and the secondary allowance scheme were increased by 20 per cent. Allowances under all other student assistance schemes were increased by II per cent. The number of Commonwealth post-graduate awards was increased from 100 to 900. The basic allowance in that area was raised from $4,620 to $6,850 per annum. This was a very significant increase of 48 per cent.
The income test requirements of TEAS were eased with the limits being increased by II per cent for 1983. In addition, the limits for the Adult Secondary Education Assistance Scheme were adjusted to the same level, which was an increase of 44 per cent. The cost of both these schemes was estimated to increase this financial year by $17m. The number of beneficiaries was estimated to increase by 10,000 student places in 1983.
We foreshadowed in the Budget the implementation of the Tertiary Student Loans Scheme and it will commence from 1983. This, of course, is putting our Government's promise into effect. What does this scheme do? It allows full time tertiary students to borrow up to $1,000 a year at a subsidised rate of interest to help with their educational expenses, as I have said, from the beginning of 1983. The banking system has agreed to provide up to $50m a year in loans to eligible students. Students will be able to borrow up to $8,000 during the time that they are full time students. They will not have to make any repayments until two years after they have finished their studies and will have up to 10 years to pay off these loans. The Government intends to subsidise the interest rate charged by the banks by 5 per cent. At current commercial rates a student will, therefore, be able to borrow at 9.5 per cent interest.
To be eligible for a loan students will have to be Australian citizens or permanent residents and be

studying full time at a university, a college of advanced education or a technical or further education institution. Students who are eligible for benefits under TEAS and other Commonwealth tertiary schemes will qualify for these loans. Other students will have to meet a simple means test under which the student's income from all sources will have to be less than $5,000 a year. The Government has legislated now to provide a formal guarantee for each loan. However, the Commonwealth will honour this guarantee only after a borrower's bank has taken all reasonable steps to regain its money. The loans scheme is being operated by the Commonwealth Department of Education in conjunction with the Australian banking system. As I have saidI have the support of my colleagues-this Bill provides the legislative basis for the implementation of the Tertiary Student Loans Scheme. It will also subsidise the interest rate I have already mentioned.
I am sure my colleagues who have supported me so adequately during my speech will allow me to become a little parochial just for a moment. I would like to point to the fact that the Opposition underrates the importance of this Bill. I believe it is particularly significant at this time when we do have severe economic difficulties, particularly those associated with the drought. I would like to mention the importance of this legislation in relation to those parents and students in rural areas, to those people, particularly the breadwinners, who through no fault of their own may become unemployed and who are attempting to either continue or place their children in tertiary studies. It is important also to remind honourable members that the eligibility of such schemes allows for self-employed people who in the past have had to rely on the assessment of last year's income to make an application based on the
assessment and estimation of their current year's income. This will be extremely important for so many people in areas affected by drought in being able to ensure that their children can continue or can commence study in our tertiary institutions.
I believe this is a very significant piece of legislation. It puts into effect the promise of the Government in the last Budget, and by the acknowledgement of the Opposition it does away with the furphies it has been spreading for so many months now that the Federal Government intends to reduce the impact of TEAS. We have, in fact, increased TEAS. We have in fact increased all student allowances and have added this measure to ensure that more students have the opportunity to participate in tertiary education.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Adjournment

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3335

Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Carlton) read a third time.
ADJOURNMENT
World Government-North West Shelf Project: Steel Industry-Telecom Australia-Death of Mr Abraham Kidron--Government Economic Policies-Unemployment-Mining Industry: 1980-81 Budget--Education: School Libraries
Motion (by Mr Carlton) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Dr EVERINGHAM (Capricornia) (10.43)-1 ask all persons of good will to call unceasingly for a maximum government campaign to bring home to teachers, students, parents, voters, legislators and governments the central truths about war and peace which will decide whether iife continues. These truths have been summed up simply and consistently by international conventions, statespeople, academics, philosophers, religious and military leaders and, even more simply and consistently, have been ignored and ridiculed every 5 or 10 years for at least 80 years. We can sum them up in 10 commandments. Breaking them could mean death for all but primitive life forms-the bugs and wogs.
These are 10 such commandments:
You shall not put supremacy, superiority or survival for your way of life before human survival.
You shall not muitiply threats as a means of lessening threats, for the balance of terror can lead only to compromise with a sharing of power and less terror on both sides or to the final permanent balance of universal death.
You shall not arrogate to your own system of law the right to act as prosecutor, judge, and executioner in its disputes with rival systems of law, nor believe, state or act upon the assumption that war can be justified by its value in limiting overpopulation or advancing civil knowledge or technology.
You shall not covet the natural resources of the world commons--high seas, polar regions, outer space, strategic bases or legally disputed trust territories-nor claim sovereign rights to foreign resources which you declare as vital or essential to your economy, even to the point of threatening omnicide in defence of your claim.

You shall not bear false witness againt your enemy or suppress or censor unfavourable facts, since truth is the first casualty in human minds on both sides before the first angry shot in war.
To balance these five prohibitions, we must add five corresponding imperatives if we are to have sanity in place of chaos between nations. 1 give this example:
You shall confess that your system of government is guilty of thoughts, statements and acts of war and has changed sides and loyalties in and between wars causing deaths in vain to your own citizens and other members of the human family.
You shall abdicate the pride and renounce the certainty that the leadership of your nation, alliance or bloc is more wise, advanced, humaile, freedom-loving or peace-seeking than others in its thoughts, statements and acts of war and acknowledge that your safety lies in acknowledging like claims by your enemy, teaching yOllf citizens and theirs these truths and trusting world representatives, freely chosen by world citizens, to take from each side the sovereign right to make war.
You shall allow and assist your enemy in world citizens movements opposed to absolute national sovereignty to oppose in your schools and mass media your alleged national interests and alleged sovereign rights which are more limited in space and time and should not take precedence in international matters.
You shall acknowledge that the United Nations Organisation like all treaties and conferences between rival sovereignties in its aim to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war because it fails to require of members the sacrifice of national sovereignty in international disputes to the sovereign rights of the human family to reconciliation under the rule of law.
YOli shall demand, work for and accept a world authority to make, interpret and enforce world law, abolishing want and fear by diversion of arms race spending, such authority being responsible to all world citizens, the only ultimate sovereignty and democratic channel for justice among humans, recognising all ideologies of goodwill as having a right to expression.
It is, of course, not only national ideologies which promote war, genocide and omnicide. There are sects among all great religions fanatically devoted to heresy hunts, infallibility

3336 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Adjournment

claims, inquisitions, purges, holy wars and promotion for a military Armageddon. Some make the simplistic distinction between atheists as devilish and theists as angelic. One reason I am on this side of the House is that I find democratic socialists less prone by and large than conservatives to condemn-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.48)-The honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) today raised the issue of the limited quantity of Australian steel consumed at the Woodside North West Shelf project in Western Australia. The honourable member has produced accurate figures. He further sings a catchy tune. After all, why should not Australian industry benefit from our resource development, especially when that industry happens to be the embattled steel industry. Anyone who reads the financial Press will realise the great difficulty that the Woodside consortium has had marketing its gas at home and abroad against competing forms of energy. Those people will also know that the industry is capital cost intensive. The cost of the gas that is sold is proportional to the development costs of the project.
This is best summarised by Woodside when, in a Press statement on 5 December, it stated:
It is the policy of the participants in the north west shelf project to give preference to Australian industry where price, quality, delivery and service are competitive.
However, the project will be marketing its products in highly competitive markets. It would jeopardise the huge investment already made, and the even bigger investment proposed to be made in the future, if the project accepted anything less than the normal commercial criteria of cost and efficiency when allocating work.
In other words, unless the cost of the project was kept to a minimum, it would not have proceeded at all. To use Australian steel would have expanded costs considerably. The present direct level of employment at Woodside is 3,000 persons. The land pipeline soon to be constructed will employ another 2,000 persons and supporting industries employ approximately 6,000 to 8,000 persons creating a total of probably 12,000 jobs. All these jobs rely on the Woodside consortium being able to complete its project within strict financial limits. The honourable member for Adelaide called for construction within Australia of the production jacket. The construction plant required to construct that jacket, which, by the way, is twice the size of anything in Bass Strait, does not exist in Australia. Further, only four

countries in the world have the plant capacity to roll the large diameter underwater pipeline and Australia, naturally, is not one of them. The Woodside order, in isolation, would not justify expenditure on the plant capacity required and no future orders are apparent. In these areas, which is where the bulk of the steel was being consumed, the honourable member for Adelaide demonstrates either a substantial lack of knowledge or the intention to deceive.
When the honourable member for Adelaide makes a plea for the steel industry in Australia he makes a plea for Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd. The Australian Financial Review of 8 December states:
Meares and Philips have also produced fascinating figures for BHP's competitiveness over the past 10 years.
From a base of 100 in 1972, an index of BHP's steel production per man hour has increased to J08 in 1980. The same index of its hourly labour cost stood at 329 in 1980.
For five other countries the figures in 1980 look like this . . . Japan's production per man hour 150, hourly labour costs 279-
By comparison, our production per man hour is 108 and our hourly labour cost is 329. The article continues:
United States productivity 102, labour costs 238; German productivity 136, labour costs 213; French productivity 141, labour costs 351, and UK.-
The UK. is often held up to us as an example of nationalisation-
productivity 91 (a 9 per cent drop), labour costs 401.
In fact, whenever BHP bothered to tender its prices were 20 per cent to 30 per cent above those of the international competition. Maybe the honourable member for Adelaide can ask himself why one company which is committed to sell its goods on the open market declines to allow another company to reduce its chances of success even when this company owns 8+ per cent of the operation as BHP does through Hematite Petroleum. Those directors would be too smart to accept an offer from their own company because they know the responsibilities of it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (10.53)-Twice this year the Channel 9 network, through its program 60 Minutes, has shown a report that compared Telecom Australia with Bell Canada-Telecom's equivalent in that country. The report was spearheaded by the journalist Jana Wendt. To say it was full of half-truths would be an understatement. The 60 Minutes program did not actually lie; it just failed to tell the whole truth. It was one

Adjournment

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3337

of the most misleading programs that, unfortunately, has been put to air in this country. It is ironic that only last night in this House we were discussing a piece of legislation concerning television licences. I wonder what will be said about this program when Channel 9's licence is next up for renewal.
I will move on to some of the things that 60 Minutes forgot to say. In 1981 Bell Canada's network increased by 141,200 services. Telecom more than doubled that figure with a network increase of 330,700 services. Also in 1981 Bell Canada added 61,300 instruments. Telecom added 531,500 instruments-over 8t times those of Bell Canada. While these might be just statistics to some people, I am sure everyone will understand my next few points. Telecom added more than 12,000 telex services and data modes. As we all know, Telecom supplies a very good public telegram service which, unfortunately, is a very unprofitable area of operation. In fact, Telecom loses some $30m a year in providing this efficient telegram service. The 60 Minutes program forgot to say that Bell Canada does not provide a public telegram service.
In Australia party lines are virtually a thing of the past. They represent only one per cent of the entire Australian network. That figure is continuing to drop. Some people will remember the old party lines where several people, sometimes whole streets of people, would use the one line. This has virtually been wiped out in Australia by Telecom. The 60 Minutes program forgot to say that Bell Canada has 450,000 party lines, that there are nearly half a million party lines in the Bell Canada system. That is a vast contrast to Australia.
The 60 Minutes reporters did say that local calls in the Canadian system were free. That is absolutely correct, but the reporters conveniently forgot to tell us that long distance calls are much more expensive in the Bell Canada network.
Further, Bell Canada's local call system enables a person only to ring someone within a few miles. That is, local calls are just that-local. Only the surrounding suburbs are included. After that short distance one is charged, and at a much more expensive rate than that charged by Telecom Australia. The 60 Minutes reporters forgot to say that Bell Canada operates in only 60 per cent of Canada. Of course, that 60 per cent is in the more densely populated and more profitable areas of that country. Telecom provides a service to the entire Australian continent. We have-this is widely recognised-one of the best telecommunications systems and services in the world. Telecom provides services even where they are

highly unprofitable. In fact, last year Telecom's subsidy to its unprofitable services was $290m. Most of that figure comes from Telecom's rural operations which, mainly because of distance and geography, are very costly. Of course, Bell
Canada does not have those problems because it does not provide that sort of service.
This type of attack on Telecom, which is deliberately misleading and scandalous in the ex-
treme, is a deliberate attempt to discredit Telecom and Australia's outstanding telecommunications system, for motives that could have far reaching consequences for our society; that is, the introduction of some large, profit-oriented private companies or consortiums that wish to enter the profitable parts of the telecommunications market. This would cause most charges, including that of local telephone calls, to rise by as much as 28 per cent. The people of Australia will not be hoodwinked by any discrediting campaign by the Channel 9 network or any other organisation. Whilst recognising that Telecom has its faults, I say that we have one of the best teIcommunications systems in the world. This is despite continued interference from the Federal Government and restraint on Telecom's access to adequate funding and markets placed upon it by this Government. The program did itself no credit with this report, which was full of half truths. Australia can be proud of the wonderful service that Telecom provides. Telecom remains wholly owned by the people of Australia.
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (10.58)-1 wish to express my sincere regret at the death yesterday of Israel's Ambassador to Australia, Mr Abraham Kidron. I was very shocked when Mr Speaker announced his death to the Parliament. As one who has had a good deal to do with Mr Kidron over the past three years, I certainly feel a deep sense of loss at his passing. His credentials speak for themselves when one assesses his career as a diplomat for his country. He had been the Ambassador to Australia since 1979 and he was non-resident Ambassador to Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Tonga and Western Samoa. He was Ambassador to Yugoslavia from 1963 to 1965 and Ambassador to the Philippines between 1965 and 1968. He held senior positions, including the position of Director-General, in Israel's foreign ministry. He was Ambassador to Holland between 1976 and 1977 and Ambassador to London between 1977 and 1979. I think Australia was very privileged to have a man with these credentials accredited to it during such a tumultuous period in Middle East history.
I mourn Mr Kidron's passing as a friend. He was a man of great wisdom, a sense of perspective

3338 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Adjournment

and broad vision. He was a warm, kind and very understanding man. Representing a country in a corner of the world where passions run high and divisions run deep, he always retained his sense of balance and perspective in his staunch advocacy for his country, which led many of us in this Parliament to respect greatly his counsel and his view of this most complex part of the world. His passing is a great loss to Israel, to Australia, to sensible diplomacy, to me personally and to others in this Parliament who had a great deal to do with him during his stay in Australia. I place on record in this Parliament my sincere sympathy to Mr Kidron's family and to the Government of Israel, a country which has lost a very loyal, dedicated and outstanding diplomat and citizen.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (11.0)~Like the road toll, the victims of the Fraser Government's economic policies are often considered in statistical terms. To illustrate the human tragedy caused by the policies of the Fraser Government I shall read a letter from one of my constitutents which states:
Dear Sir,
My husband was retrenched on the 22 October 1982. He had been employed with Transport Industries Pty Ltd for 23 years as a branch manager and operations controller. He was given no option other than early retirement.
Since then he has registered with CES and applied for social security. We receive $121.96 per week between us. We had managed to save a little money, consequently the maximum unemployment benefit has been reduced accordingly.
We have applied for all manner of employment, including cleaning and ironing. We have not been successful even though we are prepared to accept any position. We find, my husband at 57 years and myself at 54 years are now considered too old to employ, no matter what we apply for. My husband even though he joined the RAAF in 1943 cannot receive a service pension at 60 years because he was not sent overseas, even though he volunteered, so we must survive till 65 years of age for the old age pension.
Could someone please tell me how we and many similar to us, can continue to pay off our houses, pay rates etc. on unemployment benefits for the next 8 years.
At our age we have tried our best to raise and educate our children and be able to have a dignified retirement; but this government allows no dignity to us. All unemployment assistance is geared to the young.
Why can't we be allowed concessions on rates, telephone, car regisration and pharmaceuticals in conjunction with unemployment benefitsO This is a necessity for the older unemployed or will we be reduced to living in poverty. Is this the quality of life for Australianso
You say the cost of retiring people at 55 years and enabling the young to work is too costly, but you sweep the social costs of the young unemployed under the carpet. The social cost of unemployment will eventually have to be answered for and it will be much greater than allowing for early retirement.
It is often forgotten that our age group was born and brought up in a depression and it's unbelievable to finish our working life in another depression. It is also forgotten that most of our age group have been earning money since we were 14 years old to help our parents.

We have never cheated on taxes like some of the wealthy and yet we have always had to pay higher taxes hecause of the cheats.
What is not considered is the social costs when workers like us no longer trust the politicians or the political system we find ourselves under. Do you think we can ever pass on to the young a belief in political integrity? Do you think we will ever give them the faith to believe in this societyO
It is expected that the workers would take wage cuts for the benefit of Australia, but you allow corporations, businesses, politicians and the wealthy to lie, cheat and evade taxes.
In the past you have allowed concessions to companies to increase employment. I can give you an example of how much this helped the unemployed. My husband's former employer sold some of their old trucks, bought new trucks and claimed investment allowance, but not one new job was created. You also allow this firm to supply company cars (Mercedes) to the managing director's wife, son and private secretary, none of which are used for company business. Give us some dignity, bring the retirement age down to 55 years and give us further concessions. We have been ripped off for too long. We have been told by officers of the CES that my husband has very little or no chance of finding full-time employment again.
It is the workers' earning a living wage, not cut back in wages or unemployment benefits, which will restore the economy. Workers need to spend nearly all their earnings on basic necessities.
But companies' profits do not get spent on essentials, they just keep amassing profits and their top executives buy luxuries, often from overseas, which do not stimulate recovery. . There must be a change of attitude by those in power-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (11.5)~The honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) raised an issue which I must say is germane to the issue I want to raise. I am particularly concerned, as anyone in this House would be, about the dreadful impact that unemployment has on both the young and, of course, the mature people who are finding it particularly difficult to get jobs once they have been retrenched. I was very concerned, however, to hear the tone of the speech by the honourable member for Hotham which indicates that it is all the Government's fault and that it has nothing to do with excessive wage claims, increasing costs and people striking themselves out of jobs~like so many people in Port Kembla who have kept up non-stop industrial disruption. Of course, it is none of their fault; it is all the Government's fault!
It is interesting to hear the note that the honourable member for Hotham came across with when he said that it is no wonder that people no longer trust the political system. It seems to me that many trade union leaders in this nation are deliberately creating an atmosphere in which, in fact, there will be increasing unemployment so that opposition to the political system will be generated among those people who have lost their

Adjournment

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3339

jobs as a result of actions by those very trade union leaders. I am not union bashing in general. As a former executive member of my trade union I know what I am talking about, unlike so many of the honourable members sitting opposite. I suggest that there are some members of the Labor movement, including those sitting opposite, who would prefer to see a situation in which people have los! confidence in the political system because they want to replace it with another system by other devices.
I suggest that what the Government is doing in fact in positive terms to try to help soften the blow, apart from all it is doing to try to stimulate the economy, has not been recognised by honourable members opposite. For example, my region, the Illawarra region, which has been significantly affected by unemployment-it certainly has the largest rate of unemployment anywhere in Australia-will, under the agreement that the Federal Government at least came to in terms of a wages pause, in fact receive multi-millions of dollars under the $300m employment assisting arrangements this Government is introducing. Of course, there would have been a lot more to come from the State Government of New South Wales had it followed the Federal Government's lead and also introduced a 12-month wages pause. Unfortunately, it has introduced only a six months' pause. Nonetheless, some of the proceeds of that pause will find their way also into the Illawarra region. My only regret is that it is not a lot more. The New South Wales Government is not doing as much as the Federal Government is doing by having a 12-month pause.
I am very grateful indeed that the Government has agreed to the proposal I put to it that, in fact, regions such as the Illawarra which have a specific unemployment problem should receive specific and additional assistance to that which is to be generally available. I was glad to see that in the statement of the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) on this matter. It seems to me to be vital that that should happen. I am also glad to see that following the request by the local councils in that region the Federal Government is to approve itself-not through the State Government-the schemes, many of which are being put up by local government directly. Certainly, the Wollongong Council has been most alert under its Lord Mayor, Alderman Frank Arkell, in putting up very sensible schemes to the Federal Government on which the money saved will be spent. I want to stress that this freeze represents a situation in which money can be directed to assist those who are unemployed by providing specific employment schemes. I am overjoyed to see also that the

Government has agreed to allow councils and local bodies to employ people on a casual basis so that the long term unemployed can, in fact, get their unemployment benefit plus up to $35 a week by working part time without losing their entitlement. This is a most humane proposal. I am glad that this proposal, which I put up some years ago, has been accepted by the Government.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (11.9)-1t always gives me a great sense of relief to come into the chamber and listen to Lewis Carroll at this time of night. Tonight I want to talk about the 1980-81 Budget by which this conservative Government imposed new taxes on the mining industry. This new impost, by way of the appli-
cation of sales taxes to material used in the construction of railways, was savagely felt in the Pilbara. In the Pilbara the most efficient iron ore industry in the world exists. These mines rely on rail for haulage of the ore from the mine site to the coast. The mines are many hundreds of miles from shipping points. The decision of this Government to impose a sales tax impost on material used in railway construction quite obviously was very detrimental. Sales tax on material is not the only impost. It is also levied on freight on very bulky items such as railway sleepers and railway lines. This probably puts the real cost at somewhere near 30 per cent.
Members of this Government blinkered by their ideology, blinded by their ignorance and driven by their desperation have repeatedly, in this House and elsewhere, spoken about the effect of strikes and the consequent loss of iron ore sales. The truth is that not one ounce of iron ore sales has ever been lost because of industrial action. Whilst I lament the frequency of strikes in this industry, there are many causes. In any case, some of the companies have been doing far better than others in this regard. A gross distortion of the truth is often made by members of the Government when they talk about the effect of strikes in areas such as the Pilbara. I am prepared to accept that these lies are promulgated more out of ignorance than malice. I suppose that is to be expected from a collection of failed farmers, middle management misfits, sheltered professionals and general refugees from the real world.
We are talking about the most efficient industry of its kind in the world. The industry contributes greatly to our export earnings-a crucial factor in these days of a high current account deficit, managed and contrived by the Government opposite. The response of the Government has been to load the industry with additional costs. Not content with the stupidity and greed of the 1980-81 Budget, this year adjustments to the sales

3340 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Adjournment

tax exemptions and rebate system have put
another impost of about $5m on the mining indus-
try in the Pilbara area. This impost, of course, affects all rural areas-the fishing industry, the
mining industry and people in the country gener-
ally. It is said that the National Party did not make more effort to stand up for the people it
purports to represent but I guess that is the hist~ry
of the Parliament. It is an example of how illconceived and hasty was the Government's diesel
fuel tax legislation.
Let me give honourable members the Government's definition of mining. It is the exploration for or the extraction and beneficiation of minerals and their transport to a place of dressing. One large mining company in the Pilbara extracts its ore on site and dresses and beneficiates it on site. It then hauls the finished product over many hundreds of miles to the rail. If the Act were enforced, that company would have to pay the diesel fuel tax on that rail route. The other company in the Pilbara does it the other way round. It extracts the lump ore on the site, rails it to the port and processes it there. That company is clearly absolved from the responsibility of paying the tax. I will bet London to a brick that, although the law quite clearly catches one company, no attempt will be made to recoup that tax. If the Government did so, it would be most unjust. It would probably have very serious effects on an industry which, at this moment, is fighting desperately to survive.
The industry is not desperate to survive because of the price of iron ore so much as the quantity. The Japanese have cut back on sales from their most efficient producers. They have given contracts, because of their own misconceptions about world markets to inefficient producers. It is these smaller contracts which they have had to honour. I believe that, in the long run, the Japanese will have to come back to the efficient large Australian producers for their own survival but, in the meantime, things are very grim for Australia. This situation has never been helped by a succession of Liberal governments. I remember very well, when I was campaigning in 1980, that the general manager of one large company said to me: 'What is the use? Doug Anthony is a lackey for Charles Court-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MAHER (Lowe) (I1.14)-Last week I had the opportunity to visit a very well equipped and pleasant little school in my electorate-the Holy Innocents School in Croydon. It has an enrolment in the primary and infants department of 360 pupils. The principal, a Presentation sister, showed me around. She told me that 88 per cent of the pupils come from familes in which English is not spoken or, at best, is the second language. This is a common situation in my electorate. It is an area where a large number of ethnic families have

settled. They have made a great contribution to our nation. What astounded me at the school, when I inspected the library which was in a converted cottage and was barely adequate, was the fact that the library is open only two days a week.
I questioned the principal. She said that the school would very much like to have the library open for the whole week so the children, particularly the children with language difficulties, could use this important facility in the school. I then rang some of the other schools and visited some of the other schools nearby. I contacted the principal at All Hallows School at Five Dock-a primary and infants school with 400 pupils, 85 per cent of whom are of Italian extraction, either speaking Italian at home or from families in which Italian is the first language. The principal there explained to me also that her school library is open only two days a week, although she had come from a bigger school ~nd she had regarded the library in any school as bemg the heart of a school, the centre of learning for little children in a school. She told me that her school has Italian language books in the library. These are available to the children. They can take them home for their parents. It upset me no end that these kiddies the children of the migrants who have come to Australia, are unable to have access to a school library five days a week.
I contacted some of the state schools. I contacted the principal at Five Dock Public School, a school which next year will have an enrolment of 387 students. The principal there explained that 38 per cent of the children in the school-the largest group-are from Italian speaking families; children speaking English make up 35 per cent of the school; and children from other nationalities make up 27 per cent of the school. This principal is also most concerned because under the State funding arrangements her school library will be open only three days a week.
I visited Burwood Public School this week to make inquiries. This is quite a large primary school with 545 pupils, 70 per cent of whom come from ethnic families. That library is being substantially renovated by the State Government. It is doing a splendid job. More than $Im is being spent on the library and administration block. But next year the library will be open for primary and infant students only four days a week. So much for the library being the centre of the school and the heart of learning in the school. Burwood Public School has a need for a library five days a week because there are two classes for deaf pupils. These are only small classes but the teachers need to be able to have access to the library. There is another small class of 18 children who are mildly and intellectually retarded pupils. At Burwood there a:e two E~L teacher.s in the infants section and 2.2 m the pnmary sectIOn. Both Burwood Public School and Five Dock Public School have been assisted under the program for assisted schools in New South Wales.

Adjournment

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3341

Migrant adult literacy is a Commonwealth responsibility. The Commonwealth meets all the costs of teaching English to migrants. I submit that the Commonwealth should bear the cost of opening school libraries in areas where there are high ethnic populations, where migrants are settling, where the children of migrants are being educated. These kiddies should have access to a school library in a primary school, be it a government school or a state school, on each school day. I have invited the Minister for Education (Senator Peter Baume) to visit some of these schools. In June I asked him to visit All Hallows School. He still has not responded. I draw this matter to the attention of the House because I believe this coming generation of young Australians is suffering because of the attitude of this Federal Government and its indifference to learning programs for children.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (I \.l9)--A crucial element missing from a number of the economic analyses made of the current economic crisis affecting Australia and the world economy is the role of transnational corporations. Some several hundred transnational corporations, many of which have economic resources larger than small nation states, are manipulating the key international trade and financial sectors in order to maximise their profits. With subsidiary companies controlled from board rooms in New York, Tokyo, London and Berlin, these giant corporations can transfer their resources of finance, labour, raw materials and finished products across national boundaries with impunity. With the support of clever accountants and solicitors they manipulate the controls and regulations of nation states to take advantage of taxation laws, import and export controls and currency changes. Delayed payments, transfer pricing, inter-company trade, relocation of centres of production are all business processes which are used by these corporations, usually to the detriment of the economic goals of the nation states. It is estimated that transnational corporations now control between one-quarter and one-third of all world production. In such economic circumstances the claim by conservative economists and politicians that a worldwide reduction of tariffs and quotas would allow free market forces to operate is so much hogwash.
In Australia the heavy foreign penetration of our economy, second only to Canada, means that transnational corporations can make business decisions which damage the Australian economy and circumvent what little government planning exists. The pronouncement last week by the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) that Australia must now relate even more with countries of the Pacific rim has an ominous ring. With the willing cooperation of the governments of such countries as the Philippines, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore and Thailand, transnational corporations have set

up free trade zones where there are no government barriers to the movement of goods or finance in and
out with the bonus of government tax concessions and subsidies. Trade union activities are strictly limited. There are no minimum wage levels or hours of work and welfare facilities are virtually non-existent. These zones have been created in Asia, Africa and Latin America and provide an international army of unskilled, unemployed people to compete with the workers of more traditional industrial centres. The denationalisation and deregulation measures of the Federal Government serve only to accelerate the mechanism whereby at least 20 per cent of the population of Australia will become irrelevant to the economic process.
The Federal Government must take urgent measures to restore Australia's economic sovereignty. First and foremost, the Australian Government must take control of the financial system of the country. Capital inflow and outflow must be closely monitored and controlled, with foreign capital inflow to be on the basis of loan capital rather than equity. As I have mentioned in other places, planning agreements and public audits involving tripartite arrangements between governments, unions and corporation managements must be established. Trade unions must be able to intervene on behalf of the workers in planning and production decisions, as well as in the more traditional areas of wages and working conditions. Government must make tariff protection, subsidies, investment allowances and export grants conditional
upon companies involving unions and government in key investment and production decisions. Prices, royalties and taxes must all be monitored and levied for the benefit of Australian consumers by bodies such as the Prices Justification Tribunal, the Australian Taxation Office and State pricing authorities. Environmental, consumer and other interest groups should be funded so that they can play an effective role in the annual public audit of the activities and social responsibilities of the transnational corporation.
Secondly, it will be essential for a Federal Government which has the will to implement the above-mentioned measures to ensure that the Public Service is responsive and innovative in assisting the Government to achieve its aim. Workers' decision making must also be an integral part of the Public Service system, subject always to government policy and will involve a long term restructuring of the Service. The present top echelons of public servants are conservative in nature and the system of permanent heads of departments perpetuates the rigidity of the response of the Public Service to policies of a radical nature. This system
must be changed.
Thirdly, together with the introduction of regulatory controls there must be an extension of public ownership in key sectors of the economy. The creation of a resources development fund, a hy-

3342 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Adjournment

drocarbons corporation and the expansion of the Australian Industry Development Corporation can all be used to provide equity capital for public investment from Australian sources.
Fourthly, it is essential for more information to be gained on the degree of foreign ownership and control through the Bureau of Mineral Resources, the Foreign Investment Review Board and the Australian Bureau of Stati~tics. The Federal Government must reappraise transnatior;al corporation activity in the light of a planned economic policy. The sectors of the economy must be identified where transnational collaboration is considered appropriate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)--Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Is the honourable member seeking a further call?
Mr MILTONYes. Th:: sectors of the economy must be identified where transnational collaboratiol1 is considered appropriate and those sectors where only national firms, public or private, are to participate. Subject to such an appraisal, only those transnational corporations whose activities and behaviour would be compatible with the chosen form of development would be selected.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-Order! The House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 14 December 1982, at 10 a.m. in accordance with the resolution agreed to this day.
House adjourned at 11.24 p.m.
NOTICES
The fol!owing Notices were given:
Mr Hunt to move-
That in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act I%9. it is expedient to carr) out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament. O'Imel): Redevelopment of Brisbane International Airport-Remainder of works of phase
- Domestic passenger terminal and Depar~ment of aviation hangar.
Mr M&cphee to present a Bill for an Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and fOt certain other purposes.
Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to make pruvision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Sir James Killen to move:
Thdt I he following orders of the day. government business, be discharged:
Road Safety -Standing C0mmitteRepon on Tyre SafetyG'wernment Response M;nisterial Statement Motion to take note of Paper: Resumption of debate.

Drug Trafficking Report of Commonwealth-New South Wales Joint task Force Paper and Ministerial Statement Motion to take note of Papers: Resumption of debate.
Qantas Airways Limited--Report for year ending 31 March 1982 Motion to take note of Paper: Resumption of debate.
Commonwealth Administration Review--Ministerial Statement Motion to take note of Paper: Resumption of debate.
Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection SystemsCommitlee of Inquiry Notes taken by Executive OfficerPaper and Ministerial Statement .Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.
Housing Industry - Indicative planning Council-paper Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
Development and Management of Water ResourcesPapers-Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.
Social Welfare Objectives-Ministerial Statement Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
United States Naval Communications Station Agreement: Resumption of debate.
Federated Ship Painters and Dockers' Union-- 4th Interim Report of Royal Commission -- Paper and Ministerial statement Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.
Petroleum Products Freight Subsidy Scheme-Ministerial Statement -- Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
New ParliaMent House Updated Building Budget-- Ministerial Statement Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
National Communications Satellite System--Paper and Ministerial Statement Motion to take note of papers: Resumption of del)ate.
Australia's Demographic Trends. 1982 and 1982-83 Immigration Program--Ministerial Statement and PapersMoti"n to take note of papers: Resumption of debate.
Australia Council --Report -Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
Advance to the Minister for Finance 1980-81-- Statement of Expenditure: Consideration in C0mmittee.
Museum of Australia Annual ReportMotion to take note of papa: Resumption of debate.
Science and the Environment -Senate Standing Committee Report on Australian Marine ScienceGovernment Response-- Motion to take note of paper: Resumption of debate.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Bill 1982: Second reading-- Re,umption of debate.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Bill 1982: Second readingResumption of debate.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Departments
Mr Barry Jones to ask Mr Speaker:
(I) How many awards are presently in force covering employees of the Parliamentary Departments.
(2) What is the (a) title (b) date and (c) coverage of each award.
(3) Under what jurisdiction was each award made.
(4) How may each award be varied.

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3343 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Wool Research Trust Fund and Meat Research Trust Account
(Question No. 5038)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(I) What are the Wool Research Trust Fund and the Meat Research Trust Account used for.
(2) Who decides how the trust moneys will be allocated.
(3) Where does the trust fund money come from.
(4) Which projects have received grants from these 2 trust funds in each of the last 5 years.
(5) Have allocations from the trusts been paid into superannuation funds in CSIRO.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Section 70 (I) of the Wool Industry Act 1972 provides that amounts standing to the credit of an account in the Wool Research Trust Fund may be expended, with the approval of the Minister,
(a) for the following purposes; (i) scientific, technical and economic research in connection with the production or use of wool or wool products; (ii) the application of the results of any such research;
(iii) the training of persons in connection with the wool industry;
(iv) the dissemination of information and advice relating to scientific, technical and economic matters in connection with the wool industry;
(v) the publication of reports, periodicals, books and papers in connection with.any research referred to in sub-paragraph (I) of this paragraph; and
(vi) any purpose incidental to a purpose referred to in this paragraph;
(b) in the reimbursement of expenses incurred by the (Wool) Corporation in or in connection with the performance by the Corporation of a function of the Corporation referred to in the last preceding section; and
(c) in payment of remuneration and allowances payable under this Act to, and in the reimbursement of expenses incurred by, members of committees established by the Corporation for the purposes of its functions under the last preceding section,
and not otherwise.
Section 6 of the Meat Research Act 1960 provides money standing to the credit of the Meat Research Trust Account may, with the approval of the Minister, be expended:
(a) for the purposes of encouraging the export from Australia of meat and other products of the slaughter of cattle, sheep, lambs and goats, of encouraging the raising of cattle, sheep, lambs and goats in the Territories forming part of the Commonwealth, by means of: (i) scientific, economic or technical research in connection with matters related either directly or indirectly to those purposes; (ii) the training of persons for the purposes of any such research; (iii) the dissemination of information and advice in connection with scientific economic or technical

matters related either directly or indirectly to those purposes; and
(v) the publication of reports, periodicals, books and papers in connection with scientific, economic or technical matters related either directly or indirectly to those purposes;
(b) in payment of fees, expenses and allowances payable to a member of the Committee or the deputy of a member under section fourteen of this Act;
(c) in payment of fees, expenses and allowances payable to persons appointed by the Minister under section fifteen of this Act; and
(d) in payment of amounts payable to the (Meat and Livestock) Corporation under section 16 of this Act.
(2) Section 69 of the Wool Industry Act provides that it is a function of the Wool Corporation to make recommendations to the Minister with respect to expenditure, for a purpose referred to in paragraph (a) of sub-section (I) of section 70, of moneys standing to the credit of an account in the Wool Research Trust Fund other than expenditure by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) or the Bureau of Agricultural Economics (RAE).
In relation to expenditure by the CSIRO or BAE out of the moneys standing to the credit of the Fund, it is a function of the Corporation to furnish to the Minister advice required by him to assist him in considering proposals for such expenditure in relation to the needs of the wool industry.
To assist the Corporation in making such recommendations with respect to expenditure on wool research, the Corpor. ation has established six wool research advisory committees which make recommendations to the Board of Australian Wool Corporation. Five of the research advisory committees are concerned with production, harvesting, distribution, textile and economic research whilst one committee is concerned with overall policy on allocations and determination of priorities for wool research, particularly across disciplinary boundaries.
In respect of expenditure from the Meat Research Trust Account, Section 8 of the Meat Research Act 1960 establishes an Australian Meat Research Committee with, inter alia, the following functions:
8 (2) (b) to formulale plans with respect to matters in relation to which moneys standing to the credit of the Research Account may be expended and to make recommendations to the Minister with respect to expenditure of those moneys.
(3) In the case of Wool Research Trust Fund the primary source of revenue is a tax of 0.5 per cent contributed by growers on the gross revenue of their shorn wool sold. In the case of the Meat Research Trust Account the primary source of revenue is a proportion of the Funds raised by the livestock Slaughter Levy and the Livestock Export Charge. In addition to these industry contributed funds the Commonwealth matches approved expenditure from both the Wool and Meat research accounts on a dollar for dollar basis. Miscellaneous funds are received from sale of wool and livestock used for reo search and purchased from the funds, from revenue from royalities on patents, from the sale of assets and from interest on investments.
(4) Projects to which funds have been allocated from the two trust funds in each of the last 5 years are listed below.

3344 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

4 (a) WOOL RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS SUPPORTED 1978-79
AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION
Quality Shearing Service Wool Harvesting Public Relations, Extension and Infor-
mation Feedback Development of Ultrasonic and Other Novel Wool Sever-
ance Means Automated Mechanical Shearing Chemical Defleecing Mechanical Restraint Shearing Labour Relations Mobile Shearing Complex Removal of Chemically Weakened Wool Grants to State Departments of Agriculture for Travel and
Publications Comb and Cutter Materials Direct Drive Electric Motors for Handpieces Development of a Continuous Press for High Density Shed
Bales Pilot Dense Bale Handling Trials Sampling of Wool for High Density Bales Processing Consequences of Alternative Clip Preparation
Procedures Improved Packaging, Handling and Transporting Wool in
Association with Jumbo Baling Industry Understanding and Adoption of Proven Research
Results Economic Analysis of Technical Developments Determining Priorities in Wool Economic Research

AUSTRALIAN WOOL TESTING AUTHORITY
The Feasibility of Introducing Staple Length Measurement for Individual Sale Lots

CSIRO
Animal Health
Diagnosis and Control of Regulatory Diseases-Footroot Ecology and Control of Parasites in Central Eastern Australia

Animal Production
Nutrient Requirements of the Grazing Animal Evaluation of Chemicals for Use as Defleecing Agents Prevention of Fleece Rot and Fly Strike Determination of Physiological Criteria for Animal Selection Fertilisers in Animal Production Mineral SupplementationTrace Elements Breeding of Sheep for Efficient Wool Production Husbandry and Management of Chemical Shearing

Plant Industry
Breeding for Aphid Resistance Pastures for Animal Growth Integration of Grazing and Cropping Systems

Sheep Blowfly

Entomology

Wildlife Research Biological Control of Rabbits

Textile Industry Pre-mill Procedures Fleece Production and Harvesting

Yarn and Fabric Manufacture
Topmaking, including removal of vegetable matter Short staple processing Self twist

New methods of processing Improvements to existing processing Processing performance of different wools

Improvements in Final Products
Dimensional stability--- general Dimensional stability-laundering Setting Wrinkling Flammability Moth proofing Other improvements

New Outlets for Wool
Cigarette fi Iters Others

Effluent

Environmental Impact Studies

Miscellaneous Sheep by-products

Strategic Research
Wool structure Wool chemistry Wool physics Polymer chemistry

TEXTILE PHYSICS
Pre-mill Procedures
Packaging and transport Raw wool measurement Wool testing equipment Worsted processing trial-all principal processing characteristics as variables

Central Information Service
The setting up of the Australian Sheep Industry Information System

Land Resources Management Temperate Rangelands

NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Applied Economic Research in the Wool IndustryTrangie Agricultural Research Station
Joining and Mating Strategies with Sheep
Sheep Fertility Service Wagga Wagga Resistance to Insecticides in the Primary Sheep Blowfly Genetic Improvement of Reproductive Performance and Blowfly Strike Resistance in Merino Sheep Nutritional Management of Breeding Flocks of Merinos for Wool Production Plant Nutritional Study of Central Western New South Wales A Study of the Interaction of Rates of Sulphur Fertiliser with the Selenium Status of Grazing Sheep on the NorthWest Slopes of New South Wales Preliminary Evaluation of Temperate Perennial Pasture Species Collected in the Soviet Union Synthesis of Data from Long-term Fertiliser Experiments Definition of Maintenance Requirement Functions for P and S Fertilization Thiaminase I Enzyme of Plants in Relation to the Occurrence and Control of Polioencephalomalacia (Irreversible Brain Damage) in Sheep The Effects of Climate and Soil Acidity on the Efficiency of Superphosphate Use

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3345

Performance Evaluation of Vesicular-Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Grown in Artificial Culture
Determination of the Distribution and Magnitude of Production Responses to Selenium Supplementation in Northern New South Wales
Management Strategies for Highly Fertile Merino Sheep An Investigation into Nematode Resistance to Anthelmintics in Sheep Promotion of Objective Measurement to the Merino Breeding Industry in New South Wales
Research Fellowship
Dr P. G. Williams, NSWDA (Biological and Chemical Research Institute, Rydalmere) An Investigation of Techniques for Culturing Vesicular Arbuscular (VA) Mycorrhiza on Artificial Media
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Plant Introduction, Evaluation and Establishment of Introduced and Native Pasture Species
Grazing Land Productivity and Stability Animal/Plant Interactions in Native Pastures of Western Queensland Adaption and Productivity of Annual Medics Evaluation of Shallow Storage Cropping in North Western Queensland Studies in Ovine Reproduction Thyroid Function in Sheep in Relation to Meat, Milk and Wool Production Modelling a Breeding Flock in North West Queensland to Aid Research in Wool Production and Reproduction Grazing Management and Its Effect on Reproduction Control of Ectoparasites in Sheep Chemical Shearing Investigations
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Sheep and Wool Extension Officers Graduate Officers Selection of Strong Wool Merino Sheep Involving Reproduction Rate and Body Weight Breeding of Improved Cultivars of Lucerne Primarily for Use in South Australia Genetic Improvements of the South Australian Strong Wool Merino by Reduction of Incidence of Body Strike (In association with the University of Adelaide) Animal Production from a Low Oestrogen Cultivar of Trifolium subterranean sub-species Yanninicum The Reproductive Performance of Sheep Grazing a Low Oestrogen Cultivar of Trifolium subterranean sub-species Yanninicum The Genetic Improvement of the Reproductive Performance of Flocks Grazing Oestrogenic Pastures Consequence of Finding New Naturalised Subterranean Clover Ecotypes in South Australia Biological Control of Sitona Weevil Maintenance of Arid Plant Communities by Manipulation of Paddock Structure and Sheep Numbers
ROSEWORTHY AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE
Roseworthy Selection Experiments
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Effectiveness of 'Lipiodol' in Lifetime Prevention of Goitre in Ewes
Study of Wool Characters Affecting Fleece Rot and Flystrike in Tasmanian Sheep
SuperphosphateEffects on Pasture and Sheep Production

VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Improving the Reproductive Efficiency of Ewe Flocks Investigation of the Relationship Between Fleece Productivity (Including Fleece Rot Resistance) and Characteristics as Measured in Skin Sections Selenium Deficiency in Sheep Soil Testing as a Guide to the Phosphate Needs of Pastures Polioencephalomalacia in Ruminants Evaluation of Cutting Trials as a Means of Predicting the Likely Animal Performance Development of a Superphosphate Prediction Model for Victorian Pastures Growth and Development of Sheep Whole Oat Grain Feeding of Ewes and Lambs During Drought Distribution of Economic Benefits to Sections of the Sheep Industry National Flock Performance Recording Scheme (Flocktest) Internal Parasites of Weaner Sheep Use of Lupins in Feed in Drought Feeding Strategies Epidemiological Studies of Nematode and Liver Fluke Infestations in Sheep The Evaluation of Management Strategies for the Sheep Industry of Victoria 'Saving Burnt Livestock' Pamphlet Physiological Control of Wool Shedding in Wiltshire Horn Sheep
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
New Subterranean Clover Strains for Established Pasture Areas
Agronomic Evaluation of New Early Maturing Crossbreds of Subterranean Clover
Nutrition and Ewe Fertility Investigation into the Cause and Effect of Annual (Wimmera) Rye-Grass Toxicity of Livestock (In association with Murdoch University) Interactions of Phosphorus and Sulphur on Pasture Growth Ecological and Resistance Studies of Sheep Blowfly Species with Emphasis on Alternative Primary Species Laboratory Surgery and Sheep Handling Facilities Chemical Shearing
WALTER AND ELIZA HALL INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
C. B. Chapman (Vic. DA., Ph.D.)--Immunological Aspects of the Host Parasite Relationship Between Fasciola hepatica and Cattle and Sheep
DEPARTMENT OF CROWN LANDS AND SURVEY -VICTORIA
Research into Inherited Resistance to Myxomatosis in Selected Wild Rabbit Populations
MELBOURNE COLLEGE OF TEXTILES
Suint-Wax Testing and Survey (Victoria)
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE, ADELAIDE
Responses in Merino Weaner Sheep to Management Procedures for the Control of Gastro-Intestinal Nematodes (In association with the SA Department of Agriculture and Fisheries)
CAULFIELD INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, VICTORIA
Decision Making by Australian Retailers

3346 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
The Biochemical Basis of Anthelmintic Action Chemical Control of the Primary Sheep Blowfly Identification of Specific Blowfly Enzymes Essential for Larval Development
Postgraduate Scholarships
E. M. Bennet, Department of Zoology (lndep. Ph.D.)-- The Biochemistry of Drug Resistance in Strongyloid Nematodes
R. M. Sandeman (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Zoology --In Vitro Studies of the Immune Response of Sheep to Fasciola hepatica
L. M. Russel (lndep, Ph.D.) Department of Zoology Biochemical Effects of the Anthelmintics of Fasciola hepatica In Vivo and In Vitro
M. D. Gorrell (lndep, Ph.D.) Department of Parasitology-Isolation of Antigens to Liver Fluke for Use in Diagnosis and Vaccination
H. J. Kane (lndep, Ph.D.) Department of ParasitologyMechanism of Action of Anthelmintics
E. N. Washington (lndep, Ph.D.) Department of Parasitology Genetics of Drug Resistance
R. J. Martin (NSWDA, PhD.) Department of Weed Ecology - Distribution, Ecology and Control of Bathurst and Noogoora Burr
DEAKIN UNIVERSITY
Studies on the Photochemical Stability of Organophosphorus Insecticides for Textile Mothproofing and on the Synthesis of Fibre Reactive Derivatives
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
Stud) of Immunity to Ovine Squamous Cell Carcinoma (Skin Cancer)
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Molybdenum Metabolism in Sheep
MONASH UNIVERSITY
Macrocyclic Metal Complexes Based on Amino AcidsPossihle New Dyes for Wool
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Assessment of Trace Element Status of Pastures The Use of Oestrus Synchronising Agents in Sheep A.!, Programs Assessment of Manganese and Iron Status of Pastures The Effect of Superphosphate and Selenium in Sheep Investigation of the Effects of Corynebacterium pseudotuherculosis Infection on Fertility in Merino Rams Skin/Fleece Characteristics of Sheep Associated with Susceptibility to Body Strike by Blowflies
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
Interactions between Nitrogen and Phosphorus Assimilation in the Symbiotic Association Between Legumes, Rhizobium and Mycorrhizal Fungi
Trend Analysis in Sheep Station Vegetation Productivity Diffusion of Objective Measurement Comparative Study of Rural Credit Institutions
Postgraduate Scholarships
M. H. Andrew (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of BotanyShrub and Herbage Selection by Sheep in the Arid Zone
D. Cooper (lndep, Ph.D.) Department of Entomology-- Use of Pathogens to Control Heliothis punctigera

Decision Analysis of Wool Purchases-Selection to Optimise Delivery into a Range of Top Production Lines
Optimum Wool Inventory Policies Under Reserve Price and Acquisition Schemes
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
The Physiology of Circulating Hormones in Reproduction Endocrine Control of Lactation in the Ewe and Its Relationship to Nutritional Status (In association with the Queensland Department of Primary Industries) Physiology and Pathology of Clover Disease Genetic Studies on the Australian Sheep Blowfly in Relation to Its Control by Genetic Means Development of a Preventive Segment for Inclusion in a Minimum Labour Input Management Program for Commercial Sheep Flocks (In association with Victorian Department of Agriculture) Engineering Aspects of Sheep and Wool Handling (M usheep Project) Sheep Behaviour Development of Improved Means for Mechanical Wool Severance Mechanised Sheep Handling for Automated and Other Shearing Systems Pneumatic and Mechanical Wool Handling for Automated and Other Shearing Systems Synthesis and Conformation of Peptides Forming BetaTurns in Proteins An Econometric Model of Australian Agriculture Methods of Minimising the Economic Disruption Caused by the Discovery of an Exotic Sheep Disease Agent in Australia
Research Fellowships
Dr T. Stelmasiak, Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences Endocrinological Basis of Reproductive Efficiency in Rams
Dr I. J. Clarke, Department of PhysiologyPhysiology and Pathology of Clover Disease
Postgraduate Scholarships
D. J. Boon, Department of Genetics (Indep, M.Sc.)- Cytogenetics of Sex Chromosomes of L. cuprina and Genetics of Storage Proteins in L. cuprina
A. D. Craig (Indep, M.Ag.Sc.) Department of Agriculture and Forestry-Winter Productivity of Pastures in Southern Australia
W. E. Holmes (QDPI, M.Sc.Agric.) Department of Agriculture Extension-Adjustment Options of Wool growers A. P. L. Callinan (Vic. DA, Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary ParasitologyModels of Life Cycles of Sheep Nematodes
UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND
Sheep Metabolism and Nutrition Superphosphate Decisions in High Rainfall Areas of Eastern Australia Sulphur Rates, Sources and Residual Values for Pastures Low Productivity Syndromes in Sheep The Phenology and Value for Grazing of Native Cool Season Perennial Grasses Impact of Increasing Cost Structure on Australian Wool Supply Impact of Structural Change in the Australian Wool Growing Sector-Its Likely Implications for Wool Growing by Farm Type and Region

UNIVERSITY OF IOWA
Commercial and Research Applications of Wool Blending Procedures

Postgraduate Scholarships
R. H. Chisholm (lndep, Ph.D.) Department of Agronomy and Soil Science-Phosphorus Utilisation by Pasture Species

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3347

R. M. Dixon (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition. Nitrogen Nutrition in the Lower Gut. DIsCI-
pline: Nutritional Biochemistry of Ruminants J. B. Rowe (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry
and Nutrition Digestion Metabolism of Sheep (Protem and
Amino Acid Requirements of Sheep) S. W. Cridland (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Ruminant
Nutrition Requirements of Amino Acids and Glucose for
Wool Growth and Growth

UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
The Development of Least Cost Management for Sheep Flocks at Fowlers Gap Arid Zone Research Station
Action of Pyrethroid-Type Insecticides on Physiology and Behaviour of Sheep Blowflies
Development of Testing of Principles of On-Farm LowCost Methods of Alkali-Treatment of Cereal and Grass Straws for Sheep and Wool Production During Droughts and
Supplementation Feeding Periods Principles and Equipment for Severing Wool Objective Specification of Some Speciality Wool Types Objective Specification of the Colour Greasy Wool Sale
Lots Fibre Diameter Distribution of Greasy Wool Sale Lots Survey of Staple Strength in Greasy Wool sale Lots A Study of Staple Length in Greasy Wool with Particular
Reference to Clip Preparation Standards Scour Liquor Effluent Treatment The Mechanical Properties of Wool Fibres The Study of Dyestuff Aggregation Bending Torsional and Dynamic Mechanical Properties of
Wool Fibres and Yarns The Mechanics of Warp Knitting Reactive Vaporisable Dyes for Transfer Printing Wool Tailorability and Performance Characteristics of Woven
and Knitted Wool and Wool Blend Outerwear Fabncs Crusher Card for Wool Carbonizing Lightfastness of Reactive Dyes and Hercosett Treated
Wool

Postgraduate Scholarships
P. C. Fahy (NSWDA, Ph.D.) Department of Microbiology -Stimulation of Plant Growth by the Application of Bacteria to Pasture Crop Seeds
R. B. Hacker (WADA, Ph.D.) Department of Botany-- Use of Low Level Aerial Photography for Range Condition Assessment

UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND

Sensory Physiology of the Sheep Blowfly in Relation to the

Prevention of Strike

Phosphorus Supplementation of Sheep

.

Treatment of Ram Spermatozoa with Formaldehyde Pnor

to Artificial Insemination

The Microenvironment of the Fleece and Skin of Merino

Sheep in Relation to Susceptibility to Body Strike

Heat Stress Effect on Fetal Growth and Skin Development

Postgraduate Scholarships

M. A. O'Flynn (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Animal

Breeding and Parasitology-Immunogenetic Aspects of Re-

sistance to Flystrike in Sheep

J. Hare (Indep, M.V.Sc.) Department of Animal

Husbandry---Immune Response to Commercially Available

Sheep Vaccine

G. R. M. Grant (Indep, M.Sc.) Department of

Entomology---Thermal Aspects of the Sensory Control of

Oviposition in Lucilia cuprina

.

M. E. Elliott (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Ammal Breed-

ing and parasitology--Immunogenetic Aspects of Resistance

to Flystrike in Sheep

UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY

Lamb Losses Associated with Injuries Received at Birth Pachytene Chromosome Relationships of Annual Medicago species Factors Determining Oviposition on Sheep by Lucilia

cuprina

. ..

Control and Subsequent Eradication of Foot-Rot: Slgmh-

cance of Antigenic Variation in B. nodosus

Radioimmunoassay of Growth Hormone. Thyroxine and

Insulin.

Factors Determining the Price Expectations of

Wool growers in NSW

Postgraduate Scholarships
P. C. Wynn (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry-Hormonal Control of Wool Growth
D. T. Pearce (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry-- Factors Affecting Sperm Transport and Fertilization in the Ewe
P. D. Claxton (NSWDA, Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Chemical Studies-B. nodosus Infection of Sheep Ovme Foot Rot

UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA Models of Sulphur Metabolism in Sheep

UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA

Oestrogenic Activity in Pasture Legumes

Subterranean Clover Gene Pool

Development of Methods for Measuring Organic Phos-

phate in Soils

..

The Role of Vesicular-Arbuscular Mycorrhlzas m the

Phosphati Uptake and Growth of Pasture Plants and Their

Possible Application as Seed or Soil Inoculants

Replacement of Existing Cultivars of Subterranean Clover

by New Genotypes

..

Intraspecific Variation in Phosphorus Response wlthm Sub-

terranean Clover Acid Phosphatase as a Diagnostic Test for Phosphate

Deficiency

Zinc and Sheep Reproduction Sheep Presentation Control Systems Engineering and

Shorn Wool Removal for Automated Shearing

Postgraduate Scholarships
P. E. Beale (SADA, Ph.D.) Department of AgronomyBreeding and Selection of Low Oestrogenicity and Kabatiella Resistance in Trifolium subterranean Sub-Species Yanninicum
D. I. Paynter (Vic. DA, Ph.D.) Department of Animal Science and Production-Selenium and Vitamm Metabolism m Ruminants
W. M. Porter (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition -Aspects of the Effect of VesicularArbuscular Mycorrhiza on Nutrient Uptake by Plants

OTHER ORGANIZATIONS
Publication of the Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry
Staybond Pty Ltd-- Treatments for the protection of Chemically Shorn Sheep
Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Limited--Wool Pack Cutter for Sampling Purposes
Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne -- Burns Research Unit

OVERSEAS POSTGRADUATE SCHOLARSHIPS
University of Cambridge
L. D. Staples (Vic. DA, Ph.D.) Institute of Animal Physiology. Discipline: Reproduction

3348 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

University of Edinburgh
R. J. Carter (lndep, Diploma in Animal Breeding) Department of Genetics --Quantitative Genetics and Reproductive Physiology
University of Paris
L. P. Cahill (Vic. DA, Ph.D.) Institute National de la Recherche Agronomique. Discipline: Reproduction
University of Reading
M. L. Curll (NSWDA, Ph.D.) Department of Agricultural Botany Effects of the Grazing Sheep Upon Grass Clover Competition in Pastures
University of Wales
R. A. Si\cock (QDPI, Ph.D.) Department of Developmental Genetics Pasture Improvement and Forage Cropping
University of Wisconsin
G. A. Lawrence (lndep, M. Sc.) Department of Rural Sociology The Role of Agriculture in the Historical Development Process of Advanced Capitalist Countries
WOOL RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS 1979-80
AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION
Wool Harvesting Postgraduate Scholarships Quality Shearing Service Wool Harvesting Technical Extension Mechanical Restraint Shearing Mobile Shearing Complex Removal of Weakened Wool Grants to State Departments of Agriculture and Universities for Travel and Publications Design of Self-Feeding Race An Investigation of Comb/Cutter Wear Processes Feasibility Studies Review of Novel (Non-Mechanical) Wool Severing Methods Automated Mechanical Shearing-- Operations Research Automated Mechanical Shearing Research Program Biological/Chemical Defleecing Research Program Feasibility Studies of Removal of Weakened Wool AWHPPublic Relations Circular Inclined Wool Rolling Table Development of a Mechanical Penning-Up Equipment An investigation of Novel Comb/Cutter Materials Direct-Drive Electric Motors for Shearing Handpieces Development of a Continuous Press for High Density Shed Bales Pilot Dense Bale Handling Trials Sampling of Wool for High Density Bales Processing Consequences of Alternative Clip Preparation Procedures Improved Packaging, Handling and Transporting of Wool in Association with Jumbo Baling Industry Understanding and Adoption of Proven Research Results Additional Specification Pilot Trial in Funding of Testing Costs The Combing Performance of Dense Baled Scoured Wool Economic Analysis of Technical Developments Analysis/Forecast of Wool Harvesting Costs in the Future Cross Sectional Analysis of Determinants of Clothing Expenditure and Its Relationship to Promotion Effects and Effectiveness Single Dump Strapping Development Rotary Sheep Delivery Platform Wool Movement from Bins to Press Evaluation of the University of NSW Acidiser Unit Patent Services Assessment of Research Priorities

Evaluation of Woolpacks Made from Composite Paper/ Nylon Yarns
Proposal for a Feasibility Study on Practical Evaluation of a Mobile Shearing Complex

AUSTRALIAN WOOL TESTING AUTHORITY
The implementation of Staple Length Measurement for Individual Sale Lots

CSIRO
Animal Health
Foot Rot The Ecology and Control of Parasitism in Central Eastern Australia Biology of Helminths Annual Ryegrass Toxicity

Animal Production
Nutrient Requirements for Pregnancy and Lactation Nutritional Value of Pasture to the Grazing Animal Evaluation of Chemicals for Use as Defleecing Agents Prevention of Fleece-Rot and F1ystrike Determination of Physiological Criteria for Animal SelectionMorphology of Skin and Fibres Fertilisers in Animal Production Mineral Supplementation-Trace Elements Improved Viability During Early Life Breeding of Sheep for Efficient Wool Production

Plant Industry
Breeding for Aphid Resistance in Lucerne Integration of Grazing and Cropping Systems

Sheep Blowfly

Entomology

Wildlife Research
Rabbit Biology Biological Control of Rabbits

TEXTILE INDUSTRY Pre-mill Procedures
Fleece production and harvesting

Yarn and Fabric Manufacture
Topmaking Short staple processing of wool New methods of processing Improvements to existing processing Processing performance of different wools

Colouration
Colour measurement Bleaching and whitening Colour techniques

Improvements in Final Products
Dimensional stability Wrinkling Flammability Mothproofing Mechanical properties

Effluent

Environmental Impact Studies

TEXTILE PHYSICS Pre-mill Procedures
Fleece production and harvesting

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3349

Packaging and transport Objective measurement
Land Resources Management
Resource conservation in rural areas Management of rangelands
NSW DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Applied Economic Research into the Wool Industry-- Trangie Agricultural Research Station
Genetic Improvement of Reproduction Rate in Merino Sheep
Nutritional Management of Breeding Flocks of Merinos for Wool Production
Plant Nutritional Study of Central Western New South Wales
Preliminary Evaluation of Temperate Perennial Pasture Species Collected in the Soviet Union
Synthesis of Data from Long-term Fertilizer Experiments Definition of Maintenance Requirement Functions for P and S Fertilization Performance Evaluation of Vesicular-Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Grown in Artificial Culture Determination of the Distribution and Magnitude of Production Responses to Selenium Supplementation in Northern NSW Management Strategies for Highly Fertile Merino Sheep An Investigation into Nematode Resistance to Anthelmintics in Sheep Promotion of Objective Measurement to the Merino Breeding Industry in New South Wales The Effects of Climate and Soil Acidity on the Efficiency of Superphosphate Use Investigation into Detection of Insecticide Resistance Alleles in the Primary Sheep Blowfly Treatment of Sheep for the Reduction of Vegetable Matter Contamination of Wool Publication of Paper 'The Anthelmintic Resistance ProblemRegistration, Application and Recommendation'
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Plant Introduction, Evaluation and Establishment of Introduced and Native Pasture Species
Grazing Land Productivity and Stability Animal Plant Interaction in Native Pastures of Western Queensland Adaption and Productivity of Annual Medics Evaluation of Shallow Storage Cropping in North Western Queensland Studies in Ovine Reproduction Chemical Shearing Investigations Grazing Management and Its Effect on Reproduction Control of Ectoparasites in Sheep An Economic-Practical Appraisal of the Use of Acrylic Polymers and Related Compounds to Improve Productivity Anthelmintic Resistance of Haemonchus contortus in Queensland Property Planning in South Western Queensland Construction of Sheep Research Facilities at the Animal Research Institute Brisbane
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & FISHERIES
Graduate Officers Selection of Strong Wool Merino Sheep Involving Reproduction Rate and Body Weight Breeding of Improved Lucerne Varieties Primarily for Use in South Australia Genetic Improvements of the South Australian Strong Wool Merino by Reduction of Incidence of Body Strike. (In association with the Flinders University)

Animal Production from a Low Oestrogen Cultivar of Trifolium subterranean Sub-Species Yanninicum
The Reproductive Performance of Sheep Grazing a Low Oestrogen Cultivar of Trifolium subterranean sub-species Yanninicum
The Genetic Improvement of the Reproductive Performance of Flocks Grazing Oestrongenic Pastures
Consequence of Finding New Naturalised Subterranean Clover Ecotypes in South Australia
Biological Control of Sitona Weevil Maintenance of Arid Plant Communities by Manipulation of Paddock Structure and Sheep Numbers Persistence and Production Under Grazing of New AphidResistant Cultivars of Lucerne (Medicago sativa) in the South East of South Australia A Comparison of the Reproductive and Productive Performance of Bungaree Ewes and Rams with Booroola X Bungaree and Trangie Fertility X Bungaree Cross Ewes and Rams in South Australia Mycotic Dermatitis in Sheep-Prevalence and Its Relationship to Suspected Causal Factors Experimental Data Analysis Supply of Terminal
ROSEWORTHY AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE
Roseworthy Selection Experiments
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Effectiveness of 'Lipiodo' in Lifetime Prevention of Goitre in Ewes
Study of Wool Characters Affecting Fleece Rot and Flystrike in Tasmanian Sheep
SuperphosphateEffects on Pasture and Sheep Production
Reactions of Sub-Clover to Virus Infection
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Investigations of the Physiological Control of Wool Shedding in Wiltshire Horn Sheep
Evaluation of Cutting Trials as a Means of Predicting the Likely Animal Performance
Development of a Superphosphate Prediction Model for Victorian Pastures
Growth and Development of Sheep Whole Oat Grain Feeding of Ewes and Lambs During Drought National Flock Performance Recording Scheme (Flocktes!) Internal Parasities of Weaner Sheep Use of Lupins in Drought Feeding Strategies Epidemiological Studies of Nematode and Liver Fluke Infestations in Sheep The Evaluation of Management Strategies for the Sheep Industry of Victoria Physiology and Pathology of Clover Disease (in association with Prince Henry's Hospital, MRC) Improving Pasture production Through More Effective CloverJRhizobium Symbiosis Evaluation of Legume Species to improve the Feeding Value of Summer-Autumn Feed Pasture and Production Losses Due to Cricket (Teleogryllus commodus) Damage Effect of Nutrition of Ewes During Early Pregnancy on Subsequent Growth, Development and Productivity Increasing Fertility and Fecundity in Sheep (In association with Prince Henry's Hospital, MRC) Eperythrozoon ovis Infection and the Il1-Thrift Syndrome in Sheep Ovine Infertility Contagious Epididymitis and Orchitis in Ram The Benzimidazole Resistance Status of Sheep GastroIntestinal Nematodes in Victoria The Role of Coronaviruses in Weaner Il1-Thrift

3350 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Development of a Preventative Medicine Segment for Inclusion in a Minimum Labour Input Management program for Commercial Sheep Flocks
Embryo-Material Relationships in Early Pregnancy Contricution for the Publication of the Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
New Subterranean Clover Strains for Established Pasture Areas
Agronomic Evaluation of New Early Maturing Crossbreeds of Subterranean Clover
Nutrition and Ewe Fertility Investigation into the Cause of Annual (Wimmera) RyeGrass Toxicity of Livestock Interactions of Phosphorus and Sulphur on Pasture Growth Ecological and Resistance Studies of Sheep Blowfly Species with Emphasis on Alternative Primary Species Chemical Shearing Superphospate Requirements for Animal Production for Pasture Control of Red-Legged Earth Mite in Pasture The Role of Nutritional Deficiencies in Sheep Production Establishment of Co-operative Nucleus for High Fertility Merino Flocks Enterotoxaemia in Sheep Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (Purchase of) Construction of Animal House Regional Research Facilities, Esperance Laboratory Tests to Distinguish Between Benign and Virulent Strains of Bacteroides nodosus, the Cause of Footrot in Sheep Sheep Lice Control . Community Project
NEW SOUTH WALES SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE
An Investigation into the Germination and Establishment Requirements of Three Major Inedible Shrub Species of North-Western New South Wales
DEPARTMENT OF CROWN LANDS AND SURVEY-VICTORIA
Research into Inherited Resistance to Myxomatosis in Selected Wild Rabbit Populations
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE, ADELAIDE
Responses in Merino Weaner Sheep to Management Procedures for the Control of Gastro-Intestinal Nematodes
MURESK AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE
Publication of 'Sheep Nutrition'
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
The Biochemical Basis of Anthelmintic Action Chemical Control of the Primary Sheep Blowfly: identification of Specific Blowfly Enzymes Essential for Larval Development
DEAKIN UNIVERSITY
Fleece Chemistry with Particular Reference to Factors Influencing Susceptibility to Fleece Rot
Studies on the Photochemical Stability or Organophoshporus Insecticides for Textile Mothproofing and on the Synthesis of Fibre-Reactive Derivatives
FLINDERS UNIVERSITY
Genetic Improvement of the South Australian Strong Wool Merino by Reduction of Incidence of Body Strike

JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
Study Immunity to Ovine Squamous Cell Carcinoma (Skin Cancer)
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Abnormal Myelination in Lambs--The Role of Antibody in Hairy Shakers Disease
MONASH UNIVERSITY
Macrocyclic Metal Complexes Based on Amino AcidsPossible New Dyes for Wool
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
The Use of Oestrus Synchronising Agents in Sheep A.I. Programs
Assessment of Manganese and Iron Status of Pastures The Effect of Superphosphate and Selenium in Sheep Investigation of the Effects of Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis Infection on Fertility in Merino Rams Skin-Fleece Characteristics of Sheep Associated with Susceptibility to Body Strike by Blowflies The Provision of Animal Health and Production Programs. A Cost Effective Study of Pilot Flock Health Programs for Sheep The Kidney in Chronic Copper Poisoning of Sheep
RIVERINA COLLEGE
The Shearing Workforce in New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania; A study of Demographic and Spatial Characteristics
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
Interactions between Nitrogen and Phosphorus Assimilation in the Symbiotic Association Between Legumes, Rhizobium and Mycorrhizal Fungi
Trend Analysis in Sheep Station Vegetation Productivity The Ecology and Productivity of Annual Medic Pastures The Use of Recombinant DNA Techniques for the Isolation and Characterisation of Structural Genes for Hair and Wool Keratin Proteins A Feasibilty Study of the Protential of Microbial Agents for the Suppression of the Sheep Blowfly, Lucilia cuprina Diffusion of Objective Measurement Comparative Study of Rural Credit Institutions
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
Engineering Aspects of Sheep and Wool Handling (Musheep)
Genetic Studies on the Australian Sheep Blowfly in Relation to Its Control by Genetic Means
Development of a Preventive Medicine Segment for Inclusion in a Minimum Labour Input Management Program for Commercial Sheep Flocks. (In association with Victorian Department of Agriculture)
Genetic Improvement of Reproduction Evaluation of Pituitary Responsiveness Test as an Aid in Selection of Rams for Reproductive Efficiency Sheep Behaviour Project Wool Harvesting Technology Transfer Peptide Models for Beta Structures in Keratins An Assessment of the Impact and Value of a National Marketing Program An Econometric Model of Australian Agriculture Methods of Minimising the Economic Disruption Caused by Discovery of an Exotic Sheep Disease Agent in Australia
UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND
Sulphur Rates, Sources and Residual Values for Pastures Low Productivity Syndromes in Sheep The Phenology and Value for Grazing of Native Cool Season Perennial Grasses

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3351

Factors Governing the Control of the Direction of Nutrient Utilisation by Sheep for Growth, Wool Growth, Pregnancy and Lactation
Impact of Structural Change in the Australian Agricultural Sector
Economic Evaluation of Footrot Eradication Program on the Northern Tablelands of NSW
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Development of a Rotary Cutting Device Investigation of Design Principles of Shearing Mechanisms The Development of Least Cost Management for Sheep Flocks at Fowlers Gap Arid Zone Research Station Development and Testing of Principles of On-Farm LowCost Methods of Alkali-Treatment of Cereal and Grass Straws for Sheep and Wool Production During Droughts and Supplementation Feeding Periods Action of Pyrethroid-Type Insecticides on Physiology and Behaviour of Sheep Blowflies Increased Specification in Wool Commerce Measurement Aspects of Industry Standards for Australian Wool The Measurement of Staple Length and Staple Strength Scour Liquor Effluent Treatment The Mechanical Properties of Wool Fibres The Study of Dyestuff Aggregation Reactive Vaporisable Dyes for Transfer Printing Wool Tailorability and Performance Characteristics of Woven and Knitted Wool and Wool Blend Outerwear Fabrics Crusher-Card for Wool Carbonizing The Practical Specification of Wool Fabrics The Effects of Interfibre and Interstitial Friction Effects on the Performance Characteristics of Wool Garment Fabrics Antistatic Wool Fixation of Reactive Dyeing on Wool The Viscoelastic Deformation and Recovery Properties of Wool Yarns Application of Polymers to Wool to Improve the Lightfastness of Dyes The Influence of iv1achine Parameters on the Processing Performance of Wool in Fabric Manufacture and the Influence of these Variables on Fabric Properties
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Sensory Physiology of the Sheep Blowfly in Relation to the Prevention of Strike
Phosphorus Supplementation of Sheep Treatment of Ram Spermatozoa with Formaldehyde Prior to Artificial Insemination The Microenvironment of the Fleece and Skin of Merino Sheep in Relation to Susceptibility to Body Strike Studies on Fetal Growth and Skin Development
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
Lamb Lossess Associated with Injuries at Birth Control and Subsequent Eradication of Foot-Rot: Significance of Antigenic Variation in B. nodosus Radioimmunoassay of Growth Hormone. Thyroxine and Insulin. Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in Relation to Increasing the Efficiency of Its Preservation for Artificial Insemination Immunity to and Chemotherapy of Anthelmintic Resistance in Nematodes Factors Determining the Price Expectations of Wool growers in NSW
UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA
Models of Sulphur Metabolism in Sheep

UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Oestrogenic Activity in Pasture Legumes Sheep Presentation Control Systems Engineering and
Shorn Wool Removal for Automated Shearing Development of Methods for Measuring Organic Phos-
phate in Soils The Role of Vesicular-Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in the Phos-
phate Uptake and Growth of Pasture Plants and Their Possible Application as Seed or Soil Inoculants
Replacement of Existing Cultivars of Subterranean Clover by New Genotypes
Intraspecific Variation in Phosphorus Response within Subterranean Clover
Acid and Alkaline Phosphates in Roots and Shoots of SubClover Varieties
Zinc and Sheep Reproduction Development of Acidity in Soils Distribution and Fate of Organic Sulphur in Soils The Identification of Inoculant Mycorrhizal Fungi in Natural Soil Genetic Variability within Strains of Subterranean Clover The Development of a Genetic Resource in Subterranean Clover as an Aid to a Breeding and Improvement Program Development of University Research Farm
PRINCE HENRY'S HOSPITAL, MRC
Physiology and Pathology of Clover Disease Increasing Fertility and Fecundity in Ewes Embryo-Maternal Relationships in Early Pregnancy (In association with Victorian Department of Agriculture)
OTHER ORGANIZAnONS
Vlth International Congress of Endocrinology-Satellite Symposium on Reproductive Endocrinology of Domestic Ruminants
Staybond Pty Ltd, Regents Park, Sydney-- Treatments for the Protection of Chemically Shorn Sheep
ICI Central Research Laboratories-An Investigation of Fundamental Relationships Between Physico-Chemical Properties and Field Efficacy of Larvicides Useful for Control of the Primary Sheep Blowfly
New South Wales Wool Producing Industry Training CommIttee-Shearer Training in New South Wales
Australian Merino Wool Harvesting Ltd, Adelaide-Sheep Support and Restraint Cradle for Automated Shearing
Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne Burns Research Unit
OVERSEAS ORGANIZAnONS
Centexbel-Verviers, Belgium: Influence of Wool Fibre Characteristics on Yarn Proper-
ties and Spinning Conditions Prediction of the Effect of Combing on Fibre Length Dis-
tribution and Noil Development of an Assisted Supervision Computer
Deutsches Wollforschungsinstitut, Aachen, Germany-- The Role of the Cuticle in the Industrial Processing of Wool
RESEARCH FELLOWSHIPS
CSIRO Division of Animal Production
Dr A. J. Gordon (Australian Wool Corporation)- Husbandry and Management of Chemical Defleecing
University of Sydney
Dr P. G. Williams (NSWDA Biological and Chemical Research Institute, Rydalmere)-An Investigation of Techniques for Culturing Vesicular Arbuscular (VA) Mycorrhiza on Artificial Media

3352 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Prince Henry's Hospital
Dr I. J. Clarke, Department of Physiology Physiology and Pathology of Clover Disease
POSTGRADUATE SCHOLARSHIPS
N.S.W. Department of Agriculture
M. L. Curll (University of Reading, Ph.D.) Department of Agricultural Botany Effects of the Grazing Sheep Upon Grass Clover Competition in Pastures
P. D. Claxton (Sydney University, Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Chemical StudiesB. nodosus Infection of Sheep Ovine Foot Rot
R. J. Martin (ANU, Ph.D.) Department of Botany The Distribution, Ecology and Control of Xanthium Species in N.S.W.
P. B. Hughes (Rothamstead Experiments Station, UK, Ph.D.) Department of Toxicology and Biological StudiesMechanisms of Insecticide Resistance
Queensland Department of Primary Industries
L. B. Dunlop (Hawkesbury Agricultural College, Graduate Diploma of Agricultural Extension)
South Australian Department of Agriculture and Fisheries
P. E. Beale (University of Western Australia, Ph.D.) Department of Agronomy-Breeding and Selection of Low Oestrogenicity and Kabatiella Resistance in Trifolium subterranean sub-species Yanninicum
Victorian Department of Agriculture
C. B. Chapman (Walter and Eliza Hall School of Medical Research, Ph.D.)-lmmunological Aspects of the Host Parasite Relationship Between Fasciola hepatica and Cattle and Sheep
A. P. L. Callinan (University of Melbourne, Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Parasitology-Models of Life Cycles of Sheep Nematodes
L. D. Staples (University of Cambridge, UK, Ph.D.) Department of Animal Physiology-Physiological Mechanisms Associated with the Establishment of Pregnancy in the Ewe
J. K. Egan (University of Melbourne, Ph.D.) Department of Agriculture and Forestry Factors Affecting the Utilisation of Crude Fibre in Roughages in Sheep
Australian National University
E. M. Bennet (Indep., Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyThe Biochemistry of Drug Resistance in Strongyloid Nematodes
R. M. Sande man (Indep., Ph.D.) Department of Zoology-In Vitro Studies of the Immune Response of Sheep to Fasciola hepatica
M. D. Gorrell (lndep., Ph.D.) Department of Parasitology-Isolation of Antigens to Liver Fluke for Use in Diagnosis and Vaccination
K. J. Kane (lndep., Ph.D.) Department of ParasitologyMechanism of Action of Anthelmintics
E. N. Washington (lndep., Ph.D.) Department of Parasitology-Genetics of Drug Resistance
A. M. Truscott (lndep., Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyImmunity to Larval Cestodes
La Trobe University
S. F. Geller (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry-Molybdenum Metabolism in Sheep
Murdoch University
J. F. Hudman (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Environmental and Live Sciences-Effect of Superphosphate and Selenium in Sheep

University of Adelaide
S. D. Wilton (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-The Organization of Keratin Genes
1. A. Rothnagle (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-Biochemical Studies of Mammalian Skin: The Enzymic Conversion of Arginine Residues to Citrulline in the Hair Follicle
University of New England
S. W. Cridland (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Ruminant Nutrition Requirements of Amino Acids and Glucose for Wool Growth and Growth
W. Burggraaf (lndep, M.Sc.Agr.) Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition-Effects of Defaunation of Rumen Metabolism
University of New South Wales
J. A. Smart (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Animal Nutrition ..- School of Wool and Pastoral SciencesBiochemical and Nutritional Aspects of Fibre Utilization
University of Queensland
E. T. Goodall (lndep. M.Agr.Sc.) Department of Reproductive Physiology-- The Control of Early Pregnancy in the Ewe
University of Sydney
P. C. Wynn (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Animal HusbandryHormonal Control of Wool Growth
E. M. Farthing (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Physiology Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in Relation to Increasing the Efficiency of Its Preservation for Artifical Insemination
University of Western Australia
W. M. Porter (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition-Aspects of the Effect of VesicularArbuscular Mycorrhiza on Nutrient Uptake by Plants
N. Treeby (Department of Agronomy) Population Dynamics of Subterranean Clover
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
A. M. Lew (lndep. Ph.D.) Unit of Immunology Medical Microbiology Mechanisms of Immune Complex Disease with Particular Reference to Parasitic Infections
OVERSEAS TRAVEL GRANTS
Dr B. J. McGuirk (NSW Department of Agriculture) I. W. Caple (Victorian Department of Agriculture) Dr A. G. de Boos (CSIRO) 20 Delegates to attend Pretoria Wool Textile Conference (Australian Wool Corporation) Dr B. J. Quinlivian (Department of Agriculture, NSW) Dr. J. M. Bennett (Australian Wool Corporation) Professor K. J. Whiteley (University of New South Wales) Professor M. Chaikin (University of New South Wales)
WOOL RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS 1980-81
AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION
Automated Mechanical Shearing Research Program Biological-Chemical Defleecing Research Program Research Co-ordinator-Sheep Blowfly Research A Survey and Analysis of Shearing Industry Manpower Needs in Australia Workshop on Sheep and Wool Handling
CSIRO
Operation of a Regular Information System-Australian Sheep and Wool Information System

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3353

Design of a Self-Feeding Race An Investigation Aimed at Increasing the Efficiency of the Cutting Action in Reciprocating and Rotary Cutters Analytical Survey of Industrial Mothproofing Standards in
Australia Processing Consequences of Alternative Clip Preparation
Procedure A Technical and Economic Evaluation of Staple Length/
Staple Strength Measurement in Wool Marketing

Animal Health
Foot Rot The Ecology and Control of Parasitism in Central Eastern Australia Biology of Helminths Annual Ryegrass Toxicity

Animal Production
Nutritional Value of Pasture to the Grazing Animal Feeds and Supplements Evaluation of Chemicals for Use as Defleecing Agents Prevention of Fleece-Rot and Flystrike Determination of Physiological Criteria for Animal Selection-Morphology of Skin and Fibres Fertilizers in Animal Production Mineral Supplementation-Macro Elements Breeding of Sheep for Efficient Wool Production

Plant Industry
Diagnosis of Nutrient Disorders Breeding for Aphid and Disease Resistance in Lucerne Integration of Grazing and Cropping Systems

Sheep Blowfly

Entomology

Wildlife Research Biological Control of Rabbits

TEXTILE INDUSTRY Pre-mill Procedures
Fleece production and harvesting

Yarn and Fabric Manufacture
Topmaking Short staple processing of wool New methods of processing wool Improvements to existing processing of wool

Colouration Bleaching and whiteningwool fabric performance

Wool fabric performances
Dimensional stability Wrinkling Mothproofing Mechanical properties of wool

New uses

New outlets for wool

Effluent

Environmental impact studies

TEXTILE PHYSICS
Pre-mill procedures
Fleece production and harvesting Packaging and transport Objective measurement

Wool fabric performance
Flammability Mechanical properties of wool
Molecular and Structural research
Wool physics
Land resources management
Management of rangelands
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Genetic Improvement of Reproduction Rate in Merino Sheep
Definition of Maintenance Requirement Functions for P and S Fertilization
Performance Evaluation of Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Grown in Artificial Culture
Determination of the Distribution and Magnitude of Production Responses to Selenium Supplementation in Northern NSW
Management Strategies for Highly Fertile Merino Sheep An Investigation into Nematode Resistance to Anthelmintics in Sheep The Effects of Climate and Soil Acidity on the Efficiency of Superphosphate Use Investigation into Detection of Insecticide Resistance Alleles in the Primary Sheep Blowfly Improved Medic Cultivars for North and North-West New South Wales Application of Nutritional Principles to Field Problems (In collaboration with CSIRO, Division of Animal Production) Determinations of Mechanisms of Blowfly Population Maintenance in Low Rainfall Areas (In association with Queensland DPI, University of NSW and Western Australian Department of Agriculture) Establishment of National Working Party on Fly Strike
NEW SOUTH WALES SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE
An Investigation into the Establishment and Survival Requirements of Three Major Inedible Shrub Species of North Western New South Wales
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Plant Introduction, Evaluation and Establishment of Introduced and Native Pasture Species
Grazing Land Productivity and Stability Animal-Plant Interactions in Native Pastures of Western Queensland Adaption and Productivity of Annual Medics Studies in Ovine Reproduction Chemical Shearing Investigations Grazing Management and Its Effect on Reproduction Control of Ectoparasites in Sheep An Economic-Practical Appraisal of the Use of Acrylic Polymers and Related Compounds to Improve Productivity Anthelmintic Resistance of Haemonchus contortus in Queensland The Ecology of Lucilia cuprina in Queensland and Its Resistance to Commonly Used Insecticides The Effect of Genotype-Environment Interactions on Sheep Production in Queensland Determinations of Mechanisms of Blowfly Population Maintenance in Low Rainfall Areas (In association with the University of NSW, Western Australian Department of Agriculture and New South Wales Department of Agriculture) Support Facilities for Practical Orientation of Wool Research Trust Fund Projects Located at Charleville

3354 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Labour for Wool Research Trust Fund Projects, Charleville
Studies of Fetal Growth and Skin Development (In association with the University of Queensland)
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Selection of Strong Wool Merino Sheep Involving Reproduction Rate and Body Weight
Breeding of Improved Lucerne Varieties Primarily for Use in South Australia
Genetic Improvements of the Strong Wool South Australian Merino by Reduction of Incidence of Body Strike (In association with Flinders University)
Animal Production from a Low Oestrogen Cultivar of Trifolium subterranean sub-species Yanninicum
The Reproductive Performance of Sheep Grazing a Low Oestrogen Cultivar of Trifolium subterranean sub-species Yanninicum
The Genetic Improvement of the Reproductive Performance of Flocks Grazing Oestrogenic Pastures
Consequence of Finding New Naturalized Subterranean Clover Ecotypes in South Australia
Biological Control of Sitona Weevil Persistence and Production Under Grazing of New AphidResistant Cultivars of Lucerne (Medicago sativa) in the South East of South Australia A comparison of the Reproductive and Productive Performance of Bungaree Ewes and Rams with Booroola X Bungaree and Trangie Fertility X Bungaree Cross Ewes and Rams in South Australi1 Mycotic Dermatitis in Sheep-Prevalence and Its Relationship to Suspected Causal Factors Development of a Plant Test for Diagnosing the Phosphorus Status of Annual Medics and Lucerne Melanin Pigmented Fibres in White Merino Fleece Wool Studies on the Definition of Selection Objectives and Selection Criteria for Australian Merino Sheep Responses in Merino Weaner Sheep to Management Procedures for the Control of Gastro-Intestinal Nematodes (In collaboration with Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide)
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Study of Wool Characters Affecting Fleece Rot and Flystrike in Tasmanian Sheep
Superphosphate Effects on Pasture and Sheep Production
Reactions of Sub-Clover to Virus Infection The Effect of Iodine on Stimulation of Wool Growth Carpet Wool Workshop
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Investigations of the Physiological Control of Wool Shedding in the Wiltshire Horn Sheep
Evaluation of Cutting Trials as a Means of Predicting the Likely Animal Performance
Internal Parasites of Weaner Sheep Epidemiological Studies of Nematode and Liver Fluke Infestations in Sheep The Evaluation of Management Strategies for the Sheep Industry of Victoria Improving Pasture Production Through More Effective Clover-Rhizobium Symbiosis Evaluation of Legume Species to Improve the Feeding Value of Summer-Autumn Feed Pasture and Production Losses Due to Cricket (Teleogryllus commodus) Damage Effect of Nutrition of Ewes During Early Pregnancy on Subsequent Growth, Development and Productivity Increasing Fertility and Fecundity in Sheep

Eperythrozoon ovis Infection and the III-Thrift Syndrome in Sheep Ovine Infertility Contagious Epididymitis and Orchitis in Rams
The Benzimidazole Resistance Status of Sheep GastroIntestinal Nematodes in Victoria
Manganese Metabolism and Its Interactions with Other Trace Elements
Overcoming Limitations to Growth in Weaned Lambs National Flock Performance Recording Scheme (Flocktest) Ovulation Rate in the Ewe: A Study of the Effect of Short and Long Term Nutrition on Liveweight and Ovulation Rate, Pituitary Function and Follicular Gensis Copper Deficiency in Sheep and Its Relationship to GastroIntestinal Parasitism
Topical Chemotherapy of Footroot The Further Development and Extension of a Model Which Predicts Superphosphate Requirements for Victorian Pastures Improved Methods for Diagnosis of Anthelmintic Resistance Sheep and Wool Refresher Course 1980 Development of Flock Health Programs for Sheep Publication of the Journal: 'Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry' Embryo-Maternal Relationships in Early Pregnancy (In association with Prince Henry's Hospital, Melbourne)
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF CROWN LANDS AND SURVEY
Research into Inherited Resistance to Myxomatosis In Selected Wild Rabbit Populations
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Determinations of Mechanisms of Blowfly Population Maintenance in Low Rainfall Areas (In association with the University of N.S.W., Queensland DPI and New South Wales Department of Agriculture)
New Subterranean Clovers for Established Pasture Areas Nutrition and Ewe Fertility Investigation into the Cause of Annual (Wimmera) RyeGrass Toxicity of Livestock Interactions of Phosphorus and Sulphur on Pasture Growth Chemical Shearing Superphosphate Requirements for Animal Production from Pasture Control of Red-Legged Earth Mite in Pasture The Role of Nutritional Deficiencies in Sheep Production Establishment of Co-operative Nucleus for High Fertility Merino Flocks Enterotoxaemia in Sheep Alleviation of Water Repellence in Soils
Correction of Pastures Deficient in Zinc for Sheep Economic Evaluation of Salt Tolerant Shrub Pastures for the Western Australian Wheat Belt Evaluation of Early Maturing Medics for Sandy, Alkaline Soils Pastures Deterioration at Esperance Grazing Management Investigation --Coodardy Investigations into Facial Eczema in Sheep The Development of a New Early Warning System for Timing of Insecticide Application-based on an Intensive Ecological and Behavioural Study of the Primary Sheep Blowflies with Emphasis on Sheep-Blowfly Interaction in the Field The Environmental Effects on the Incidence and Development of Dermatophilosis and Fleece Rot--Conditions Predisposing Sheep to Body Strike Attendance at Graduate Course in Hydrology Blowfly-Sheep Integrated Study Complex

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3355

WESTERN LANDS COMMISSION, SYDNEY
A Study of the Impact of the Cost-Price Squeeze on Current and Future Viability of Lessees in the Western Division of NSW (In association with Hassell and Associates, Goulburn)
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
The Biochemical Basis of Anthelmintic Action Chemical Control of the Primary Sheep Blowfly: Identification of Specific Blowfly Enzymes Essential for Larval Development
DEAKIN UNIVERSITY
Fleece Chemistry with Particular Reference to Factors Influencing Susceptibility to Fleece Rot
Studies on the Photochemical Stability of Organophosphorys Insecticides for Textile Mothproofing and on the Synthesis of Fibre-Reactive Derivatives
Studies on the Fundamental Characteristics of Wool Scouring Liquors
An Interactive Computer Model of Automated Wool Harvesting Systems
FLINDERS UNIVERSITY
Genetic Improvement of the Strong Wool South Australian Merino by Reduction of the Incidence of Body Strike
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
Study Immunity to Ovine Squamous Cell Carcinoma (Skin Cancer)
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Abnormal Myelination in Lambs-The Role of Antibody In Hairy Shakers Disease
MONASH UNIVERSITY
An Investigation of the Influence of Cutaneous Electric Fields and Currents on Fibre Formation in the Follicles of Sheep
Peptide Models for Beta Structures in Keratins (In association with the University of Melbourne)
Foetal Growth and Skin Development in Sheep (transferred from University of Queensland)
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Computer Analysis of Field Data Collected During Large Scale Sheep Artificial Insemination Programs (In association with Muresk Agricultural College)
Assessment of Manganese and Iron Status of Pastures The Effect of Superphosphate and Selenium in Sheep Skin-Fleece Characteristics of Sheep Associated with Susceptibility to 'Body' Strike by Blowflies The Provision of Animal Health and Production Programs. A Cost-Effective Study of Pilot Flock Health Programs for Sheep The Kidney in Chronic Copper Poisoning of Sheep Field Test for Diagnosis of Copper Deficiency in Pasture Plants Golden Jubilee Symposium on 'Copper in Soils and Plants'
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
Interactions between Nitrogen and Phosphorus Assimilation in the Symbiotic Association Between Legumes, Rhizobium and Mycorrhizal Fungi
The Ecology and Productivity of Annual Medic Pastures The Use of Recombinant Techniques for the Isolation and Characterisation of Structural Genes for Hair and Wool Keratin Proteins A Feasibility Study of the Potential of Microbial Agents for the Suppression of the Sheep Blowfly, Lucilia cuprina

Development of Sensing Techniques for Automated Mechanical Shearing
Postgraduate Training Program in Wool Economic Research
Diffusion of Objective Measurement
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE, ADELAIDE
Responses in Merino Weaner Sheep to Management Procedures for the Control of Gastro-Intestinal Nematodes (In collaboration with South Australian Department of Agriculture)
MURESK AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Grain Alcohol By-Products and Sheep Feeding Computer Analysis of Field Data Collected During Large Scale Sheep Artificial Insemination Programs (In collaboration with Murdoch University) The Relationship Between Testes Size in Rams and Flock Fertility
ROSEWORTHY AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Roseworthy Selection Experiments
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
Engineering Aspects of Sheep and Wool Handling (Musheep)
Genetic Studies on the Australian Sheep Blowfly in Relation to its Control by Genetic Means
Evaluation of Pituitary Responsiveness test as an Aid in Selection of Rams for Reproductive Efficiency
Sheep Behaviour Wool Harvesting Technology Transfer Development of Flock Health Programs for Sheep (In association with the Victorian Department of Agriculture) Partial Support for the Purchase of an Electron Microscope Peptide Models for Beta Structures in Keratins (In association with Monash University) Picosecond Kinetic Spectroscopy of Stilbene-Based Fluorescent Whitening Agents Methods of Minimising the Economic Disruption Caused by Discovery of an Exotic Disease Agent in Australia The Influence of Weather Conditions on Wool Quantity and Quality
UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND
Sulphur rates, Sources and Residual Values for Pastures Low Productivity Syndromes in Sheep The Phenology and Value for Grazing of Native Cool Season Perennial Grasses Factors Governing the Control of the Direction of Nutrient Utilisation by Sheep for Growth, Wool Growth, Pregnancy and Lactation Urea and Electrolyte Secretion in the Sheep Genotype and Phenotype Interactions: Temperature Regulation and Renal Competence Economic Evaluation of Footrot Eradication Programs on the Northern Tablelands of New South Wales Dynamic Growth of Sheep Farms Economic Evaluation of Technical Innovation in Wool Production Postgraduate Scholarships in Wool Economic Research
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Determinations of Mechanisms of Blowfly Population Maintenance in Low Rainfall Areas (In association with Queensland DPI, Western Australian Department of Agriculture and N.S. W. Department of Agriculture)
Development of a Rotary Cutting Device

3356 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Investigation of Design Principles of Shearing Mechanisms

The Development of Least Cost Management for Sheep

Flocks at Fowlers Gap Arid Zone Research Station

Action of Pyrethroid-Type Insecticides on Physiology and

Behaviour of Sheep Blowfly

Low Cost NIR Wool Measurement for Sheep Breeders

Chemical Control of the Primary Sheep Blowfly: Synthetic

Inhibitors of Larval Cuticle Formation as Potential

Insecticides

Feasibility Study of Microwave Forward Sensing

Increased Specification in Wool Commerce

.

Measurement Aspects of Industry Standards for AustralIan

Wool

The Measurement of Staple Length and Staple Strength

Scour Liquor Effluent Treatment

The Mechanical Properties of Wool Fibres

Reactive Vapourisable Dyes for Transfer Printing Wool

Tailorability and Performance Characteristics of Woven

and Knitted Wool and Wool Blend Outwear Fabncs

The Practical Specification of Wool Fabrics

The Effects of Interfibre and Interstitial Fiction Effects on

the Performance Characteristics of Wool Garment Fabrics

Antistatic Wool

Fixation of Reactive Dyeings on Wool

The Viscoelastic Deformation and Recovery Properties of

Wool Yarns

Application of Polymers to Wool to Improve the Lightfas-

tness of Dyes

.

The Influence of Machine Parameters on the ProcessIng

Performance of Wool in Fabric Manufacture and the

Influence of these Variables on Fabric Properties

Application of Environmental Scanning Electron Mi-

croscopy (ESEM) to Studies of Wool Fibres

On-Line Measurement of State Variables of Wool Yarn

Manufacturing Process

UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND

The Microenvironment of the Fleece and Skin of Merino

Sheep in Relation to SUbceptibility to Body Strike

.

Studies of Fetal Growth and Skin Development (In assocI-

ation with Queensland Department of Primary Industries)

A Study of Sperm Capacitation, Fertilisation and Embryo

Transfer in Sheep

Sensory Manipulation of the Behaviour of the Female

Sheep Blowfly Under Semi-Field Conditions

UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY

Lamb Losses Associated with Injury at Birth

Control and Subsequent Eradication of Foot-Rot: Signifi-

cance of Antigenic Variation in B. nodosus

Radioimmunoassay of Growth Hormone, Thyroxyne and

Insulin

Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in Relation to

Increasing the Efficiency of Its PreservatIon for ArtIficIal

Insemination

Immunity to and Chemotherapy of Anthelmintic Resist-

ance in Nematodes

'Alkalage' Utilisation by Sheep

Factors Involved in Survival and Development of Embryos

During Early Pregnancy in the Ewe

Enquiry into Vetrazin, the New Primary Sheep Blowfly

Specific

...

Cytogenetics of Host Pathogen InteractIons In Larval DIS-

eases of the Sheep Blowfly

.

The Reticular Groove-A Route to Increased EfficIency of

Administration of Anthelmintics and Other Therapeutic

Agents

.

Convening of Symposium on Current Work In Footrot of

Sheep

Factors Determining the Price Expectations of

Wool growers in New South Wales

UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Oestrogenic Activity in Pasture Legumes Sheep Presentation Control Systems Engineering and Shorn Wool Removal for Automated Shearing The Role of Vesticular-Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in the Phosphate Uptake and Growth of Pasture Plants and Their Possible Application as Seed or Soil Inoculants Replacement of Existing Cultivars of Subterranean Clover by New Genotypes Acid and Alkaline Phosphatesin Roots and Shoots of SubClover Varieties Zinc and Sheep Production Development of Acidity in Soils The Identification of Inoculant Mycorrhizal Fungi in Natural Soil Genetic Variability within Strains of Subterranean Clover The Development of a Genetic Resource in Subterranean Clover as an Aid to a Breeding and Improvement Program Development of University Research Farm
OTHER ORGANISATIONS
The Australian Society of Animal Production-Publication of the Proceedings
Australian Wool Corporation-Direct Drive Electric Motors for Shearing Handpieces
L. G. Anstis and Associates, Albury, N.S.W.-Removal of Weakened Wool
Mechanical Severance of Wool Using a Fibre Tensioning Device
Australian Academy of Science-Fourth International Symposium on Nitrogen Fixation
F. W. Hughes Pty Ltd-Hot Acid Flocculation Plant ICI Australian Operations Pty Ltd-An Investigation of Fundamental Relationships Between Physico-Chemical Properties and Field Efficiency of Larvicides Useful for Control of the Primary Sheep Blowfly Development of a Chemical Screening Package The Victorian College of Pharmacy, Parkville-Control Bacterial Proliferation in the Fleece Australian Merino Wool Harvesting Ltd-Automatic Shearing Machine Prince Henry's Hospital, Melbourne-Embryo-Maternal Relationships in Early Pregnancy (In association with the Victorian Department of Agriculture) Royal Children's Hospital, MelbourneBurns Research Unit Prouvost Lefebvre & Co.-The Combing Performance of Dense Baled Scoured Wool Australian Wool Corporation--Economic Analysis of Technical Developments Automatic Automated Machine (transferred from Australian Merino Wool Harvesting)
OVERSEAS ORGANIZATIONS
Centexbel-Verviers, Belgium-Influence of Wool Fibre Characteristics on Yarn Properties and Spinning Conditions Prediction of the Effect of Combing on Fibre Length Distribution and Noil Development of an 'Assisted Supervision Computer'
Deutches Wollforschungsinstitut, Achen, West Germany-- The Role of the Cuticle in the Industrial Processing of Wool
POSTGRADUATE SCHOLARSHIPS
NSW Department of Agriculture
M. L. Curll (University of Reading, Ph.D.) Department of Agricultural Botany-Effects of the Grazing Sheep Upon Grass-Clover Competition in Pastures
P. D. Claxton (University of Sydney, Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies---B. nodosus Infection of Sheep (Ovine Footrot) -- Immunology and Bacteriology

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3357

R. J. Martin (Australian National University, Ph.D.) Department of Botany-The Distribution, Ecology and Control of Xanthium Species in NSW
P. B. Hughes (Rothamstead Experimental Station UK, Ph.D.) Department of Toxicology and Biological SciencesMechanisms of Insecticide Resistance
A. R. Gilmour (Massy University, Ph.D.) Department of Sheep Husbandry-The Estimation of Genetic Parameters for Discrete Variables
K. D. Atkins (Edinburgh University, UK, Ph.D.) Institute of Animal Genetics--The Production and Estimation of Response to Selection in Sheep Populations
Queensland Department of Primary Industries
G. I. Knights (University of NSW, Misc. Program) School of Wool and Pastoral Sciences
Victorian Department of Agriculture
C. B. Chapman (University of Melbourne, Ph.D.)- Immunological Aspects of the Host Parasite Relationship between Fasciola hepatica and Cattle and Sheep
A. P. L. Callinan (University of Melbourne, Ph.D.) School of Veterinary Sciences, Development of Stochastic Models of Life Cycles of Sheep Nematodes
L. D. Staples (Cambridge University, Ph.D.) Department of Animal Physiology-Physiological Mechanisms Associated with the Establishment of Pregnancy in the Ewe
J. K. Egan (University of Melbourne, Ph.D.) Department of Nutrition-Agriculture and Forestry-Factors Affecting the Utilisation of Crude Fibre in Roughages in Sheep
F. D. Brien (Edinburgh University, UK, Ph.D.) Institute of Animal Genetics--Genetic Selection for Improving Reproductive Performance in Sheep Using New Methods
Western Australian Department of Agriculture
H. G. Gardiner (Utah State University, USA, M.Sc.) Department of Range ScienceThe Effects of Kangaroo Grazing on Arid Zone Vegetation
R. B. Richards (University of California, USA, Diploma) Pathology, School of Veterinary Medicine--General Study
Adelaide University
S. D. Wilton (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-The Organization of Keratin Genes
J. A. Rothnagel (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-Biochemical Studies of Mammalian Skin: The Enzymic Conversion of Arginine Residues to Citrulline in the Hair Folicle
S. T. Were (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Organic Chemistry-Synthesis of Perloline and Other Toxins of Lolium perene
B. J. Hosking (Indep, Ph.D.) Waite Agricultural Research Institute Department of AgronomyThe Processes of Digestion and Digesta Flow in the Grazing Ruminant
B. S. Robinson (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Agricultural BiochemistryThe Role of Choline and Betaine in the Nutrition Metabolism and Production in Sheep
Australian National University
E. M. Bennet, (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyThe Biochemistry of Drug Resistance in Strongyloid Nematodes
M. D. Gorrell (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyIsolation of Antigens of the Sheep Liver Fluke, Fasciola hepatica, and Their Potential Use in the Diagnosis of and Vaccination Against Fascioliasis
H. J. Kane (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyMechanism of Action of Anthelmintics On Liver Fluke
E. N. Washington (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Zoology-Genetics of Drug Resistance

A. M. Truscott (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Zoology-- Immunity to Larval Cestodes
A. O. Irving (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Zoology Bacterial Expression of Genes: A New Approach to Obtaining Parasite Antigens for Vaccination Studies
D. R. Larkman (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyInteraction of Anthelmintics on Biochemical Pathways of Haemonchus contortus in Sheep
P. J. Skelly (Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-The Properties of the Larval Cuticle Proteins of the Sheep Blowfly, Lucilia cuprina
Melbourne University
I. M. Grant (Indep, M.Vsc.) Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences-Control of Reproductive Inefficiency in Sheep Flocks
James Cook University
P. Daniels (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Tropical Veterinary Science -Immunology of Skin Cancer (Ovine)
La Trobe University
S. F. Gheller (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry-Molybdenum Metabolism in Sheep
Murdoch University
J. F. Hudman (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-Environmental and Live SciencesEffect of Superphosphate and Selenium in Sheep
R. O. Nable (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-- Environmental and Life Sciences-- Assessment of Manganese and Iron Status of Pastures
University of New England
S. W. Cridland (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition--Sheep Metabolism and Nutrition
W. Burggraaf (Indep, M.Sc.Agr.) Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition-Effects of Defaunation of Rumen Metabolism
F. A. Thomas (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of PhysiologyProductivity of Ewes in Hot, Arid Conditions in Relation to the Mineral Content of Waters, with Particular Emphasis on Behaviour, Reproductive Performance and ThermoRegulation
S. J. Weise (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition-Low Productivity Syndromes in Sheep---- Factors Governing the Control of the Direction of Nutrient Utilisation by Sheep for Growth, Wool Growth, Pregnancy and Lactation
University of New South Wales
J. A. Smart (Mrs Lee) (Indep, Ph.D.) School of Wool and Pastoral Sciences--Animal Nutrition--Studies on Forage Hemicellulose and Urea Utilisation
University of Queensland
M. E. Elliott (Indep, M.Sc.) Department of Animal Production and Parasitology-Immunogenetic Aspects of Resistance to Fly Strike in Sheep
E. T. Goodall (Indep, M.Agr.Sc.) Department of Physiology-The Control of Early Pregnancy in the Ewe
C. Eisemann (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Entomology-- Sensory Manipulation of the Behaviour of Sheep Blowfly
L. Webb (Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Anatomy-An Investigation of Fertilisation and Embryo Transfer in Sheep
University of Sydney
P. C. Wynn (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry -- Hormonal Control of Wool Growth

3358 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

E. M. Farthing (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in Relation to Increasing the Efficiency of Its Preservation for Artificial Insemination
M. N. Trappl, (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry-Factors Involved in Survival and Development of Embryos During Early Pregnancy in the Ewe P. P. T. Gah (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Physiology-Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in Relation to Increasing the Efficiency of Its Preservation for Artificial Insemination
N. C. Sangster (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry Comparative Biochemistry of Anthelmintic Resistance and Susceptible Strongyle Parasites of Sheep
J. Trevor-Jones (Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry--Alkalage Utilisation by Sheep
P. Taylor (Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary PhysiologyThe Reticular Groove-A Route to Increased Efficiency of Administration of Anthelmintics and Other Therapeutic Agents
G. A. Smith (Ph.D.) Department of Animal HusbandryDiurnal Rhythms in the Release of Hormones of Reproduction
University of Western Australia
N. Treeby (Ph.D.) Department of Agronomy-Population Dynamics of Subterranean Clover
M. C. H. Ong (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Mechanical Engineering-Dynamics and Control of Automated Mechanical Shearing
OVERSEAS TRAVEL GRANTS
Dr R. W. Ponzoni (South Australian Department of Agriculture)
Professor W. A. Stern (University of Western Australia) Mr W. Binney (Glenormiston Agricultural College) Mr E. Holm (Western Australian Department of Agriculture) Dr L. P. Jones (Victorian Department of Agriculture) Dr G. E. Robards (New South Wales Department of Agriculture) ProfessorG. E. Rogers (Adelaide University) Mr I. McMichael (Australian Nuffield Farming Scholars' Association) Mr K. D. Atkins (New South Wales Department of Agriculture) Mr R. B. Richards (Western Australian Department of Agriculture) Mr H. G. Gardiner (Western Australian Department of Agriculture) Professor R. Postle (University of New South Wales) Dr U. Meyer-travel to Australia (University of New South Wales) Dr K. P. Ghiggino (University of Melbourne) Dr I. J. Clarke (Prince Henry's Hospital)
WOOL RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS 1981-82
AUSTRALIAN WOOL CORPORATION (WRTF FUNDED)
A WHCON '81--- The Second Wool Harvesting Research and Development Conference
Research Co-ordinator--Blowfly Research Research Co-ordinator- -Fertilizer Usage Wool Textile Research Planning Study A Technico-Economic Assessment of Alternative Methods of High Density Packaging
CSIRO
Design of a Self-Feeding Race

An Investigation Aimed at Increasing the Efficiency of the Cutting Action in Reciprocating and Rotary Cutters
Processing Consequences of Alternative Clip Preparation Procedure
A Technical and Economic Evaluation of Staple Length/ Staple strength Measurement in Wool Marketing
Staple Length and Staple Strength Sub-Sampling Techniques
An Experimental Survey of Mothproofing Agents in Wool and Wool-Blend Textiles
An Experimental Survey to Determine the Extent of Insecticide Residues in Raw Wool and Wool Grease
Defleecing of Sheep by Epidermal Growth Factor

Footrot

Animal Health

Internal parasites
Ecology and control of parasitism in Central Eastern Australia
Biology of helminths

Animal Production
Nutrient requirements of livestock Nutrient requirements of the grazing animal

Skin and fleece biology
Evaluation of chemicals for use as defleecing agents Prevention of fleece rot and fly strike Determination of physiological criteria for animal selection

Minerals in animal production
Fertilizers for animal production Mineral supplementation- -trace elements

Animal breeding and genetics Breeding of sheep for efficient wool production

Plant Industry
Management of agricultural systems for crops and pastures Integration of grazing and cropping systems

Wildlife Research
Biology of eutherian mammals Biological control of rabbits

TEXTILE INDUSTRY
Wool yarns and fabrics
Topmaking Short-staple processing New methods of processing Improvements to existing processing methods Processing performance of different wools

Colouration processes
Colouration processes Dyeing

Wool fabric performance
Dimensional stability Wrinkling Mothproofing Mechanical properties

New outlets for wool Airconditioning

Effluent

Environmmental impact studies

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3359

TEXTILES PHYSICS
Pre-mill procedures
Fleece production and harvesting Packaging and transportation Objective measurement
Fabric performance
Dimensional stability Wrinkling Flammability Mechanical properties Properties of clothing
Molecular and structural physics
Wool physics
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Definition of Maintenance Requirement Functions for P and S Fertilization
Performance Evaluation of Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Grown in Artificial Culture
Determination of the Distribution and Magniture of Production Responses to Selenium Supplementation in Northern NSW
An Investigation into Nematode Resistance to Anthelmintics in Sheep
The Effects of Climate and Soil Acidity on the Efficiency of Superphosphate Use
Investigation into Insecticide Resistance Alleles in the Primary Sheep Blowfly and an Assessment of Their Practical Significance
Improved Medic Cultivars for North and North-West New South Wales
Application of Nutritional Principles to Field Problems National Working Party on Flystrike Selection for Reduced Susceptibility to Body Strike in Merino Sheep Display of Technical Information from Sheep Research Projects Being Conducted at Trangie, NSW
WESTERN LANDS COMMISSION OF NSW
A Study of the Impact of the Cost Price Squeeze on Current and Future Liability of Lessees in the Western Division ofNSW
NEW SOUTH WALES SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE
An Investigation into the Establishment and Survival Requirements of Three Major Inedible Shrub Species of North-Western NSW
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Plant Introduction, Evaluation and Establishment of Introduced and Native Pasture Species
Grazing Land Productivity and Stability Animal-Plant Interactions in Native Pastures of Western Queensland Adaption and Productivity of Annual Medics Studies in Ovine Reproduction (,Toorak ') Grazing Management and Its Effect on Reproduction Control of Ectoparasites in Sheep The Ecology of Lucilia cuprina in Queensland and Its Resistance to Commonly Used Insecticides The Effect of Genotype/Environment Interactions On Sheep Productivity in Queensland Support Facilities for Practical Orientation of Wool Research Trust Fund Projects Located at Charleville Labour for Wool Research Trust Fund Projects, Charleville

The Effects of Fire on Woody Weed Control and Composition of Ground Flora in South-Western Queensland
Some Fundamental Approaches to Increasing Wool Production
Biological Defleecing Studies (In collaboration with Monash University)
Sheep and Wool Refresher Course 1981 Studies on Fetal Growth and Skin Development (In collaboration with Monash University) Sheep Blowfly Film The Effect of Blowflies and Lice on the Survival and Productivity of Sheep
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Graduate Officers Genetic Improvement of the Strong Wool South Australian Merino Sheep by Reduction in the Incidence of Body Strike The Reproductive Performance of Sheep Grazing a Low Oestrogen Cultivar of Trifolium subterranean sub-species Yanninicum The Genetic Improvement of the Reproductive Performance of Flocks Grazing Oestrogenic Pastures Biological Control of Sitona Weevil Persistence and Production Under Grazing of New AphidResistant Cultivars of Lucerne (Medicago sativa) in the South East of South Australia A Comparison of the Reproductive and Productive Performance of Bungaree Ewes and Rams with Booroola X Bungaree and Trangie Fertility X Bungaree Cross Ewes and Rams in South Australia Mycotic Dermatitis in SheepPrevalence and Its Relationship to Suspected Casual Factors Development of a Plant Test for Diagnosing the Phosphorus Status of Annual Medics and Lucerne Melanin Pigmented Fibres in the White Merino Fleece Wool Studies on the Definition of Selection Objectives and Selection Criteria for Australian Merino Sheep Breeding and Development of Clover Scorch Resistant Yanninicum Subclovers Breeding Lucerne Cultivars Resistant to Sitona Weevil Pasture Improvement Through the Identification and Development of New Pastures Species and Cultivars in the Higher Rainfall Zone of South Australia Selection of Low Phosphorus Requiring Annual legumes Responses in Merino Weaner Sheep to Management Procedures for the Control of Gastro-Intestinal Nematodes (In collaboration with Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science, Adelaide.)
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
A Study of Wool Characteristics Affecting Fleece Rot and F1ystrike
Superphosphate-Effects on Pasture and Sheep Production
Reactions to Sub-Clover to Virus Infection Fertilizer Decline Functions-Phosphate Demonstration of the Importance of the Adoption of Measures to Protect Young Sheep from Flystrike and a Preliminary Investigation of the Ecology and Population F1uctations of Sheep Blowfly in Tasmania Yellow Virus Infecting Pasture Legumes and Grasses The Effects of Time of Lambing and Stocking Rate on Lambing Percentage and Wool Growth in Breeding Ewes and on Subsequent Rates of Growth in Lambs
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Evaluation of Cutting Trials as a Means of Predicting the Likely Animal Performance
Improving Pasture Production Through More Effective Clover/Rhizobium Symbiosis

3360 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Evaluation of Legume Species to Improve the Feeding Value of Summer-Autumn Feed
Pasture and Production Losses Due to Cricket (Teleogryllus commodus) Damage
Effect of Nutrition of Ewes During Early Pregnancy on Subsequent Growth, Development and Productivity of the Lamb
Increasing Fertility and Fecundity in Sheep Eperythrozoon ovis Infection and the III-Thrift Syndrome in Sheep Ovine Infertility Contagious Epididymitis and Orchitis in Rams The Benzimidazole Resistance Status of Sheep GastroIntestinal Nematodes in Victoria Manganese Metabolism and Its Interactions with Other Trace Elements in Sheep Overcoming Limitations to Growth in Weaned Lambs Ovulation Rate in the Ewe: A Study of the Effect of Liveweight Patterns over 8 Months on Ovulation Rate, Pituitary Function and Folliculogenesis Topical Chemotherapy of Footrot The Further Development and Extension of a Model Which Predicts Superphosphate Requirements for Victorian Pastures Improved Methods for Diagnonis of Anthelmintic Resistance The Effect of Iron and Protein Deficiency in Sheep on Immune Competence and the Control of Internal Parasites Thiamine Deficiency in Sheep, the Effects on Growth and Wool Production Improving Reproductive Performance, Extension Project Selection of Sheep for Control of Parasitic Gastrointestinal Roundworms Sheep Production Systems Improved Establishment and Growth of Subterranean Clover Development of Flock Health Programs for Sheep (In association with University of Melbourne) Publication of the Journal: 'Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry' Embryo-Maternal Relationships in Early Pregnancy (In association with Prince Henry's Hospital, Medical Research Centre, Melbourne)
DEPARTMENT OF CROWN LANDS AND SURVEYVICTORIA
Research into Inherited Resistance to Myxomatosis in Selected Wild Rabbit Populations
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Agronomic Evaluation of New Early Maturing Crossbreds of Subterranean Clover
Chemical Shearing Superphosphate Fertiliser Recommendations for Animal Production from Pasture Control of Red-Legged Earth Mite in Pasture The Role of Nutritional Deficiencies in Sheep Production Establishment of Co-operative Nucleus for High Fertility Merino Flocks Alleviation of Water Repellence in Soils Correction of Pastures Deficient in Zinc for Sheep Economic Evaluation of Salt Tolerant Shrup Pastures for the Western Australian Wheat Belt Evaluation of Early Maturing Medics for Sandy, Alkaline Soils Pasture Deterioration at Esperance Grazing Management Investigation-Mulga Shrub Lands (Coodardy) Investigations into Facial Exzema in Sheep The Development of an Early Warning System for Timing of Insecticide Application-based on an Intensive Ecological

and Behavioural Study of the Primary Sheep Blowflies with Emphasis on Sheep/Blowfly Interaction in the Field
The Environmental Effects on the Incidence and Development of Dermatophilosis and Fleece Rot-Conditions Predisposing Sheep to Body Strike
Blowfly-Sheep Integrated Study Complex Soil Acidity Investigation-Medium Rainfall Areas Disease and Insect Resistance Screening of National Subterranean Clover Collection Annual Ryegrass Toxicity (ARGT) and Anti-Toxin Production Study of Host Parasite Relations and Control of Annual Ryegrass Toxicity The Impact of Exotic Legume Aphids on Existing and Experimental Pasture Legumes in the Esperance Region Wool Marketing Reporting Mechanism of Fly Population Maintenance in Low Rainfall Areas
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Responses in Merino Sheep to Management Procedures for the Control of Gastro-Intestinal Nematodes. (In collaboration with South Australian Department of Agriculture)
MURESK AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Grain Alcohol By-Products and Sheep Feeding The Relationship Between Testes size in Rams and Flock Fertility Further Studies of the Use of Formalin for the Preservation of Viable Spermatozoa (In association with University of Queensland)
ROSEWORTHY AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Roseworthy Selection Experiments
VICTORIAN COLLEGE OF PHARMACY LIMITED
Control of Bacterial Proliferation in the Fleece Optimisation of Drug Delivery to Merino Type Sheep
DEAKIN UNIVERSITY
Fleece Chemistry with Particular Reference to Factors Influencing Susceptibility of Fleece Rot
GRIFFITH UNIVERSITY
Analysis of Environmental and Management Factors in Relation to Competition Between Aristide and Preferred Range Grasses
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
Study of Immunity to Ovine Squamous Cell Carcinoma (Skin Cancer)
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Abnormal Myelination in Lambs-The Role of Antibody in Hairy Shakers Disease
Development of Assays for Sheep IgE for Investigation of Resistance to Blowfly Larvae and other Parasites
Stress Effects on Maternal and Fetal Metabolism, and on Fetal Growth and Development in the Pregnant Ewe
MONASH UNIVERSITY
Biological Defleecing Studies (In collaboration with Queensland DPI)
An Investigation of the Influence of Cutaneous Electric Fields and Currents on Fibre Formulation in the Follicles of Sheep
Studies on Fetal Growth and Skin Development (a) Effects of Heat Street (b) Effects of Thyroid Function and Epidermal

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3361

Growth Factor (c) Interaction of Heat Stress and Nutrients (In collaboration with Queensland DPI)
Peptide Models for Beta Structures in Keratins (In collaboration with the University of Melbourne)
Treatment of Wool with N-Acyl Isatin Derivatives
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Assessment of Manganese and Iron Status of Pastures The Effect of Superphosphate and Selenium in Sheep The Provision of Animal Health and Production Programs. A Cost-Effective Study of Pilot Flock Health Programs for Sheep The Kidney in Chronic Copper Poisoning of Sheep Field Test for Diagnosis of Copper Deficiency in Pasture Plants
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
Interactions between Nitrogen and Phosphorus Assimilation in the Symbiotic Association Between Legumes, Rhisobium and Mycorrhizal Fungi
The Ecology and Productivity of Annual Medic Pastures The Use of Recombinant DNA Techniques for the Isolation and Characterisation of Structural Genes for Hair and Wool Keratin Proteins A feasibility Study of the Potential of Microbial Agents for the Suppression of the Sheep Blowfly, Lucilia cuprina Ultrasonic Sensing Support for a Visiting Research Fellow-Dr V. Gianinazzi-Pearson Basis for Intervention Against Arid Zone Vegetation Deterioration Diffusion of Objective Measurement and Sale by Sample
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
Engineering Aspects of Sheep and Wool Handling (Musheep)
Genetic Studies on the Australian Sheep Blowfly in Relation to Its Control by Genetic Means
Sheep Behaviour Wool Harvesting Technology Transfer--Engineering Liaison Development of Flock Health Programs for Sheep (In association with Victorian Department of Agriculture) Farmers' Attitudes Towards and Acceptance of Blowfly Control Measures Limitations to Efficient Digestion and Utilisation of Subterranean Clover by Sheep Plant Cell Wall Components Limiting Production in Ruminants The Influence of Weather Conditions on Wool Quality and Quantity Peptide Models for Beta Structures in Keratins (In collaboration with Monash University) Picosecond Kinetic Spectroscopy of Stilbene Based Fluoroescent Whitening Agents
UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE
Immunity in the Respiratory Tract of Sheep
UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND
Sulphur Rates, Sources and Residual Values for Pastures Low Productivity Syndromes in Sheep The Phenology and Value for Grazing of Native Cool Season Perennial Grasses Factors Governing the Control of the Direction of Nutrient Utilisation by Sheep for Growth, Wool Growth, Pregnancy and Lactation Urea and Electrolyte Excretion in Sheep Genotype and Phenotype Interactions: Temperature Regulation and Renal Competence

Survey of Management Practices Used in the Amelioration of Blowfly Strike
Dynamics of Growth of Sheep Farms Economic Evaluation of Technical Innovations of Wool Production
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Investigation of the Principles of Wool Severance Low Cost NIR Wool Measurement for Sheep Breeders Feasibility Study: Manipulation of Factors which Facilitate Maintenance of Residual Sheep Blowfly Populations in an Arid Zone Oviposition Suppressants in the Control of the Sheep Blowfly Lucilia cuprina: Is there a Relationship Between Behavioural Adaptation to Suppressants and Insecticidal Resistance? Alkali Treatment of Cereal Grains and Cereal Grain Rations for Production and Maintenance Drought Feeding of Sheep Increased Specification in Wool Commerce Measurement Aspects of Industry Standards for Australian Wool The Measurement of Staple Length and Staple Strength Scour Liquor Effluent Treatment The Mechanical Properties of Wool Fibres The Practical Specification of Wool Fabrics Antistatic Wool Fixation of Reactive Dyeings on Wool The Viscoelastic Deformation and Recovery Properties of Wool Yarns Application of Chemicals to Wool to Improve Lightfastness of Dyes The Influence of Machine Parameters on the Processing Performance of Wool in Fabric Manufacture, and the Effect of These Variables on Fabric Properties Application of Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM) to Studies of Wool Fibres On Line Measurement of State Variables of Wool Yarn Manufacturing Process Computer Simulations of Mechanical Processing of Wool Fibres The Application of the Theory of Viscoelasticity to Fabric Properties Important in Garment Manufacture The Application of Foam and Radio Frequency Heating Techniques to the Low Energy Dyeing of Wool The Development of Improved Wool Severance Mechanisms
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
A Study of Sperm Capacitation, Fertilisation and Embryo Transfer in Sheep
Sensory Manipulation of the Behaviour of the Female Sheep Blowfly Under Semi-Field Conditions
Further Studies of Phosphorus Metabolism and Phosphorus Deficiency in Sheep (In collaboration with Queensland Institute of Technology)
Further Studies of the Use of Formalin for the Preservation of Viable Spermatozoa (In association with Muresk Agricultural College)
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
Lamb Losses Associated with Injuries Recieved at Birth Control and Eradication of Foot-Rot: Significance of Antegenic Variation in B. nodosus Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in Relation to Increasing the Efficiency of Its Preservation for Artificial Insemination Immunity to and Chyemotherapy of Anthelminitic Resistance in Nematodes 'Alkalage' Utilisation by Sheep Factors Involved in Survival and Development of Embryos During Early Pregnancy in the Ewe

3362 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Enquiry into Vetrazin, the New Primary Sheep Blowfly Specific
Cytogenetics of Host Pathogen Interactions in Larval Diseases of the Sheep Blowfly
The Reticlar Groove~--A Route to Increased Efficiency of Administration of Anthelmintics and Other Therapeutic Agents
Wool Growth in Pregnancy and Lactation Factors Determining the Price Expectations of Wool growers in New South Wales
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Oestrogenic Activity in Pasture Legumes Sheep Presentation, Control Systems Engineering and Shorn Wool Removal for Automated Shearing The Role of Vesicular-Arbuscular Hmycorrhizas in the Phosphate Uptake and Growth of Pasture Plants and their Possible Application as Seed or Soil Inoculants Acid and Alkaline Phosphatases in Roots and Shoots of Sub-clover Varieties Zinc and Sheep Reproduction The Identification of Inoculant Mycorrhizal Fungi in Natural Soil Genetic Variability within Strains of Subterranean Clover Development of University Research Farm Development of Acidity in Soils Interations Between NA + and CA2+ in Growth of Salt Bush Atriplex
OTHER ORGANIZAnONS
Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd, Adelaide Automatic Wool Grab Sampling Machine for Standard Wool Bales
Elm Engineering Pty Ltd Wool Bale Identification Documentation System
Australian Nuffield Farming Scholars Association-Mr W. McL. Poyton ( 1982 Nuffield Scholar)
ICI Australia Operations Pty Limited -An Investigation of Fundamental Relationship Between Physico-Chemical Properties and Field Efficacy of Larvicides Useful for Control of the Primary Sheep Blowfly Research and Development into the Screening of Chemical/Biological Defleecing Agents
Port Phillip Mills Pty Limited, Williamstown, Victoria An Evaluation of the Forte 2585 Moisture and Weight Measurement System on Bales of Scoured Wool
Prince Henry's Hospital, Melbourne (Medical Research Centre) Embryo-Maternal Relationships in Early Pregnancy (in association with Victorian Department of Agriculture)
Queensland Institute of Technology --Further Studies of Phosphorus Metabolism and Phosphorus Deficiency in Sheep (I n collaboration with University of Queensland)
Royal Childrens' Hospital, Melbouren--~~Burns Research Unit
Merino Wool Harvesting Pty Limited-~Automatic Shearing Machine (Mobile/Transportable Automated Machine Shearing System)
McLenan, Magasanik Associates P/L--Overview Study to Identify Research and Development Options and Priorities for Handling, Packaging and Distribution of Wool in Australia
Mrs J. Stockley-~~Journalist--Dissemination of Information from Wool Research Trust Fund Projects
OVERSEAS ORGANIZATIONS
Centexbel-Verviers, BelgiumInfluence of Wool Fibre
Characteristics on Yarn Properties and Spinning Conditions
Prediction of the Effect of Combing on Fibre Length Distribution and Noil Development of an 'Assisted Supervision Computer'

Deutsches Woolforschungsinstitut, Achen, West Germany~-The Role of the Cuticle in the Industrial
Processing of Wool
Mechanisms of Binding of Mothproofing Agents Modification of the Cell Membrane Complex During Industrial Processing of Wool
POSTGRADUATE SCHOLARSHIPS
NSW Department of Agriculture
R. J. Martin (Australian National University, Ph.D.) Department of Botany-The Distribution, Ecology and Control of Xanthium Species in NSW
A. R. Gilmor (Massey University, Ph.D.) Department of Sheep Husbandry-The Estimation of Genetic Parameters for Discrete Variables
K. D. Atkins (Edinburgh University, UK, Ph.D.) Institute of Animal Genetics-The Prediction and Estimation of Response to Selection of Sheep Populations
Victorian Department of Agriculture
L. D. Staples (Cambridge University, Ph.D.) Department of Animal Physiology-Physiological Mechanisms Associated with the Establishment of Pregnancy in the Ewe
J. K. Egan (University of Melbourne, Ph.D.) Department of Nutrition-School of Agriculture and Forestry~ Factors Affecting the Utilisation of Crude Fibre in Roughages in Sheep
F. D. Brien (Edinburgh University, UK, Ph.D.) Institute of Animal Genetics-~Genetic Selection for Improving Reproductive Performance in Sheep Using New Methods
Western Australian Department of Agriculture
H. G. Gardiner (Utah State University, USA, M.Sc.) Department of Range Science-The Effects of Grazing on Arid Zone Vegetation
R. B. Richards (University of California, USA, Diploma) Department of Pathology, School of Veterinary MedicineGeneral Study
Adelaide University
S. D. Wilton (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-The Organization of Keratin Genes
1. A. Rothnagel (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-Biochemical Studies of Mammalian Skin: The Enzymic Conversion of Arginine Residues to Citrulline in the Hair Follicle
S. T. Were (lndep, Ph.D.) Department of Organic Chemistry-Synthesis of Perloline, a Toxin from Lolium perene
B. J. Hosking (Indep, Ph.D.) Waite Agricultural Research Institute Department of Agronomy-Effects of Rate, Extent and Site of Digestion on Herbage and Supplement N Use by Grazing Sheep
B. S. Robinson (Indep, Ph.D.) Department of Agricultural BiochemistryThe Role of Choline and Betaine in the Nutrition Metabolism and Production in Sheep
Australian National University
K. J. Kane (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyMechanism of Action of Anthelmintics on Liver Fluke
A. M. Barton (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyImmunity to Larval Cestodes
D. O. Irving (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Zoology-- Bacterial Expression of Parasite Genes: A New Approach to Obtaining Parasite Antigens for Vaccination Studies
D. R. Larkman (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyInteraction of Anthelmintics on Biochemical Pathways of Haemonchus contortus in Sheep
P. J. Skelly (Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry~ The Properties of the Larval Cuticle Proteins of the Sheep Blowfly, Lucilia cuprina

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3363

R. J. Martin (N.S.W. Dept. Agric., Ph.D.) Department of BotanyThe Distribution, Ecology and Control of Xanthium Species in NSW
James Cook University
P. Daniels (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies-Study of Immunity to Ovine Squamous Cell Carcinoma
La Trobe University
S. F. Gheller (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry-Molybdenum Metabolism in Sheep
Murdoch University
J. F. Hudman (Indep. Ph.D.) School of Environmental and Life Sciences-- Effect of Superphosphate and Selenium in Sheep
R. O. Nable (Indep. Ph.D.) School of Environmental and Life Sciences-Assessment of Manganese and Iron Status of Pastures
University of Melbourne
I. M. Grant (Indep. M.VSc.) Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies-Control of Reproductive Inefficiency in Sheep Flocks
J. K. Egan (Victorian Department of Agriculture, Ph.D.) Department of Nutrition--School of Agriculture and Forestry-Factors Affecting the Utilisation of Crude Fibre in Roughages by Sheep
K. J. Smit (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Physical Chemistry~-Picosecond Kinetic Spectroscopy of StilbeneBased Fluorescent Whitening Agents
University of New England
S. W. Cridland (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry and NutritionFactors Governing the Control of Nutrient Utilisation B by Sheep
F. A. Thomas (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of PhysiologyProductivity of Ewes in Hot, Arid Conditions in Relation to the Mineral Content of Waters, with Particular Emphasis on Behaviour, Reproductive Performance and Thermo-Regulation
S. L. Weise (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition-Low Productivity Syndromes in SheepFactors Governing the Control of the Direction of Nutrient Utilisation by Sheep for Growth, Wool Growth, Pregnancy and Lactation
S. Hamilton (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Agricultural Economics and Business Management-Training Program in Wool Economics
G. W. Kaine (M.sc. or Ph.D.) Department of Agricultural Economics and Business Management-A General Equilibrium Model of the Wool Industry
University of New South Wales
R. D. Pattinson (Indep. M.Sc.) School of Wool and Pastoral Sciences-The Influence of Pre-Sale Testing on the Value Determining Characteristics of Greasy Wool Sale Lots
University of Queensland
E. T. Goodall (Indep. M.Agr.Sc.) Department of Physiology-The Control of Early Pregnancy in the Ewe
C. Eisemann (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of EntomologySensory Manipulation of the Behaviour of Sheep Blowfly
J. G. E. Thompson (Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Anatomy-An Investigation of Fertilisation and Embryo Transfer in Sheep
University of Sydney
A. Simpson (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Physiology~-Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in

Relation to Increasing the Efficiency of Its Preservation for Artificial Insemination
M. N. Trappl (Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry-Factors Involved in Survival and Development of Embryos During Early Pregnancy in the Ewe
P. P. T. Goh (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Physology-Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in Relation to Increasing the Efficiency of Its Preservation for Artificial Insemination
N. C. Sangster (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-Comparative Bioch~mistry of Anthelmintic Resistance and Susceptible Strongyle Parasites of Sheep
P. J. Trevor-Jones (Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry~ 'Alkalage' Utilisation by Sheep
P. Taylor (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Physiology The Reticular Groove-A Route to Increased Efficiency of Administration of Anthelmintics and other Therapeutic Agents
G. A. Smith (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry-Diurnal Rhythms in the Release of Hormones of Reproduction
University of Western Australia
M. C. G. Ong (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Mechanical Engineering-Dynamics and Control of Automated Mechanical Shearing
POSTGRADUATE SCHOLARSHIPS
M. E. Rose (University of Queensland) A. R. Moran (University of Queensland) G. M. Clarke (University of Queensland) S. B. Hooper (Monash University) G. I. Jorgensen (Monash University) E. Delhaize (Murdoch University) I. W. Purvis (New England University) J. M. Clarke (University of Queensland) G. M. Hough (University of Sydney) H. Williams (University of Tasmania) H. J. Pearsall (Department of Agriculture New South Wales) R. L. Holmes (Department of Agriculture New South Wales)
RESEARCH FELLOWSHIPS
Dr P. C. Wynn (CSIRO), Division of Animal Production) - - Hormonal Control of Growth and Metabolism in the Wool Follicle
Mr D. G. Masters (University of California) ---Zinc in Sheep Reproduction
OVERSEAS TRAVEL GRANTS
Dr A. G. Wedd (Biological and Agricultural Chemistry) Dr M. T. Pailthorpe (Textile Technology) Professor G. E. Rogers (University of Adelaide) Dr B. Craven (University of New South Wales) Professor W. C. Dauterman (Department of Agriculture N.S.W.) Mr W. J. Key (University of Western Australia) Dr. J. M. Cummins (University of Queensland) Dr G. E. Ford (Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science) Dr R. C. Kellaway (University of Sydney) Dr S. de Jong (CSIRO) Professor R. Postle (University of New South Wales) Dr E. F. Denby (CSIRO) Dr B. N. Hoschke (CSIRO) Dr A. G. de Boos (CSIRO) Dr D. G. Phillips (CSIRO) Dr L. A. Allen (CSIRO) Mr P. Wheelwright (Defence Department)

3364 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

INTERSTATE TRAVEL
Dr P. Vogel (Department of Agriculture, Western Australia)
Mr D. Lewis (Department of Agriculture, South Australia) Mr D. Nicholas (Department of Agriculture, Western Australia) Mr P. Kenny (Department of Agriculture, Victoria) Mr B. Jefferies (Department of Agriculture, South Australia) Mr A. Barber (Department of Agriculture, South Australia)

WOOL RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS 1982-83
CSIRO
Animal Health
Bacterial diseases Footrot and reproductive inefficiencies

Internal parasites
Epidemiology and control of helminths in temperate Australia

Animal Production
Nutrient requirements of livestock Nutrient requirement of the grazing animal

Skin and fleece biology
Evaluation of chemicals for use as defleecing agents Biology of the skin and its relation to wool growth and natural shedding Prevention of fleece-rot and fly strike Determination of physiological criteria for animal selection

Minerals in animal production
Fertilizers for animal production Mineral supplementation-macro-elements Mineral supplementation - trace-elements Nutritional and metabolic implications for fertilizer usage

Improvement in reproductive efficiency Improved fertility and breeding

Animal breeding and genetics Breeding of sheep for efficient wool production

Tropical animal production Growth and metabolic efficiency

Plant industry
Management of agricultural systems for crops and pastures Integration of grazing and cropping systems

Wildlife Research
Biology of eutherian mammals Biological control of rabbits

TEXTILE INDUSTRY
Wool yarns and fabrics
Scouring Topmaking Yarns faults and spinning Improvement to existing procedures Processing performance of different wools

Measurement
Printing Dyeing

Colouration processes

Wool fabric performance
Dimensional stability Wrinkling Flammability Mothproofing Mechanical and physical properties Photodegradation Properties of clothing
New outlets for wool
Air conditioning
Environmental impact studies
Eflluent Noise An experimental survey of insecticide residue in wool grease and scouring eflluent
TEXTILE PHYSICS
Pre-mill procedures
Fleece production and harvesting Packaging and transport Objective measurement
Fabric performance
F1amability Mechanical and physical properties Properties of clothing
Molecular and structural research
Wool physics
PROTEIN CHEMISTRY
Pre-mill procedures
The spatial distribution of reactive groupings in the wool fibre
The use of monoclonal antibodies to probe the molecular structure of the wool fibre
Textile Industry and Protein Chemistry
Inter-divisional study on the relation between the composition and textile properties of wool
Land Resources Management
Design of a self-feeding race
Molecular and cellular biology unit
Defleecing of sheep by epidermal growth factor
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Definition of Maintenance Requirement Functions for P and S Fertilization
The Effects of Climate and Soil Acidity on the Efficiency of Superphosphate Use
Improved Medic Cultivars for North and North-West New South Wales
Application of Nutritional Principles to Field Problems National Working Party on Flystrike Selection for Reduced Susceptibility to Body Strike in Merino Sheep An Inolulation Method for Pot Trials with Artificial Cultures of Companion fungi of Vesicular-Arbuscular (V-A) Endophytes Identification of Aphid Tolerant Medics for Western New South Wales The Restoration of Pasture Productivity on the Southern Slopes of New South Wales Improved Bacteriodes nodosus Vaccines for the Control of Ovine Virulent Footrot

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3365

Investigation into Insecticide Resistance, the Major Problem Facing Chemical Control of the Sheep Blowfly, Lucilia cupnna
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Plant Introduction, Evaluation and Establishment of Introduced and Native Pasture Species
Grazing Land Productivity and Stability Animal, Plant Interactions in Native Pastures of Western Queensland Adaption and Productivity of Annual Medics The Ecology of Lucilia cuprina in Queensland and its Resistance to Commonly used Insecticides The Effect of Genotype/Environment Interactions on Sheep Production in Queensland Support Facilities for Practical Orientation of Wool Research Trust Fund Projects Located at Charleville Labour for Wool Research Trust Fund Projects, Charleville The Effects of Fire on Woody Weed Control and Composition of Ground Flora in South-Western Queensland Some Fundamental Approaches to Increasing Wool Production The Effects of Blowflies and Lice on the Survival and Productivity of Sheep Investigating Practical Ways of Improving Productivity from Mitchell Grass Pastures Ectoparasite Control in Sheep An Assessment of the Cost of Land Degradation to the Wool Industry in South-West Queensland
Biological Defleecing Studies
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Evaluation of Cutting Trials as a Means of Predicting the Likely Animal Performance
Evaluation of Legume Species to Improve the Feeding Value of Summer-Autumn Feed
Effect of Nutrition of Ewes During Early Pregnancy on Subsequent Growth, Development and Productivity of the Lamb
Increasing Fertility and Fecundity in Ewes Manganese Metabolism and Its Interactions with Other Trace Elements in Sheep Ovulation Rate in the Ewe: A Study of the Effect of Liveweight Patterns over 8 Months on Ovulation Rate Topical Chemotherapy of Foot rot The Further Development and Extension of a Model Which Predicts Superphosphate Requirements for Victorian Pastures Improved Methods for Diagnosis of Anthelmintic Resistance Improved Establishment and Growth of Subterranean Clover The Effect of Iron and Protein Deficiency in Sheep on Immune Competence and the Control of Internal Parasites Thiamine Deficiency in Sheep, the Effects on Growth and Wool Production Selection of Sheep for Control of Parasitic Gastrointestinal Roundworms
Sheep Production Systems Development of Flock Health Programs for Sheep (In association with University of Melbourne) Embryo-Maternal Relationships in Early Pregnancy (In association with Prince Henry's Hospital, Melbourne) Simulating the Intake of Corriedale Wethers Grazing Perennial Pastures in Western Victoria The Strategic use of Supplementary Feed and Lucerne to Increase the Live Weight and Onset of Oestrus of Spring Born Merino Ewes at 18 Months of Age Ovine Contagious Epididymitis

Ovine Footrot: Development and Implementation of Improved Methodology for Detecting Virulent and Benign Strains of Bacteriodes nodosus
The Production of Monoclonal Antibodies by Hybridoma Technology for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Diseases Affecting Sheep Production
Improving Old and Devising New Sheep Production Systems
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Graduate Officers Genetic Improvement of the Strong Wool South Australian Merino by Reduction in the Incidence of Body Strike The Reproductive Performance of Sheep Grazing a Low Oestrogen Cuitivar of Trifolium subterranean SUb-species Yanninicum The Genetic Improvement of the Reproductive Performance of Flocks Grazing Oestrogenic Pastures Persistence and Production Under Grazing of New AphidResistant Cuitivars of Lucerne (Medicago sativa) in the South East of South Australia A Comparison of the Reproductive and Productive Performance of Bungaree Ewes and Rams with Booroola X Bungaree, Trangie Fertility X Bungaree and 'T' flock X Bungaree Cross Ewes and Rams in South Australia Development of Plant Tests for Diagnosing the Phosphorus Status of Annual Medics and Lucerne Melanin Pigmented Fibres in the White Merino Fleece Wool Breeding and Development of Clover Scorch Resistant Yanninicum Subclovers Breeding Lucerne Cultivars Resistant to Sitona Weevil Pasture Improvement Through the Identification and Development of New Pastures Species and Cultivars in the Higher Rainfall Zone of South Australia Selection of Low Phosphorus Requiring Annual legumes Responses in Merino Sheep to Management Procedures for the Control of Gastro-Intestinal Nematodes (Transferred from South Australian Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science) Vitamin E Metabolism and its Interaction with Selenium in Sheep (Transferred from South Australian Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science)
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
A Study of Wool Characters Affecting Fleece Rot and Flystrike
Superphosphate-Effects on Pasture and Sheep Production
Fertiliser Decline Functions-Phosphate Demonstration of the Importance of the Adoption of Measures to Protect Young Sheep from Flystrike and a Preliminary Investigation of the Ecology and Population Fluctations of Sheep Blowfly in Tasmania Yellows Virus Infecting Pasture Legumes and Grasses
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Superphosphate Recommendations for Animal Production from Pasture
Role of Red-Legged Earth Mite in Annual Pastures The Role of Nutritional Deficiencies in Sheep Production Establishment of Co-operative Nucleus for High Fertility Merino Flocks Alleviation of Water Repellence in Soils Correction of Pastures Deficient in Zinc for Sheep Evaluation of Early Maturing Medics for Sandy, Alkaline Soils Pastures Deterioration at Esperance Grazing Management Investigation-Mulga Shrublands (Coodardy)

3366 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

The Development of an Early Warning System for Timing of Insecticide Application --based on an Intensive Ecological and Behavioural Study of the Primary Sheep Blowflies with Emphasis on Sheep/Blowfly Interaction in the Field
The Environmental Effects on the Incidence and Development of Dermatophilosis and Fleece Rot-Conditions Predisposing Sheep to Body Strike
Soil Acidity InvestigationMedium Rainfall Areas Disease and Insect Resistance Screening of National Subterranean Clover Collection Annual Ryegrass Toxicity (ARGT) and Anti-Toxin Production Study of Host Parasite Relations and Control of Annual Ryegrass Toxicity The Impact of Exotic Legume Aphids on Existing and Experimental Pasture Legumes in the Esperance Region Mechanism of Fly Population Maintenance in Low Rainfall Areas-with Reference to Covert Strike, Carcase Breeding and the Relationship of Fly Numbers to their involvement in Strike Study of Host Plant-Rhizobia Relationships with Medics and Rhizobia on Acid Soils The Control of Dryland Salinity, by Land-use Manipulation in the Esperance Plains Region-Provision of Specialised Equipment The Productivity and Stability of a Semi-arid Shrubland Pasture when Grazed at Two Stocking Rates near Carnarvon, Western AustraliaTravel Grant (A. McR. Holm) Epidemiology of Internal Parasites in the Medium Rainfall Area of Western Australia Response to Selection for High and Low Resistance to Dermatophilosis Studies with Caprine Syncytial Retroviruses in Sheep Preparation of Plant Analysis Diagnostic Criteria Manual
SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE OF NEW SOUTH WALES
An Investigation into the Establishment and Survival Requirements of Three Major Inedible Shrub Species of North-Western New South Wales
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF CROWN LANDS AND SURVEY
(Vermin and Noxious Weeds Destruction Board)
Effectiveness of Myxomatosis for Rabbit Control Effects of Diseases other than Myxomatosis in Wild Rabbits
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Responses in Merino Sheep to Management Procedures for the Control of Gastro-Intestinal Nematodes (In collaboration with South Australian Department of Agriculture)
Vitamin E Metabolism and its Interaction with Selenium in Sheep-Capital Grant
SOIL CONSERVATION AUTHORITY, VICTORIA
Water Use Efficiency of Dryland Pastures
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
Application of Recombinant DNA Technology to Parasite Control
DEAKIN UNIVERSITY
Fleece Chemistry with Particular Reference to Factors Influencing Susceptibility to Fleece Rot
GRIFFITH UNIVERSITY
Analysis of Environmental Factors in Relation to Competition Between Aristida and Preferred Range Grasses

JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
Study of Immunity to Ovine Squamous Cell Carcinoma
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Development of Assays fo Sheep IgE for investigation of Resistance to Blowfly Larvae and other Parasites
Stess Effects on Maternal and Fetal Metabolism, and on Fetal Growth and Development in the Pregnant Ewe
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY
Ecological Genetics of Insecticide Resistance in the Australian Sheep Blowfly (Previously titled 'Genetic Studies on the Australian Sheep Blowfly in Relation to Its Control by Genetic Means')
Limitations to Efficient Digestion and Untilisation of Subterranean Clover by Sheep
Development fo Flock Health Programs for Sheep (In association with Victoria Department of Agriculture)
Farmers' attitudes Towards and Acceptance of Blowfly Control Measures
Plant Cell Wall Components Limiting Digestion In Ruminants Capital Grant-Purchase of Laboratory Equipment
Capital Grant-Growth Room Peptide Models for Beta Structures in Keratins Wool Harvesting Technology Transfer-Engineering Liaison Development of Improved Means of Mechnical Wool Severence
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Assessment of Manganese and Iron Status of Pastures The Effect of Superphosphate and Selenium in Sheep The Provision of Animal Health and Protection Programs. A Cost-Effective Study of Flock Health and Production Programs for Sheep Assessment of Manganesium, Calcium and Zinc Status of Pastures Lysosomes, Lysosomal Enzymes and Chronic Copper Poisoning of Sheep Economic Analysis of Salt Tolerant Shrub Pasture Planting and Associated Activities in the West Maya Catchment Area The Kidney in Chromic Copper Poisoning of Sheep
MONASH UNIVERSITY
Studies on Fetal Skin Development and Fetal Growth (a) Effects of Epidermal Growth Factor (b) Interaction of Growth Factors with Thyroid and Adrenal Hormones (c) Effect of Heat Stress (In collaboration with Queensland DPI)
An Investigation of the Influence of Cutaneous Electric Fields and Currents on Fibre Formation in the Follicles of Sheep
Treatment of Wool with N-Acyl Isatin Derivatives
MURESK AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE
The Relationship Between Testes Size in Rams and Flock Fertility
Application of a Technique for Ram Semen Storage to a Large Scale A.!, Program
Preparation of Efficient Documentation and Learning Programs for Grazier Users of Micro Computers
UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND
Sulphur Rates, Sources and Residual Values for Pastures Urea and Electrolyte Excretion in Sheep Genetype and Phenotype Interactions: Temperature Regulation and Renal Competence Survey of Management Practices Used in the Amelioration of Blowfly Strike Increasing Productivity of Sheep Dynamics of Growth of Sheep Farms

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3367

Economic Evaluation of Technical Innovations in Wool Production
The Use of Decision Analysis to Evaluate Helminth Control Starategies
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Low Cost Infrared Reflectance Spectroscopy (NIRS) Wool Measurement for Sheep Breeders
Oviposition Suppressants in the Control of the Sheep Blowfly Lucilia cuprina: Is there a Relationship Between Behavioural Adaptation to Supressants and Insecticidal Resistance?
Alkali Treatment of Cereal Grains and Cereal Grain Rations for Production and Maintenance Drought Feeding of Sheep
Blowfly Populations in the Arid Zone and Their Relationship to Flystrike Incidence
The Development of Improved Wool severance Mechanisms
Assistance in the Publication of the Journal 'Wool Technology and Sheep Breeding'
Improved Specification in Wool Commerce (previously 'Increased Specification in Wool Commerce')
Measurement Aspects of Industry Standards for Australian Wool
The Measurement of Staple Length and Staple Strength Support Staff Maintenance of Equipment Purchased from Wool Research Trust Fund Insurance of Equipment Fixation of Reactive Dyeings on Wool Applications of Chemicals to Wool to Improve Lightfastness of Dyes The Influence of Machine Parameters on the Processing Performance of Wool in Fabric Manufacture, and the Effect of These Variables on Fabric Properties Application of Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM) to Studies of Wool Fibres Investigation and Objective Specification of Wool Fabric Mechanical Properties, Quality and Performance The Viscoelastic Properties of Wool Fibres Important in Fabric Performamce On-Line Measurement of State Variables of Wool Yarn Manufacturing Process Clerical Support for Wool Research Projects Development and Updating of Physical Testing Equipment for Wool Fibres, Yarns and Fabrics Using Latest Microprocessor and Electronic Techniques Finite Element Methods for the Mechanics of Wool Fibre Assemblies The Structure of Sirospun Yarns
NEWCASTLE UNIVERSITY
Immunity in the Respiratory Tract of Sheep
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
A Study of Sperm Capacitation Fertilisation and Embryo Transfer in Sheep
Sensory Manipulation of the Behaviour of the Female Sheep Blowfly Under Semi-Field Conditions
Futher Studies of Phosphorus Metabolism 3nd Phosphorus Deficiency in Sheep
The Influence of Absorbed Protein to Energy Rations on Pre and Postnatal Lamb Growth and Wool Production
Rapid Determination of Total Body Nitrogen (Muscle Mass) by Neutron Activation Analysis
The Field Selection of Sheep for Resistance to Body Strike Effect of Environmental Temperature on the Ovarian Activity of the Ewe

RIVERINA COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
Improved Production from Shedded Superfine Wool Merino Wethers
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Lamb Losses Associated with Injuries Received at Birth 'Alkalage' Utilisation by Sheep Factors Involved in Survival and Development of Embryos During Early Pregnancy in the Ewe Enquiry into Vetrazin, the New Primary Sheep Blowfly Specific Cytogenetics of Host Pathogen Interactions in Larval diseases of the Sheep Blowfly The Reticular Groove-A Route to Increased Efficiency of Administration of Anthelmintics and Other Therapeutic Agents Wool Growth in Pregnancy and Lactation Examination of Semen Production of Rams and Selection of Rams with Particular Characteristics of Semen Charactiristics of Sheep witb Natural and Acquired Resistance to Footrot
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Oestrogenic Activity in Pasture Legumes The Indentification of Inoculant Mycorrhizal Fungi in Natural Soil Genetic Variability within Strains of Subterranean Clover Development of University Research Farm Development of Acidity in Soils Management of the Symbiosis Between Vesicular Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi and Pasture Plants to Increase the Efficiency of Fertilizer Use Productivity of Salt Tolerant Forage Grasses and Shrubs at High Salinity (In collaboration with Muresk Agricultural College and Western Australian Department of Agriculture) Root Rots of Subterranean Clovers in South Western Western Australia Assessment of the Feasibility of Using Existing Data Collected by Members of the Australian Merino Society for Genetic Analysis Maternal Behaviour and the Survival of Lambs Born as Multiples Under Field Conditions Sheep Presentation, Manipulation and Control Systems Engineering for Automated Shearing
OTHER ORGANIZAnONS
Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture & Animal Husbandry (via Victorian Department of Agriculture)- Publication of the Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry
Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd-Automatic Wool Grab Sampling Machine for Standard Bales
ICI Australia Operations Pty LtdValidation of Chemical Screens (Defleecing)
Merino Wool Harvesting Pty Ltd-Mobile/Transportable Automated Shearing System
Prince Henry's Hospital, Melbourne-Embryo-maternal Relationships in Early Pregnancy (In association with Victorian Department of Agriculture)
St Vincent's School of Medical Research-Ovine Pituitary Hormones (In collaboration with the Australian Society for Reproductive Biology) Victorian College of Pharmacy Ltd-Control of Bacterial Proliferation in the Fleece
Optimization of Drug Delivery to Merino-type Sheep McLennan, Magasanik Associates Pty Ltd--Overview Study to Identify Research and Development Options and Priorities for the Handling, Packaging and Distribution of Wool in Australia To be Nominated-Technical Research Review Project

3368 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

McGowen International Pty Ltd-AMS Market Research Project: Part 2
To be Nominated~~ Identification of Development and Manufacturing Resources for AMS
W. D. Scott & Coy Pty Ltd-Analysis of Competitive Current Technology Options to AMS and likely Farm Technology and Supply Environment
To be Nominated--Industry Acceptance Study Project Port Phillip Mills Pty Ltd-An Evaluation of the Forte 2585 Moisture and Weight Measurement System on Bales of Scoured Wool
Centexbel
Influence of Wool Fibre Characteristics on Yarn Properties and Spinning Conditions
Prediction of the Effect of Carding and Combing on Fibre Length Distribution and Noil
Development of a System for Dark Fibre Detection and Classification on Raw Wool Samples
DWI,Aachen
The Role of the Cuticle in the Industrial Processing of Wool Mechanisms of Binding of Mothproofing Agents Modification of the Cell Membrane Complex during Industrial Processing of Wool Textile Research Institute, Princeton, USA-Analysis of Dyestuff Transport Phenomena in Wool by Microspectrophotometry
POSTGRADUATE SCHOLARSHIPS
New South Wales Department of Agriculture
A. R. Gilmour (Massey University, Ph.D.) Department of Sheep Husbandry The Estimation of Genetic Parameters for Discrete Variables
K. D. Atkins (Edinburgh University, Ph.D.) Institute of Animal Genetics The Prediction and Estimation of Response to Selection in Sheep Populations
Queensland Department of Primary Industries
M. E. Rose (Queensland University, Ph.D.) Department of Animal Production-An Evaluation of the Genetic and Economic Consequences of Alternative Breeding Strategies in the Queensland Merino Industry
Victorian Department of Agriculture
F. D. Brien (Edinburgh University, UK, Ph.D.) Institute of Animal Genetics --Genetic Selection for Improving Reproductive Performance in Sheep Using New Methods
A. R. Moran (Melbourne University, M.Ag. Studies) Facility of Agriculture and Forestry-Agricultural Extension
Western Australian Department of Agriculture
H. G. Gardiner (Utah State University, Ph.D.) Department of Range Science-The Effects of Grazing on Arid Zone Vegetation
R. B. Richards (University of California, USA, Diploma) Pathology, School of Veterinary Medicine-General Study
Adelaide University
S. D. Wilton (Indep. Ph.D) Department of Biochemistry-- The Organization of Keratin Genes
J. A. Rothnagel (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry -Biochemical Studies of Mammalian Skin: The Enzymic Conversion of Arginine Residues to Citrulline in the Hair Follicle
S. T. Were (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Organic Chemistry-Synthesis of Perloline, a Toxin from Lolium perene
B. J. Hosking (Indep. Ph.D.) Waite Agricultural Research Institute, Department of Agronomy-Effects of Rate, Extent

and Site of Digestion on Herbage and Supplement N Use by Grazing Sheep
B. S. Robinson (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Agricultural Biochemistry-The Role of Choline and Betaine in the Nutrition Metabolism and Production in Sheep
Australian National University
A. M. Barton (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyImmunity to Larval Cestodes
D. O. Irving (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyBacterial Expression of Parasite Genes: A New Approach to Obtaining Parasite Antigens for Vaccination Studies
D. R. Larkman (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of ZoologyInteraction of Anthelmintics on Biochemical Pathways of Haemonchus contortus in Sheep
P. J. Skelly (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry The Properties of the Larval Cuticle Proteins of the Sheep Blowfly, Lucilia cuprina
La Trobe University
To be Nominated (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry--Molybdenum Metabolism in Sheep
Melbourne University
I. M. Grant (Indep. M. VSc.) Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies-Control of Reproductive Inefficiency in Sheep Flocks
G. M. Clarke (Ph.D.) Department of Genetics Ecological Genetics of Insecticide Resistance in the Australian Sheep Blowfly
K. J. Smits (M.Sc.) Department of Physical ChemistryPicosecond Kinetic Spectroscopy of Stilbene-based Fluorescent Whitening Agents
University of New England
S. W. Cridland (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition-Factors Governing the Control of Nutrient Utilisation by Sheep
S. L. Weise (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition-Low Productivity Sydnromes in SheepFactors Governing the Control of the Direction of Nutrient Utilisation by Sheep for Growth, Wool Growth, Pregnancy and Lactation
S. Hamilton (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Agricultural Economics and Business Management-Training Program in Wool Economics
J. A. Hamilton (M.Rur.Sc.) Department of Physiology Genotype and Phenotype Interactions: Temperature Regulations and Renal Competence
G. W. Kaine (M.Ec.) Department of Agricultural Economics and Business Management~ A General Equilibrium Model of the Wool Industry
I. W. Purvis (Ph.D.) Department of Animal Science Genetic Relationships between Male Reproductive Characteristics and Female Reproductive Efficiency
University of New South Wales
(School of Wool and Pastoral Sciences)
R. D. Pattinson (Indep. M.Sc.) School of Wool and Pastoral Sciences-The Influence of Pre-Sale Testing on the Value Determining Characteristics of Greasy Wool Sale Lots
(School of Textile Technology)
R. Holmes-Brown (Ph.D.) School of Textile Technology-- Removal ofmoi,ture from Loose Textile Assemblies
University of Queensland
E. T. Goodall (lndep. M.Agr.Sc.) Department of PhysiologyThe Control of Early Pregnancy in the Ewe

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3369

C. Eisemann (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of EntomologySensory Manipulation of the Behaviour of Sheep Blowfly
J. G. E. Thompson (Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Anatomy-An Investigation of Fertilisation and Embryo Transfer in Sheep
J. Clarke (Ph.D.) Department of Animal ProductionStudies of Phosphorus Metabolism and Deficiency in Sheep
University of Sydney
A. Simpson (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Physiology-Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in Relation to Increasing the Efficiency of Its Preservation for Artificial Insemination
P. P. T. Goh (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Physiology-Physiology and Biochemistry of Ram Semen in Relation to Increasing the Efficiency of Its Preservation for Artificial Insemination
N. C. Sangster (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Biochemistry-Comparative Biochemistry of Anthelmintic Resistance and Susceptible Strongyle Parasites of Sheep
P. J. Trevor-Jones (Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry-Roughage Utilisation by Sheep
A. M. Reid (Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary Physiology-The Reticular Groove-a route to Increased Efficiency of Administration of Anthelmintics and other Therapeutic Agents
G. A. Smith (lndep. Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry-Diurnal Rhythms in the Release of Hormones of Reproduction
G. M. Hough (Ph.D.) Department of Animal Husbandry--- Wool Growth in Pregnancy and Lactation
J. P. Ryan (M.Sc.Ag.) Department of Animal Husbandry-Factors Involved in Survival and Development of Embryos During Early Pregnancy in the Ewe
Murdoch University
J. F. Hudman (Ph.D.) Department of Veterinary StudiesEffect of Superphosphate and Selenium in Sheep
R. O. Nable (lndep. Ph.D.) School of Environmental and Life Sciences-Assessment of Manganese and Iron Status of Pastures
To be Nominated-(Ph.D.) Department of Environmental and Life Sciences-Biochemical Forms of Trace Elements in Plants
James Cook University
P. Daniels (Indep. Ph.D.) Department of Tropical Veterinary Science-Study of Immunity to Ovine Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Monash University
S. B. Hooper (Ph.D.) Department of PhysiologyRelationship between Prostoglandin Release into the CSF of Sheep and LHRH Release into the Jugular
G. I. Jorgensen (Ph.D.) Department of PhysiologyStudies of Growth Factors in the Foetal Sheep
University of Tasmania
H. Williams (Ph.D.) Department of Zoology-Ecology of Calliphorid Flies in Tasmania
Western Australia
P. D. Kovesi (B.E.) Department of Mechanical Engineering-Control of Kinematically Redundant Manipulator Arms
OTHER ORGANISAnONS
Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology
To be Nominated (M.App.Sc.) Department of Applied Biology-Primary Structure of Wool Proteins

UNDERGRADUATE SCHOLARSHIPS
University of New South Wales
(School of Wool & Pastoral Sciences)
Undergraduate Scholarships
RESEARCH FELLOWSHIPS
Western Australia
D. G. Masters, Department of Nutrition and Animal Science-Zinc in Sheep Reproduction and Wool Growth
OVERSEAS TRAVEL GROWTH
State Departments
South Australia Department of Agriculture-Dr R. W. Ponzoni
Universities
New South Wales-Associated Professor J. W. James Western Australia-Dr T. Flowers Western Australia--Professor W. D. Jeschke MurdochProfessor J. F. Loneragan La Trobe--Dr A. W. Bell Adelaide-Dr D. J. Cooper Melbourne-R. B. Freeman Marcus Oldham Farm Management College -Mr A. G. Blackburn
Interstate Travel
Mr J. R. Edwards-Department of Agriculture, Western Australia
4 (b) MEAT RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS SUPPORTED 1978-79
(i) Cattle and Beef Research
Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation (AMLC)
Classification of Beef Carcases Bruising in Cattle Research/Industry Liaison Market Research and Off Farm Costs Collection and Processing of Edible Blood Products from Cattle
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
Genetic Studies; Belmont and Rockhampton Evaluation of Acaricides, Brisbane Tick Ecology, Physiology and Biochemistry, Brisbane Endoparasites of Beef Cattle in Southern and Northern Australia, Parkville and Indooroopilly Tick Resistance and Tick-borne Fevers of Cattle, Indooroopilly, Jimboomba and Townsville Biological Control of Dung and Buffalo Fly, Canberra, Rockhampton and Pretoria, South Africa Bovine Tuberculosis, Parkville Pasture and Animal Production Studies Northwest Australia Ecology and Control of Buffalo Fly The Culture of Babesia bovis in vitro in Tissue Culture Controlled Release in Mineral Nutrition and Biological Disorders Biological Control of Exotic Aphid Pests Plant Introduction Seed Production and Primary Evaluation Improvement and Testing of Legumes Improving Techniques for Estimating the Requirements of Tropical Pastures for Phosphate Fertilizer Beef Allocation to the Meat Research Laboratory, Cannon Hill Screw-worm Fly Investigations: Sterile Male Trial

3370 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Bureau of Agricultural Economics (BAE)
Economic Considerations in Property Management for Beef Production
Studies in Beef Prices Regional Economic Studies of the Australian Beef Cattle Industry Integration and Inter-regional Economic Relationships in the Beef Cattle Industry
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Pasture Studies, Queensland Studies of Management Practices, 'Swans Lagoon' Millaroo Studies on Cattle Tick, Tick Fever and Tick Control, Yeerongpilly, Wacol and Oonoonba Analysis of Reproductive Data Measurement of Beef Carcases Low Productivity in Cattle in South West Queensland Residue and Tick Control Programs Development of Control Systems for the Spotted Alfalfa and Blue Green Aphids
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT AGRICULTURE
Nature and Organisation of the Beef Cattle Industry, with Special Reference to the Northern Areas of NSW, Armidale and Grafton
Beef Cattle Improvement Through Breeding Methods, Trangie
The Significance of Copper Deficiency to the Cattle Industry, Glenfield
Field Evaluation of Feral Pig Control Techniques, Glenfield
Maintenance Requirements for Phosphorous and Sulphur of Grazed Pasture on Beef Properties of Coastal NSW
Phosphorus Levels in Cattle in the Pastoral Zone Inherited Enzyme Deficiencies in Livestock An Investigation of Techniques for Culturing Vesicular Arbuscular (VA) Mycorrhizas on Artificial Media Immunity to Liver Fluke The Biology of Ostertagia sp. in Relation to Infections in Cattle
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Improving Production from the Beef Herd Investigation of Calf Wastage, 'Attwood', Broadmeadows Investigation of Iodine in Sheep and Cattle The Application of the Serving Capacity Test in the Breeding of Beef Bulls and in their Mating Management Improving the Efficiency of Calf Production from Annual Pasture Improved Laboratory Methods for the Detection of Cattle with Ostertagiasis
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Breeding and Management of Cattle and Fodder Crop Production and Utilisation for Beef Production in Southern Australia
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Beef Production in the Agricultural Areas of WA, Bramley, Northam, Mt Barker, Wokalup and Chapman Research Station
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Live Animals Assessment in Relation to Beef Carcase Classification

ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY
Studies of the Nitrogen and Energy Turnover of Cattle Grazing Sown Pastures in the Mediterranean Environment of South Australia
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Properties of Enterophathogenic E. coli and the Incidence of such Strains Amongst Scouring Beef Calves
Hypomagnesaemia and Hypocalcaemia of Ruminants
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY
Growth and Body Composition Studies Physiological Studies on Intensive Rearing Practices in Calves and Parasitic Gastritis Endocrinology of Serving Inability and Testicular Dysfunction in Bulls The Utilisation of Poor Quality Roughage by Grazing Ruminants
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Copper in Pasture Plants Economic Importance of Epidemiology and New Treatment Methods for Infection Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis Contribution for the Publication of the Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Melbourne
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Viral, Bacterial and Leptospiral Diseases Studies on the Arthropod Parasites of Cattle Synchronisation of Oestrus in Beef Cattle Lymphatic Studies in Cattle Studies on the Validation and Efficiency of Meat Inspection and Meat Hygiene Procedures for Disease Control and Public Health Live Animal Assessment in Relation to Carcase Classification and Marketing The Quantity and Quality of Beef Production in Brahman Steers The Pathways of Parasites in Tick Vector and the Metabolic Factors in the Vectors in Relation to the Development of the Infective Agents Live Animal Assessment in relation to Carcase Classification and Marketing
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Bovine Nutrutional Studies: Factors Affecting Fermentation and Feed Utilisation in the Bovine Rumen
The Large-scale Production and Testing of Endogone Spores for the Inoculation Forage crop and Pastures
(ii) Lamb and Mutton Research
AMLC
Sheep Carcase Classification Pilot Trial Research/Industry Liaison
Market Research and 'Off Farm' Costs
CSIRO
Selective Breeding and Cross-breeding for Meat Production, Ryde and Armidale
Sheep Blowfly Investigations (Genetic and Ecological Studies)
Control ofOvine Footrot CSIRO Meat Research Laboratory Bluetongue--the Determination of Vectors
BAE
Production Economics of the Mutton and Lamb Industries

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3371

NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Quality and Use of Legume Inoculants, and Studies of Nitrogen Fixation, Gosford
A study of the Predisposing Causes of Blowfly Strike and Mechanisms that Afford Control
Control of Lucerne Aphids
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE Reproduction and Lamb Survival
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Improvement of Fertility of Crossbred Ewes, Kybybolite Control of Annual Ryegrass Toxicity Survey of Reproductive Rates of Prime Lamb Mothers
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Evaluation of Sown Pasture Legumes for Sheep Proeuction Including Reproduction; SW of Western Australia
The Investigation of Lupinosis (with CSIRO) Wastage in Supply Marketing and Processing of Sheep Meats Lupin Grain Supplementation of Sheep and Lambs for Out of Season Meat Production
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT AGRICULTURE The Pathogenesis of Sarcocystis Ovifelis Infection in Sheep
ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY Studies on Part-partum Oestrus in Sheep
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY Epidemiology and Immunology of Cysticercus ovis infection
Design of Electric Fences Regulation of Follicular Development in the Ovary of the Ewe
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY Training Project to Study the Early Development of the Sheep Embryo
UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND Phosphorus Nutrition of Pasture Plants
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES Consumer requirements for Lamb Comparison of Sires to Produce a North American Carcase The White Suffolk-the Production of a New Meat Ram Breed with Growth Characteristics of the Suffolk but Without Black Wool
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND Pasture and Seed Production Studies, Brisbane. Normal and Abnormal Promotions of Digestive Organs with Particular Reference to Domestic Ruminant Animals
UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA Interactions between Sulphur and Molybdenum and Copper Metabolism in the Sheep
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE
Sporazoa infection in sheep
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY Anatomical Studies of Sheep, Sydney

UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Co-operative reproductive research in Western Australian Flocks
MEAT RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS SUPPORTED 1979-80
(i) Cattle and Beef Research
AMLC
Classification of Beef Carcases Research/Industry Liaison Market Research and 'Off Farm Costs'
CSIRO
Genetic Studies; 'Belmont' and Rockhampton Evaluation of Acaricides, Brisbane Tick Ecology, Physiology and Biochemistry, Brisbane Endoparasites of Beef Cattle in Southern and Northern Australia, Parkville an Indooroopilly Tick Resistance and Tick-borne Fevers of Cattle, Indooroopilly, Jimboomba and Townsville Biological Control of Dung and Buffalo Fly, Canberra, Rockhampton and Pretoria, South Africa Bovine Tuberculosis, Parkville Pasture and Animal Production Studies Northwest Australia Ecology and Control of Buffalo Fly The Culture of Babesia bovis in vitro in Tissue Culture Controlled Release in Mineral Nutrition and Biological Disorders Biological Control of Exotic Aphid Pests Plant Introduction, Seed Production and Primary Evaluation Improvement and Testing of Legumes Improving Techniques for Estimating the Requirements of Tropical Pastures for Phosphate Fertilizer Screw-worm Fly Investigations Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis CSIRO Meat Research Laboratory, Cannon Hill
BAE
Economic Considerations in Property Management for Beef Production
Studies in Beef Prices Regional Economic Studies of the Australian Beef Cattle Industry Integration and Inter-regional Economic Relationships in the Beef Cattle Industry
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Pasture Studies, Queensland Studies of Management Practices, 'Swans Lagoon', Millaroo Studies on Cattle Tick, Tick Fever and Tick Control, Yeerongpilly, Wacol and Oonoonba Analysis of Reproductive Data Measurement of Beef Carcases Low Productivity in Cattle in South West Queensland Residue and Tick Control Programs Development of Control Systems for the Spotted Alfalfa and Blue Green Aphids The Use of Acrylic Polymers as Insecticide Depots for Control of Ectoparasites in Cattle Mulga Feeding of Cattle
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Nature and Organization of the Beef Cattle Industry, with Special Reference to the Northern Areas of NSW, Armidale and Grafton

3372 REPRESENTA TIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Beef Cattle Improvement Through Breeding Methods, Trangie
Maintenance Requirements for Phosphorus and Sulphur of Grazed Pasture on Beef Properties of Coastal NSW
Phosphorus Levels in Cattle in the Pastoral Zone An Investigation of Techniques for Culturing Vesicular Arbuscular (VA) Mycorrhizas on Artificial Media Immunity to Liver Fluke The Biology of Ostertagia sp. in Relation to Infections in Cattle Studies of Bluetongue Viruses in New South Wales, Glenfield A System for the Individual Identification and Recording of Animals Significance of Copper Deficiency in Cattle in New South Wales Agricultural Damage by Feral Pigs and Studies of Control Methods
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Beef Research Program-Hamilton Investigation of Calf Wastage, 'Attwood', Broadmeadows Investigation of Iodine in Sheep and Cattle The Application of the Serving Capacity Test in the Breeding of Beef Bulls and in their Mating Management Improving the Efficiency of Calf Production from Annual Pasture Induced Calving and Subsequent Productivity of Cows Handling and Transport of Cattle to Slaughter in Relation to Improving Efficiency, Safety, Meat Quality and Animal Welfare
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Breeding and Management of Cattle and Fodder Crop Production and Utilisation for Beef Production in Southern Australia
The Effect of Early Weaning and a Moderate Growth Rate from Birth to First Mating on the Fertility and Mothering Ability of Hereford Heifers
Integration of Straightbred and Crossbred Systems of Beef Production
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Beef Production in the Agricultural Areas of WA, Bramley, Northam, Mount Barker, Wokalup and Chapman Research Station
Responses to Selection of Multi-Breed and Single Breed Herds of Cattle
Serology of Leptospinosis by the Ensyme-linked Imminosorbent Assa y
NORTHERN TERRITORY DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY PRODUCTION
Beef Cattle Industry Survey 1979-80 Analysis of Pesticides in Beef
ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY
Studies into the Summer Nutrition of Cattle Grazing Sown Pastures in the Mediterranean Environment of South Australia
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
The Immunological Basis of Disease Resistance and Susceptibility of Cattle
Control of Sex of Offspring in Cattle
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Properties of Enterophathogenic E. coli and the Incidence of such Strains Amongst Scouring Beef Calves

Hypomagnesaemia and Hypocalcaemia of Ruminants
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY
The Utilisation of Poor quality Roughage by Grazing Ruminants
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Copper in Pasture Plants Economic Importance of Epidemiology and New Treatment Methods for Infection Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis
NEW ENGLAND UNIVERSITY
Efficient Combinations of Non-protein Nitrogen By-pass Starch in the Utilisation of Feeds by Ruminants
The Establishments of Improved Pastures for Bloat Control and Increased Productivity in Cattle
Research into the Cause of Bloat Supervision of the Development and Consolidation of the National Beef Recording Scheme Throughout Australia To Up-grade the Analytical Capabilities of the NBRS to Meet Current Demands of Industry To Develop and Test a Computerised System for Selling Cattle
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Studies in Growth Production in Grazing Cattle
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Viral, Bacterial and Leptospiral Diseases Studies on the Arthropod Parasities of Cattle Control of Ovarian Activity in Cattle by Hormonal Treatment Lymphatic Studies in Cattle Studies on the Validation and Efficiency of Meat Inspection and Meat Hygiene Procedures for Disease Control and Public Health Live Animal Assessment in Relation to Carcase Classification and Marketing Factors Affecting Infectivity to Haematozoa to Arthropod Vectors with Special Reference to Bovine Piroplasms
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
The Life Cycle, Pathology, Epidemiology, Control Metabolism and Immunology of Onchocera gibsoni in Northern Australia
Correlative Studies on Lesions and Lymph Node Changes in Slaughtered Cattle
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Factors Affecting Food Intake, Growth and the Efficiency of Protein Production in Ruminants and their Affects on Carcase Composition
Epidemiology Pathogenesis Virology Immunology of Neurofibromatosis of Beef Cattle
A Taxomic Study of the Australian Species of Lasiohelea Blood Sucking, Biting Mites
Physiological Studies on Intensive Rearing Practices in Calves and Parasitic Gastritis
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Bovine Nutritional Studies: Factors Affecting Fermentation and Feed Utilisation in the Bovine Rumen
The Large-scale Production and testing of Endogone Spores for the Inoculation of Forage Crops and Pastures
MISCELLANEOUS
Contribution for the Publication of the 'Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry', Melbourne.

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3373

(ii) Lamb and Mutton Research
AMLC
Sheep Carcase Classification Research/Industry Liaison Market Research and 'Off Farm' Costs
CSIRO
Selective Breeding and Cross-breeding for Meat Production, Ryde and Armidale Sheep Blowfly Investigations (Genetic and Ecological Studies)
Control of Ovine Footrot CSIRO Meat Research Laboratory Bluetongue--the Determination of Vectors
BAE
Production Economics of the Mutton and Lamb Industries
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Manipulation of the Total Amount and Partitioning of Fat in the Body of the Sheep
Control Strategies for Wingless Grasshopper in Tableland Improved Pasture Areas
A Study of Contamination of Sheep Carcases with Grass Seeds
Quality and Use of Legume Inoculants, and Studies of Nitrogen Fixation, Gosford
A Study of the Predisposing Causes of Blowfly Strike and Mechanisms that Afford Control
Control of Lucerne Aphids
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Improving Reproductive Performance, Central and Northern Victoria
A Study of the Effects of Various Management Procedures upon the Activation of Primordial Follicles and their Susceptibility of Atresia in the Sheep Ovary
Strategies to Ensure that Mating of Ewes Occurs to Produce Prime Lamb at an Optimum Time for Marketing
Synchronisation of Oestrus and Ovulation using a Prostaglandin Inhibitor Device
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Improvement of Sheep Reproductive Rates
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Control of Annual Ryegrass Toxicity Survey of Reproductive Rates of Prime Lamb Mothers Possible Role of a High Fertility Merino Strain in Crossbred Prime Lamb Production in South Australia Advantages and Disadvantages of High Twinning Rates of Prime Lamb Flocks
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Evaluation of Sown Pasture Legumes for Sheep Production Including Reproduction; SW of Western Australia
The Investigation of Lupinosis (with CSIRO) Wastage in Supply Marketing and Processing of Sheep Meats Lupin Grain Supplementation of Sheep and Lambs for Out of Season Meat Production Investigation of Polioencephalomalacia
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
The Pathogenesis of Sarcocystis ovifelis Infection in Sheep Publication of Papers Relating to AMRC Projects

Sarcocystis ovicanis as a Potential of Ovine Abortion
ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY Studies on Post-partum Oestrus in Sheep Control of the Pasture Cockchafer
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE
Sporazoa Infection in Sheep
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY The Immunology of Cysticerosis/Taeniasis in Domestic Animals
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY Training Project to Study the Early Development of the Sheep Embryo
NEW ENGLAND UNIVERSITY Phosphorus Nutrition of Pasture Plants
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
The White Suffolk-the Production of New Meat Ram Breed with Growth Characteristics of the Suffolk but Without Black Wool
New Breed of Sheep Specialising in High Levels of Fertility and Capacity for Good Autumn Lambing
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND Pasture and Seed Production Studies, Brisbane Normal and Abnormal Promotions of Digestive Organs with Particular Reference to Domestic Ruminant Animals
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY Anatomical Studies of Sheep, Sydney
UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA Interactions between Sulphur and Molybdenum and Copper Metabolism in the Sheep
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA Co-operative Reproductive Research in Western Australian Flocks Sulphur Deficiency and Botanical Composition of Pastures
MISCELLANEOUS Characterisation Bluetongue-like Viruses by RNA RNA hybridization techniques
MEAT RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS SUPPORTED 1980-81 (i) Cattle and Beef Research AMLC
Research/Industry Liaison Market Research and 'Off Farm Costs' Collection and Processing of Edible Blood Products from Cattle Automated Slaughtering
CSIRO Genetic Studies; 'Belmont' and Rockhampton Evaluation of Acaricides, Brisbane Tick Ecology, Physiology and Biochemistry, Brisbane Endoparasites of Beef Cattle in Southern and Northern Australia, Parkville and Indooroopilly Tick Resistance and Tick-borne Fevers of Cattle, Indooroopil\y, Jimboomba and Townsville Biological Control of Dung and Buffalo Fly, Canberra, Rockhampton and Pretoria, South Africa

3374 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Pasture and Animal Production Studies Northwest Australia
Ecology and Control of Buffalo Fly The Culture of Babesia bovis in vitro in Tissue Culture Controlled Release in Mineral Nutrition and Biological Disorders Clayton, Victoria Biological Control of Exotic Pests Plant Introduction, Seed Production and Primary Evaluation Improvement and Testing of Legumes Improving Techniques for Estimating the Requirements of Tropical Pastures for Phosphate Fertilizer Screw-worm Fly Investigations Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis A Permanent Solution to the Bloat Problem through Plant Breeding CSI RO Meat Research Laboratory Cannon Hill
BAE
Economic Considerations in Property Management for Beef Production
Studies in Beef Prices Regional Economic Studies of the Australian Beef Cattle Industry Integration and Inter-regional Economic Relationships in the Beef Cattle Industry
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Breeding and Management of Cattle and Fodder Crop Production and Utilisation for Beef Production in Southern Australia
The Effect of Early Weaning and a Moderate Growth Rate from Birth to First Mating on the Fertility and Mothering Ability of Hereford Heifers
Integration of Straightbred and Crossbred Systems of Beef Production
The Potential of the Forage Crop Legume, Sainfoin, as a pasture for meat production
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Beef Production in the Agricultural Areas ofWA, Bramley, Northam, Mt Barker, Wokalup and Chapman Research Station
Responses to Selection in Multi-Breed and Single Breed Herds of Cattle
Development of an Alternative Market for the WA Pastoral Cattle Industry
The Evaluation of Electric Fencing for Cattle Control in the Kimberleys
Investigation ofOrbivirus Serotypes in WA Evaluation of Perennial Legume Pasture Species, Kimberley Regions
NORTHERN TERRITOKY DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY PRODUCTION
Beef Cattle Industry Survey 1979-80
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Pasture Studies, Queensland Studies on Cattle Tick, Tick Fever and Tick Control, Yeerongpilly, WacoI and Oonoonba Residue and Tick Control Programs Development of Control Systems for the Spotted Alfalfa and Blue Green Aphids The Use of Acrylic Polymers as Insecticide Depots for Control of Ectoparasites in Cattle Mulga Feeding of Cattle Travelling and Marketing Weight Loss in Cattle

Bovine Leucosis--Antigen Production and Survey A Study of the Sahiwal Breed and Sahiwal Crosses and Reproductive Problems of the Bos Indicus Cattle in North Queensland
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Nature and Organization of the Beef Cattle Industry, with Special Reference to the Northern Areas of NSW, Armidale and Grafton
Beef Cattle Improvement Through Breeding Methods, Trangie
Maintenance Requirements for Phosphorus and Sulphur of Grazed Pasture on Beef Properties of Coastal NSW
Phosphorus l.evels in Cattle in the Pastoral Zone An Investigation of Techniques for Culturing Vesicular Arbuscular (VA) Mycorrhizas on Artificial Media The Biology of Ostertagia sp. in Relation to Infections in Cattle Studies of Bluetongue Viruses in New South Wales, Glenfield A System for the Individual Identification and Recording of Animals Significance of Copper Deficiency to the Cattle industry, Glenfield Agricultural Damage by Feral Pigs and Studies of Control Methods
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Beef Research Program-Hamilton Investigation of Calf Wastage, 'Attwood', Broadmeadows Investigation of Iodine in Sheep and Cattle Improving the Efficiency of Calf Production from Annual Pasture Induced Calving and Subsequent Productivity of Cows Handling and Transport of Cattle lo Slaughter in Relation to Improving Efficiency, Safety, Meat Quality and Animal Welfare
ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY
Studies into the Summer Nutrition of Cattle Grazing Sown Pastures in the Mediterranean Environment of South Australia
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
The Immunological Basis of Disease Resistance and Susceptibility of Cattle
Control of Sex of Offspring in Cattle
GRIFFITH UNIVERSITY
Biochemical Characterisation of Bunyaviruses
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
The Life Cycle, Pathology, Epidemiology, Control Metabolism and Immunology of Onchocerca gibsoni in Northern Australia
Correlative Studies on Lesions and l.ymph Node Changes in Slaughtered Cattle
Aspects of Fertility in Bos Indicus Strain Bulls in Northern Australia
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Properties of Enterophathogenic E. coli and the Incidence of such Strains Amongst Scouring Beef Calves
Hypomagnesaem,a and Hypocalcaemia of Ruminants Capital Contribution to a Building for Research on Sheep and Cattle Nutrition (50:50 beef:sheep)
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY
The Utilisation of Poor Quality Roughage by Grazing Ruminants

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3375

MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Economic Importance of Epidemiology and New Treatment Methods for Infection Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis
NEW ENGLAND UNIVERSITY Efficient Combinations of Non-protein Nitrogen By-pass Starch in the Utilisation of Feeds by Ruminants The Establishment of Improved Pastures for Bloat Control and Increased Productivity in Cattle Research into the Cause of Bloat Supervision of the Development and Consolidation of the National Beef Recording Scheme Throughout Australia To Up-grade the Analytical Capabilities of the NBRS to Meet Current Demands of Industry To Develop and Test a Computerised System for Selling Cattle
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Studies in Growth Production in Grazing Cattle
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Viral, Bacterial and Leptospiral Diseases Studies on the Arthropod Parasites of Cattle Live Animal Assessment in Relation to Carcase Classification and Marketing Factors Affecting Infectivity to Haematozoa to Arthropod Vectors with Special Reference to Bovine Piroplasms
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Factors Affecting Food Intake, Growth and the Efficiency of Protein Production in Ruminants and their Affects on Carcase Composition
Epidemiology Pathogenesis Cirology Immunology of Neurofibromatosis of Beef Cattle
A Taxomic Study of the Australian Species of Lasiohelea Blood Sucking, Biting Mites
Physiological Studies on Intensive Rearing Practices in Calves and Parasitic Gastritis
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA Bovine Nutritional Studies: Factors Affecting Fermentation and Feed Utilisation in the Bovine Rumen The Large-scale Production and Testing of Endogone Spores for the Inoculation of Forage Crops and Pastures
MISCELLANEOUS Contribution for the Publication of the Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Melbourne
(ii) Lamb and Mutton Research
AMLC
Research/Industry Liaison
CSIRO Sheep Blowfly Investigations (Genetic and Ecological Studies) Control ofOvine Footrot CSIRO Meat Research Laboratory Bluetongue -the Determination of Vectors The Role of the Booroola Merino in Australia's Fat Lamb Industry and The Development of a Sheepmeat Sire for Crossbreeding with the Booroola for Lamb Production
BAE Production Economics of the Mutton and Lamb Industries

NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Improvement of Sheep Reproductive Rates New South Wales
Manipulation of the Total Amount and Partitioning of Fat in the Body of the Sheep
Control Strategies for Wingless Grasshopper in Tableland Improved Pasture Areas
A Study of Contamination of Sheep Carcases with Grass Seeds
Quality and Use of Legume Inoculants, and Studies of Nitrogen Fixation, Gosford
Field Selection of Lucerne for Disease Resistance and Persistence Under Grazing
The Identification of Single and Twin Bearing Ewes The Pathogenesis and Control of Fleece Rot and Body Strike and the Selection of Sheep Resistant to Body Strike Production Testing Service for Terminal Sheepmeat Breeds inNSW Computerisation of Market Reporting Data The Improvement of Pasture Productivity on the Central Tablelands and Slopes of NSW
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Improving Reproductive Performance, Central and Northern Victoria
A study of the Effects of Various Management Procedures upon the Activation of Primordial Follicles and their Susceptibility of Atresia in the Sheep Ovary
Strategies to Ensure that Mating of Ewes Occurs to Produce Prime Lamb at an Optimum Time for Marketing
Synchronisation of Oestrus and Ovulation using a Prostaglandin Inhibitor Device
Anthedorintic Resistance in Sheep Nematodes Improved Control of the Black Field Cricket (Teleogryllus commodus)
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Improvement of Sheep Reproductive Rates
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Control of Annual Ryegrass Toxicity Possible Role of a High Fertility Merino Strain in Crossbred Prime Lamb Production in South Australia Advantages and Disadvantages of High Twinning Rates of Prime Lamb Flocks Breeding Lucerne Cultivars Resistant to Lucerne Flea and Red Legged Earthmite
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Evaluation of Sown Pasture Legumes for Sheep Production Including Reproduction; SW of Western Australia
The Investigation of Lupinosis (with CSIRO) Lupin Grain Supplementation of Sheep and Lambs for Out of Season Meat Production Investigation of Polioencephalomalacia Experimental Sheep Shed Development of Pre-slaughter Handling Procedures for Sheep and Lambs to Increase Carcase Weights, Grading Performance and Sound Skin Take-off
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Sarcocystis ovicanis as a Potential of Ovine Abortion Improvement of Reproductive Performance in Prime Lamb Mothers The Effect of Sarcocystis ovicanis on the Growth Rate of Lambs

3376 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY Studies on Post-partum Oestrus in Sheep Control of the Pasture Cockchafer
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE
Sporazoa Infection in Sheep
LATROBE UNIVERSITY Capital Contribution to a Building for Research on Sheep and Cattle Nutrition
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY The Immunology of cysticerosis/taeniasis in Domestic Animals
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY Training Project to Study the Early Development of the Sheep Embryo
NEW ENGLAND UNIVERSITY Phosphorus Nutrition of Pasture Plants The Genetics of Host-parasite Relationship with Particular Reference to the Sheep-helminth Interaction
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES The White Suffolk-the Production of a New Meat Ram Breed with Growth Characteristics of the Suffolk but Without Black Wool New Breed of Sheep Specialising in High Levels of Fertility and Capacity for Good Autumn Lambing
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND Pasture and Seed Production Studies, Brisbane Normal and Abnormal Promotions of Digestive Organs with Particular Reference to Domestic Ruminant Animals
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY Anatomical Studies of Sheep, Sydney
UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA Interactions between Sulphur and Molybdenum and Copper Metabolism in the Sheep
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA Co-operative Reproductive Research in Western Australia Flocks Sulphur Deficiency and Botanical Composition of Pastures
MISCELLANEOUS Molecular Basis of Pathogenesis and Virulance in Bluetongue Viruses
MEAT RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS SUPPORTED 1981-82 (i) Cattle and Beef Research AMLC
Research/Industry Liaison Market Research
CSIRO Genetic Studies; 'Belmont' and Rockhampton Evaluation of Acaricides, Brisbane Tick Ecology, Physiology and Biochemistry, Brisbane Endoparasites of Ruminants in Southern Australia Helminth Control in Beef Cattle in Summer Rainfall Areas Tick Resistance and Tick-borne Fevers of Cattle, Indooroopilly, Jimboomba and Townsville

Biological Control of Dung and Buffalo Fly, Canberra, Rockhampton and Pretoria, South Africa
Pasture and Animal Production Studies Northwest Australia
Ecology and Control of Buffalo Fly Plant Introduction, Seed Production and Primary Evaluation Improvement and Testing of Legumes Improving Techniques for Estimating the Requirements of Tropical Pastures for Phosphate Fertilizer Screw-worm Fly Investigations Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis A Permanent Solution to the Bloat Problem through Plant Breeding CSIRO Meat Research Laboratory Cannon Hill New Meat Processing Technology
BAE
Monitoring of Producers' Situations in the Grazing Livestock Industry
Farm Level Studies of Resource Use and Management in the Grazing Livestock Industry
Analysis of Economic Problems Affecting the Grazing Livestock Industry
Studies in the Demand, Supply and Price of Beef and Sheep Meats
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Pasture Studies, Queensland Studies on Cattle Tick, Tick Fever and Tick Control, Yeerongpilly, Wacol and Oonoonba Distribution Variation and Host Interactions on the Fungus Colletrotrichum gloeosporioides Development of Control Systems for the Spotted Alfalfa and Blue Green Aphids Travelling and Marketing Weight Loss in Cattle Bovine Leucosis-Antigen Production and Survey A Study of the Sahiwal Breed and Sahiwal Crosses and Reproductive Problems of the Bos Indicus Cattle in North Queensland
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Beef Cattle Improvement Through Breeding Methods, Trangie
An Investigation of Techniques for Culturing Vesicular Arbuscular (VA) Mycorrhizas on Artificial Media
A System for the Individual Identification and Recording of Animals
Significance of Copper Deficiency in Cattle in New South Wales
Agricultural Damage by Feral Pigs and Studies of Control Methods
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Beef Research ProgramHamilton Investigation of Iodine in Sheep and Cattle Improving the Efficiency of Calf Production from Annual Pasture Induced Calving and Subsequent Productivity of Cows Handling and Transport of Cattle to Slaughter in Relation to Improving Efficiency, Safety, Meat Quality and Animal Welfare Evaluation of Meat Production Systems in South-eastern Australia Management of Insect Pests of Pasture

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3377

SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
The Effect of Early Weaning and a Moderate Growth Rate from Birth to First Mating on the Fertility and Mothering Ability of Hereford Heifers
Integration of Straightbred and Crossbred Systems of Beef Production
The Potential of the Forage Crop Legume, Sainfoin, as a pasture for meat production
An Agronomic and Nutritional Evaluation of Grain Legume Crops for Cattle and Sheep
The Effects of Zeranol Treatment Prior to Weaning on the Growth and Productivity of Replacement Beef Heifers

WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

Beef Production in the Agricultural Areas of WA,

Brambey, Northam, Mt Barker, Wokalup and Chapman Re-

search Station

Responses to Selection of Multi-Breed and Single Breed

Herds of Cattle

-

Development of an Alternative Market for the WA Pas-

toral Cattle Industry

Investigation ofOrbivirus Serotypes in WA

Evaluation of Perennial Legume Pasture Species, Kim-

berley Regions

The Effects of Soil Acidity on Pasture Production in the

High Rainfall Areas ofWA

The Biological Control of Docks

ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY
Studies into the Summer Nutrition of Cattle Grazing Sown Pastures in the Mediterranean Environment of South Australia

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
The Immunological Basis of Disease Resistance and Susceptibility of Cattle
Control of Sex of Offspring in Cattle

GRIFFITH UNIVERSITY Biochemical Characterisation of Bunyaviruses

JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
Correlative Studies on Lesions and Lymph Node Changes in Slaughtered Cattle
Aspects of Fertility in Bos Indicus Strain Bulls in Northern Australia

LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Properties of Enterophathogenic E. coli and the Incidence of such Strains Amongst Scouring Beef Calves
Hypomagnesaemia and Hypocalcaemia of Ruminants

MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY Electric Fences for Kangaroos and Rabbits

MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Economic Importance of Epidemiology and New Treatment Methods for Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis

UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND
The Establishment of Improved Pastures for Bloat Control and Increased Productivity in Cattle
Research into the Cause of Bloat Supervision of the Development and Consolidation of the National Beef Recording Scheme Throughout Australia To Up-grade the Analytical Capabilities of the NBRS to Meet Current Demands of Industry To Develop and Test a Computerised System for Selling Cattle

Nitrogen and Protein Metabolism Studies
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Studies in Growth Production in Grazing Cattle
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Viral, Bacterial and Leptospiral Diseases Studies on the Athropod Parasites of Cattle Factors Affecting Infectivity to Haematozoa to Arthropod Vectors with Special Reference to Bovine Piroplasms The Relationship of Live Animal Measuresments to Carcase Classification and Commercial Yield
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Factors Affecting Food Intake, Growth and the Efficiency of Protein Production in Ruminants and their Affects on Carcase Composition
Physiological Studies on Intensive Rearing Practices in Calves and Parasitic Gastritis
Biochemical Pathology and Plant Poisoning of Cattle and Sheep
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Bovine Nutritional Studies: Factors Affecting Fermentation and Feed Utilisation in the Bovine Rumen
The Large-scale Production and Testing of Endogone Spores for the Inoculation of Forage Crops and Pastures
MISCELLANEOUS
Contribution for the Publication of the Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, Melbourne
(ii) Lamb and Mutton Research
AMLC
Research/Industry Liaison Market Research
CSIRO
Sheep Blowfly Investigations (Genetic and Ecological Studies)
Control ofOvine Footrot CSIRO Meat Research Laboratory Bluetongue-the Determination of Vectors The Role of the Booroola Merino in Australia's Fat Lamb Industry and the Development of a Sheepmeat Sire for Crossbreeding with Booroola for Lamb Production Breeding a Phalaris Cultivar Tolerant to Acid Soils Biological Control of Blue-green Aphid by Insect Pests and also by Pathogenic Fungi New Meat Processing Technology
BAE
Monitoring of Producers' Situations in the Grazing Livestock Industry
Farm Level Studies of Resource Use and Management in the Grazing Livestock Industry
Analysis of Economic Problems Affecting the Grazing Livestock Industry
Studies in the Demand, Supply and Price of Beef and Sheep Meats
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Improvement of Sheep Reproductive Rates
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Manipulation of the Total Amount and Partitioning of Fat in the Body of the Sheep

3378 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Control Strategies for Wingless Grasshopper in Tableland Improved Pasture Areas
A study of Contamination of Sheep Carcases with Grass Seeds
Quality and Use of Legume Inoculants, and Studies of Nitrogen Fixation, Gosford
Field Selection of Lucerne for Disease Resistance and Persistence Under Grazing
The Identification of Single and Twin Bearing Ewes The Pathogenesis and Control of Fleece Rot and Body Strike and the Selection of Sheep Resistant to Body Strike Production Testing Service for Terminal Sheepmeat Breeds inNSW The Improvement of Pasture Productivity on the Central Tablelands and Slopes of NSW
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
A Study of the Effects of Various Management Procedures upon the Activation of Primordial Follicles and their Susceptibility of Atresia in the Sheep Ovary
Strategies to Ensure that Mating of Ewes Occurs to Produce Prime Lamb at an Optimum Time for Marketing
Synchronisation of Oestrus and Ovulation using a Prostaglandin Inhibitor Devise
Anthelmintic Resistance in Sheep Nematodes Improved Control of the Black Field Cricket (Teleogryllus commodus)
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Control of Annual Ryegrass Toxicity Possible Role of a High Fertility Merino Strain in Crossbred Prime Lamb Production in South Australia Advantages and Disadvantages of High Twinning Rates of Prime Lamb Flocks Breeding Lucerne Cultivars Resistant to Lucerne Flea and Red Legged Earthmite Investigations into the Use of the Hormone Melatonin as a Means of Modifying Seasonal Breeding Activity of Sheep
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Evaluation of Sown Pasture Legumes for Sheep Production Including Reproduction; SW of Western Australia
The Investigation of Lupinosis (with CSIRO) Investigation of Polioencephalomalacia Experimental Sheep Shed Development of Pre-slaughter Handling Procedures for Sheep and Lambs to Increase Carcase Weights, Grading Performance and Sound Skin Take-off Development of a Machine to Mechanically Separate Fat and Lean Husbandry and Welfare of Sheep Prior to and During Live Export by Ship Germination and Establishment of Atriplex spp Breeding White Lupinus (Lupinus albus) for High Rainfall Mediterranean Environments Pasture Research Program for the Medium (400-600 mm) Rainfall Zone of WA Species Selection and Management Related in Particular to the Ryegrass Toxicity Problem Factors Affecting Seed Production of Subterranean Clover in Old Land Pastures of the South Coast Sand Plain
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Improvement of Reproductive Performance in Prime Lamb Mothers
The Effect of Sarcocystis ovicanis on the Growth Rate of Lambs
The Pathogenesis of Sarcocystis ovifelis in Sheep

ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY
Studies on Post-partum Oestrus in Sheep Control of the Pasture Cockchafer
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE
Sporazoa Infection in Sheep
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY
The Immunology of Cysticerosis/Taeniasis in Domestic Animals
Rate of Digestion of Mature Forages Cereal Stubble for Sheep and Cattle The Induction of Fertile Oestrus in Post-partum Ewes
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Training Project to Study the Early Development of the Sheep Embryo
An Investigation of Stressor-induced Microbial and Pathophysiological Changes in Sheep with Particular Reference to an Acute Death Syndrom in Sheep Assembled for Live Export
NEW ENGLAND UNIVERSITY
Phosphorus Nutrition of Pasture Plants The Genetics of Host-parasite Relationship with Particular Reference to the Sheep-helminth Interaction
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
The White Suffolk-the Production of a New Meat Ram Breed with Growth Characteristics of the Suffolk but Without Black Wool
New Breed of Sheep Specialising in High Levels of Fertility and Capacity for Good Autumn Lambing
A Study of Wastage of Meat Rams (Dorset and border Leicester) and Practical Methods of Control
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND Normal and Abnormal Promotions of Digestive Organs with Particular Reference to Domestic Ruminant Animals
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Anatomical Studies of Sheep, Sydney
UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA
Interactions between Sulphur and Molybdenum and Copper Metabolism in the Sheep
Assessment of Potential of Sown Pastures on the Central Plateau of Tasmania on a Semi-commercial Scale
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Co-operative Reproductive Research in Western Australia Flocks
Sulphur Deficiency and Botanical Composition of Pastures
MISCELLANEOUS
Molecular Basis of Pathogenesis and Virulence of Bluetongue Viruses
MEAT RESEARCH TRUST FUND RESEARCH PROJECTS SUPPORTED 1982-83 (i) Cattle and Beef Research
AMLC Research and Industry Liaison Additional Allocation to Produce 'AMRC Record' Market Research
CSIRO
Genetic Studies 'Belmont' and Rockhampton

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 3379

Evaluation of Acaricides Endoparasites of Ruminants in Southern Australia Helminth Control in Beef Cattle in Summer Rainfall Areas Tick Resistance and Tick-borne Fevers of Cattle Biological Control of Dung and Buffalo Fly Pasture and Animal Production Studies Northwest Australia Ecology and Control of Buffalo Fly Plant Introduction, Seed Production and Primary Evaluation (Project A) Improvement and Testing of Legumes (Project B) Improving Techniques for Estimating the Requirements of Tropical Pastures Screw-worm Fly Investigations of Sterile Male Trial Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis A Permanent Solution to the Bloat Problem through Plant Breeding Pre-slaughter and Post-slaughter Influence on Meat Yields and Quality Production of Vaccine Agent Against Bovine Babesiosis using Recombinant DNA Technology Effect of Stylosanthes Legumes on Cattle Ticks New Meat Processing Technology
BAE
Monitoring of Producers' Situations in the Grazing Livestock Industry
Farm Level Studies of Resource Use and Management in the Grazing Livestock Industry
Analysis of Economic Problems Affecting the Grazing Livestock Industry
Studies in the Demand, Supply and Price of Beef and Sheep Meats
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Beef Cattle Improvement Through Breeding Methods, Trangie
An Investigation of Techniques for Culturing Vesicular Arbuscular (VA) Mycorrhizas on Artificial Media
A system for the Individual Identification and Recording of Animals
Raising the Quality of Conserved Forages The Evaluation of Selection for Growth Rate in Beef Cattle and its Effect on Herd Productivity
QUEENSLAND DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
Pasture Studies Travelling and Marketing Weight Loss in Cattle A Study of the Sahiwal Breed and and Sahiwal Crosses and Reproductive Problems of the Bos Indicus Cattle in North Queensland Distribution, Variation and Host Interactions of Colletrotrichum Gloeosporioides Selection of Cattle for Helminth Resistance
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
The Effect of Early Weaning and a Moderate Growth Rate from Birth to First Mating on the Fertility and Mothering Ability of Hereford Heifers
Integrating of Straighbred and Crossbred Systems of Beef Production
The Potential of the Forage Crop Legume, Sainfoin, as a pasture for meat production
An Agronomic and Nutritional Evaluation of Grain Legume Crops for Cattle and Sheep
The Effects of Zeranol Treatment Prior to Weaning on the Growth and Productivity of Replacement Beef Heifers

VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Beef Research Program-- Hamilton Improving the Efficiency of Calf Production from Annual Pasture Handling and Transport of Cattle to Slaughter in Relation to Improving Efficiency, Safety, Meat Quality and Animal Welfare Evaluation of Meat Production Systems in South-eastern Australia Management of Insect Pests of Pasture Urine Metabolites for Assessment of Nutritional and Metabolic Status of Cattle Production and Utilisation of Feed from Irrigation
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Responses to Selection of Multi-Breed and Single Breed Herds of Cattle
Evaluation of Perennial Legume Pasture Species, Kimberley Regions
The Effects of Soil Acidity on Pasture Production in the High Rainfall Areas of WA
The Biological Control of Docks Development of Management Strategies for First Calving Beef Cattle Alternative Management Strategies for Cattle Turnover in the Kimberley Development of Grazing Management Systems for Summer Rainfall Grasslands in the Kimberley Region ofWA Pasture Plants, Trees and Shrubs of the Kimberley
NORTHERN TERRITORY DEPARTMENT OF PRIMARY PRODUCTION
Beef Cattle Industry Survey 1979-80 Rangeland Management Guides for Central Australia
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
The Immunological Basis of Disease Resistance and Susceptibility of Cattle
Control of Sex on Offspring in Cattle Reproductive Biology of Cattle and Sheep and the Ontogeny of the Ruminant Immune System
GRIFFITH UNIVERSITY
Biochemical Characterisation on Bunyaviruses
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
Aspects of Fertility in Bos Indicus Strain Bulls in Northern Australia
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Escherichia coli and Calf Scours Hypomagnesaemia of Ruminants Development of Rapid Chromotographic Method for Identification of Meat from Different Species World Beef Trade
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY
Contribution Towards Costs of Publishing the Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Development of Conjunctival Insect Devices for the Treatment of Infectious Bovine Keratoconjunctivitis
UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND
The Establishment of Improved Pastures for Bloat Control and Increased Productivity in Cattle
Research into the Cause of Bloat Supervision of the Development and Consolidation of the National Beef Recording Scheme Throughout Australia

3380 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

To Up-grade the Analytical Capabilities of the NBRS to Meet Current Demands of Industry
To develop and Test a Computerised System for Selling Cattle
Nitrogen and Protein Metabolism Studies Molasses as an Energy Concentrate for Drought Feeding of Cattle and Sheep or for Beef Production
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Viral, Bacterial and Leptospiral Diseases Studies on the Arthropod Parasites of Cattle The Relationship of Live Animal Measurements to Carcase Classification and Commercial Yield
SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Factors Affecting Food Intake, Growth and the Efficiency of Protein Production in Ruminants and their Affects on Carcase Composition
Physiological Studies on Intensive Rearing Practices in Calves and Parasitic Gastritis
Biochemical Pathology and Plant Poisoning of Cattle and Sheep
The Immuniological Basis of Disease Resistance and Susceptibility in Cattle
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Bovine Nutritional Studies: Factors Affecting Fermentation and Feed Utilisation in the Bovine Rumen
The Large-scale Production and Testing of Endogone Spores for the Inoculation of Forage Crops and Pastures
(ii) Lamb and Mutton Research
AMLC
Research and Industry Liaison Plus Additional Allocation to Produce 'AMRC Record' Market Research
CSIRO
Sheep Blowfly Investigations (Ecological and Genetic Studies)
Control ofOvine Footrot The Role of the Booroola Merino in Australia's Fat Lamb Industry and Development of a Meat Sheep Sire for crossbreeding with the Booroola Breeding a Phalaris Cultivar Tolerant to Acid Soils Deboning of Manufacturing Grade Carcases Engineering Requirments for the Exploitation of Hotboning Technology The Shelf-life and Microbiological Quality of Packaged Meat Derivation of Pharmaceuticals from Cattle and Sheep Bile Control of Fat Deposition and Mobilization in Sheep New Meat Processing Technology
BAE
Monitoring of Producers' Situations in the Grazing Livestock Industry
Farm Level Studies of Resource Use and Management in the Grazing Livestock Industry
Analysis of Economic Problems Affecting the Grazing Livestock Industry
Studies in the Demand, Supply and Price of Beef and Sheep Meats
NEW SOUTH WALES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Quality and Use of Legume Inoculants, and Studies of Nitrogen Fixation, Gosford
Manipulation of the Total Amount and Partitioning of Fat in the Body of Sheep

Control Strategies for Wingless Grasshopper in Tablelands Improved pastures areas
Field Selection of Lucerne for Disease Resistance and Persistence Under Grazing
The Pathogenesis and Control of Fleece Rot and Body Strike and the Selection of Sheep Resistant to Body Strike
Production Testing Service for Terminal Sheepmeat Breeds inNSW
The Improvement of Pasture Productivity on the Central Tablelands and Slopes of NSW
Use of Hybridoma Technology to Study Immune Processes in Livestock Diseases
Identification of Agronomically Superior and Aphid Tolerant Medics for Western NSW
Grazing and Management Systems to Reduce Grass Seed Contamination of Carcases and Improve Native Pastures
Developing a Field Technique for Determining the Numbers During Pregnancy in Sheep
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICUL TURE
Control of Annual Ryegrass Toxicity, Glen Osmond An Examination of the Contribution of Various Merino Genotypes to the Productivity of the F I Border Leicester X Merino Ewe and the Possible Role of a High Fertility Merino Strain in Crossbred Prime Lamb Production in Southern Australia Advantages and Disadvantages of High Twinning Rates of Prime Lamb Flocks Breeding Lucerne Cultivars Resistant to Lucerne Flea and Red Legged Earthmite Investigations into the Use of the Hormone Melatonin as a Means of Modifying Seasonal Breeding Activity of Sheep
TASMANIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
The Pathogenesis of Sarcocystis oyifelis in Sheep Improvement of Reproductive Performance in Prime Lamb Mothers The Effect of Sarcocystis ovicanis on the Growth Rate of Lambs Development of Drought and Pest-tolerant Pastures in Tasmania
VICTORIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
A Study of the Effects of Various Management Procedures upon the Activition of Primordial Follicles and their Susceptibility to Atresia in the Sheep Ovary
Anthelmintic Resistance in Sheep Nematodes Improved Control of the Black Field Cricket (Te/eogryllus commodus) Use of Progesterone Priming to Obtain Fertile Matings of Cross Bred Ewes in OctoberjNovember in Southern Australia
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
Evaluation of Sown Annual Pasture Legumes for Sheep Production Including Reproduction
The Investigation of Lupinosis (co-operative study with CSIRO)
Development of Pre-slaughter Handling Procedures for Sheep and Lambs to Increase Carcase Weights, Grading Performance and Sound Skin Take-off
Development of a Machine to Mechanically Separate Fat and Lean
Husbandry and Welfare of Sheep Prior to and During Live Export by Sea
Germination and Establishment of A trip/ex spp Breeding White Lupins (Lupinus a/bus) for High Rainfall Mediterranean Environments Pasture Research Program for the Medium Rainfall Zone ofWA

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3381

Factors Affecting Seed Production of Subterranean Clover in Old Land Pastures of the South Coast Sand Plain
Selection for 12 Month Bodyweight Identification of a General Economic Strategy for the Prevention of Stock Losses due to Dingoes
ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY
Control of the Pasture Cockchafer, Aphodius lasmaniae The Use of Grain Legumes for Increasing Lamb Production in a Mediterranean Environment A Feasibility Study of the Potential of Microbial Agents for the Suppression of the Sheep Blowfly Lucilla cuprina Surface Protein of Ram Sperm in Maturation and their Use in Promotion Survival During Dilution and Cold Storage
INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL AND VETERINARY SCIENCE
Sporoza Infection of Sheep
MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY
The Immunology of Cysticerosis/Taeniasis in Domestic Animals
Rate of Digestion of Mature Forages Cereal Stubble for Sheep and Cattle The Induction of Fertile Oestrus in Post-partum Ewes The Effect of Poor Nutrition During Early Post Natal Life on Subsequent Skeletal Development in Sheep Genetic Improvement of Reproduction Investigation of Corpora Lutea Induced by Hormone Treatment of Anoestrus Ewes Gene Manipulation and Immune Regulation of Sheep
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Training Project to Study the Early Development of the Sheep Embryo
An Investigation of Stressor-induced Microbial and Pathophysiological Changes in Sheep with Particular Reference to an Acute Death Syndrome in Sheep Assembled for Live Export
NEWCASTLE UNIVERSITY
Lymphocyte Traffic and the Local Immune Response in the Ruminant Mammary Gland
Phosphorus Nutrition of Pasture Plants The Genetics of Host-parasite Relationship with Particular Reference to the Sheep-helminth Interaction Changes in Ovulation Rate and Fertility Induced by Vaccination of Sheep with an Inhibin Preparation Genetic Control of Growth and Body Composition and its Relationship with Reproductive Performance A Computerized System for Selling Sheep
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
The White Suffolk -the Production of a New Meat Ram Breed
New Breed of Sheep Specialising in High Levels of Fertility and Capacity for Good Autumn Lambing
A Study of Wastage of Meat Rams and Practical Methods of Control
QUEENSLAND INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
Molecular Basis of Pathogenesis and Virulence of Bluetongue Viruses
UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Normal and Abnormal Functions of Digestive Organs with Particular Reference to Domestic ruminant Animals
Studies in Papilloma Viruses and the Papilloma/carcinoma Complex of Sheep

SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Growth and Development of Sheep Studied by Anatomical Techniques
Photoperiodism and Reproductive Endocrinology of the Sheep
ST VINCENT'S SCHOOL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
Ovine Pituitary Hormones
UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA
Interactions between Sulphur and Molybdenum and Copper Metabolism in the Sheep
Assessment of Potential of Sown Pastures on the Central Plateau of Tasmania on a Semi-commercial Scale
UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Co-operative Reproductive Research in WA Flocks Sulphur Deficiency and Botanical Composition of Pastures Management of Symbiosis between Vesicular Arbuscular (VA) Mycorrhizal Fungi and Pasture Plants to Increase the Efficiency of Fertilizer Use In addition to the above research projects, economic research is carried out by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics funded wholly or in part from the Wool Research Trust Fund and/or the Meat Research Trust Account. The trust funds support on-going research which monitors the producers' situations and market outlook as well as specific research projects. Research projects which have been supported from one or both of the funds between 1978-79 and 1982-83 are listed below.
An Optimal Control Appro_ch to Wool Price Stabilisation
Institutional Trading in the Wool Market Wool Price Variability and Wool Demand World Cotton Price Determination Wool Marketing in WA Review of Developments in the Australian Cotton Industry Wool Textile Flows Evaluation of the Wool Marketing Service Exchange Rate Impacts on Commodity Prices Econometric Analysis of Stockholding under the Reserve Price Scheme Diffusion Index of OECD Economic Activity Relocation of the Japanese Textile Industry Supply Responses in the Australian Sheep Industry Wool Supply in a Total Rural Sector Context Jumbo Bales OECD Cotton Demand Commodity Projections for the Year 2000 BAE Data Bank Grade Prices for Wool Private Buying for Wool A Spatial Analysis of Prices in the Wool Auction Market Regularities in Australian Rainfall and Wool Production Forecasts Cotton Price Determination in the USA Continuing Wool, Cotton and Synthetic Fibre Market Monitoring, Analysis and Outlook Work Wool Marketing Report Theoretical Evaluation of Wool Promotion USA Wool Promotion: Issues and Implications Movements in Prices among Wool Types Centralised Selling of Wool Sale by Sample and Objective Measurement Small Classed Lines of Wool Wool Price Forecasting Systems Determinants of Soviet Wool Production/Demand Reserve Prices and Fluctuating Exchange Rates Setting Reserve Prices Under Fluctuating Exchange Rates Woolbroker Competition

3382 REPRESENTATiVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Seasonality in the World Wool Textile Economy Man-made Fibre Price Index
Chinese Wool and Other Fibres Demand Man-made Fibre Price Determination Climatic Effects on Sheep and Wool Production Clip Forecasting Systems Japanese Policies and Wool Demand New Zealand Wool Price Policy
Australian Cotton Supply Wool Supply in Argentina Demand for Wool in the OECD Area Choices in Setting the Minimum Reserve Price for Wool Preliminary Analysis of Some Wool Price Stabilisation Impacts Continuous Australian Agricultural and Grazing Industry Survey (AAGIS) Continuous AAG IS Ripoff (quick release of selected survey variables) Survey Supplements (blowfly control, animal health inputs) Computer Mapping of Survey Data Data Base Development Delphi Techniques in Forecasting Ripoff Estimates at Constant Prices Influences of the Value of Rural Assets Farm Level Response to Animal Health Inputs Regional Distribution and Structure of Livestock Industries in the 1980s Regional Slaughter Patterns to 1990 Brucellosis/TB Control in Remote Pastoral Areas The Role of Disease - Free Zoning in Disease Contingency Planning Production Potential of the Australian Agricultural and Grazing Industry to the Year 2000
The S-E Asian Market for Australian Meat EEC Beefand Veal Regime BeefStablisation Policy Options Liveweight Selling of Store Cattle World Trade in Poultry Meat Livestock By-Products Market in Australia
Effects of Livesheep Trade on Flock Structure and Turnoff
BAE/CSIRO Identification of Potential Research Areas Viability oCTop End Beef Producers Forecasting of Farm Costs Errors in Short-term BAE Forecasts Farmers Annuity Schemes Price Expectations and Supply Response Relative Economic Efficiency in NSW Grazing Industry Microcomputers on Australian Rural Holdings Financial Performance of the Beef Industry During the I 970s Farmers Use of Futures Markets FARM Model Agricultural Research Evaluation Phosphate Fertiliser Issues in the 1980s Off Farm Labour in the Grazing Industry Off-Farm Investment in Grazing Industry Economic Aspects of Investment Allowance Analysis of Issues in the Live Sheep Trade Relation Between Saleyard and Futures Prices Model of US Beef Industry Beef Export Marketing Arrangements Structural Change in the Meat Processing Sector: Implications for the Future Econometric Model of Broad Acre Agriculture EEC Beef Regime Effect of Canadian Meat Import Law Analysis of Alternative Methods of Beef Price Forecasting A New Look at the Theory of the Cattle Cycle Meat Price Quality Relationships: Implications for Market Reform

EEC Sheepmeat Regime Quartile Analysis of Efficiency of Input Use in Australian Grazing Industry Some Implications of US Counter-Cyclical Beef Import Policy
Survey of Cattle Selling Methods in Australia An Econometric Model of the Sheep Market in Australia Evaluation of Promotion of Meat in Australia Livesheep Trade and Its Likely Effect on the Australian Economy A Note of the Theory of Price Determination in the Australian Beef Industry The Australian Beef Cattle Industry: A Perspective on Demand and Supply in Domestic and Overseas Markets Cattle Marketing in Australia An Econometric Model of Australian Beef Industries Productivity Change in the Zones of the Australian Sheep Industry Technical Efficiency in the Wool Industry Demand and Supply Analysis for Beef Review of Current and Proposed US Meat Import Legislation Sheep Supply Analysis Analysis and Determinants of Wool Yields and Fleece Weights in the Australian Wool Industry Regional Programming Model Development A Stochastic Regional Programming Model for the Grazing Industry (STORM) Simulation Model of a Tropical Cattle Production System Structural Change in the Australian Sheep Industry since 1965
Farmers Attitudes to Adjustment and Adjustment Assistance
Productivity of the Australian Sheep Industry Analysis and Forecasts of Wool Harvesting Costs
Stability, Equality and Distributions of Incomes of Australian Sheep Producers
An Evaluation on Non-Traditional Enterprise on Grazing Properties
Demand for Beef in Korea The Market for Beef in Japan Livestock Selling Methods Appraisal Pricing Efficiency at Cattle Auction Centres Livestock Selling Methods: Producer Survey Production Economics in the Mutton and Lamb Industries Economic Considerations in Property Management for Beef Production
Regional Economic Studies of the Beef Cattle Industries Integration and Interregional Economic Relationships in the Beef Cattle Industry Quantity-Price Relationships in the Australian Retail Market Relationship Between Beef Prices in the US and Australian Saleyard Prices
A Forecasting Model of the US Beef-Pork Sector Supply of Beef in Australia Supply of Beef from Other Exporters An Econometric Model of the Australian Beef Industry An Econometric Appraisal of Different Livestock Selling Methods An Assessment of the Efficiency of Formation of Prices for Cattle at Auction Selling Centres in Australia An Examination of the Availability and Distribution of Information Available to Buyers and Sellers of Livestock in Australia An Examination of Export Beef Prices and Factors Influencing Them at Points along the Export Marketing Chain A Study of Revenues from Beef Export Markets and the Effects of Alternative Control Mechanisms

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3383

Production Capability and Deferment of Capital Inputs in Relation to Investment Behaviour
Role of Borrowed Funds in Farm Investment Relative Input Use Intensity by Different Products Share of Total Farm Returns Attributed to Selected Inputs Demand for Labour by the Sheep Industry Reappraisal of the Effects of tbe Middle East Live Sheep and Sheepmeat Trade Price Expectations; Formation and Determination of Intended Enterprise Change Nature and Extent of Technical Change in Wool Industry Factors Influencing the Generation and Adoption of New Technology Potential Farm Level Effects of Technical Change Adoption Goal Orientation ~'nd fanner Behaviour Farmers Attitudes to Adjustment Age, Education, Experience and Farmers Income Resource Allocation Between On and Off-farm Resource Deployment Change in the Age Distribution of Wool Producers A Criterion for Assessing Adjustment Assistance Needs Substitution of Inputs in Response to Price Change Transformation Between Outputs in Response to Relative Price Change The Concept and Analysis of Productivity Change in Rural Industries The Construction of Price and Quantity Indexes for Outputs and Inputs of the Australian Sheep Industry Technical Crange and Input-Output Mix in the High Rainfall Zone of the Australian Sheep Industry Traceback of the Relative Performance of Grazing properties Cross Sectional Variability in the Productivity of Sheep Properties An Analysis of Technical Efficiency in the Sheep Industry On-farm Structural Adjustment in the Australian Sheep Industry Development of Criteria for Assessing the Adjustment Assistance Nerds of Rural Producers An Exploration of How the Application of a Full Income Concept would Affect the Distribution of Income in the Grazing Industry Modelling Investment/Consumption/Saving Decision Behaviour at the Farm Level Economic and Sociological Factors Influencing the Economic Performance of Farm Operators in the Pastoral Zone Managerial Processes in Victorian Farmers Goal Orientations and Farmer Behaviour On and Off-farm Employment in the Australian Grazing Sector and Adjustment An Exploratory Analysis of Gains in Resource Use Efficiency from Farm Syndication An Analysis of Risk Attitudes in the Australian Grazing Industry Impact of the Middle East Market on the Supply Response of Livesheep and Sheepmeat in the Australian Sheep Industry Regional Supply Response of Live Sheep and Sheep Meat Exported to the Middle East Region A Demographic Model of the Australian Sheep Industry Labour Demand and Supply Functions for the Australian Sheep Industry Growth and Decline on Rural Areas, Factors Related to Adjustment Policy
(5) The 1982-83 budgets of the Wool Research Trust Fund and the Meat Research Trust Account include estimates for superannuation payments for persons employed by CSIRO

who undertake research funded by one or other of these two Trust Funds.
Award of Order of the British Empire to the Hon. Phillip Benwell
(Question No. 4837)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) What was the nature of the services to Australia rendered by the Hon. Philip Benwell, former Liberal candidate for the State Electoral Division of Heathcote and Federal Electoral Division of Hughes, for which an Order of the British Empire was awarded.
(2) On "Ihose recommendation was the award made.
(3) Are nominees for such awards vetted for criminal convictions; ifso, was this done in this case and with what results.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Mr Benwell was appointed a Member of the Most Excellent Order of the Bntish Empire (M.B.E.) in the 1976 Queen's Birtrday Honours List for service to the community. In accord with practice all recommendations to the Queen by the Prime Minister are made after consideration of reports by nominators. supporters and referees.
(3) Mr Benwell is currently the subject of judicial proceedings in Sri Lanka. (See answer to Question No. 4838.) The award may be reviewed depending on the outcome of those proceedings.
Defence Service Homes Corporation Lands in Victoria: Purchase
(Question No. 4860)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
Further to his answer to Question No. 4106 (Hansard, 18 August 1982, pages 549-550) concerning Defence Service Homes Corporation lands in Victoria; in relation to each of the lands in question (a) were valuations obtained at the time the land was purcha,ed; ifso, what was the valuation and who carried it out, (b) were any further valuations obtained between the date of purchase and (i) the date of sale or (ii) the date of preparation of the answer to Question No. 4106 if the land has not yet been sold, (c) who were the vendors when the land was sold to the Defence Service Homes Corporation, (d) in the case of the lands which have been sold what were the names of (i) each purchaser on the subsequent sale by the Defence Service Homes Corporation and (ii) the directors and secretary of any company which was a purchaser of the lands.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The areas quoted in Question No. 4106 for Craigieburn and Wantirna are residual areas following earlier disposal of small parcels of land at both locations. The areas originally purchased were 132.2 hectares at Craigieburn an 11.45 hectares at Wantirna. The purchase prices previously advised related to the original areas.
(3) Yes. Valuations were carried out by the Australian Taxation Office at the time the subject properties were purchased, the details being:
Craigieburn --132.2 hectares valued at $1,350,000 on 6 February 1974, Croydon13.13 hectares valued at $227,000 on 21 March 1973,

3384 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Kilsyth-- 21.24 hectares valued at $333,000 on 18 July 1972, Lilydale 81.82 hectares valued at $1, III ,975 on 19 September 1973, Mooroolbark - 29.04 hectares valued at $215,275 on 24 July 1970, and Wantirna 11.45 hectares valued at $212,000 on 9 March 1972.
(b) Yes. Subsequent valuations have been carried out on all properties by the Australian Taxation Office.
(c) When the land was sold to the Defence Service Homes Corporation the vendors were as follows:
Craigieburn ---Fourth Grabert Sales Pty Ltd., Croydon Mr R. D. Smith, KilsythH. J., E. L. and W. J. Tomkins, Lilydale-Cooring-Yering Pty. Ltd., Mooroolbark-Croydon Primary Producers Pty. Ltd., and Wantirna-Mr L. J. Phelan.
(d) (i) and (ii) --Lands which have been sold are as follows:
Craigieburn--- 6.6 hectares sold to the Special Broadcasting Service for $85,000, Croydon--13.13 hectares sold for $545,000 to Paradise Developments Pty. Ltd., Directors: Mr Colvin Miles Tempest and Mr Leon Peter Lambden, Secretary: None registered Kilsyth-21.24 hectares sold for $480,000 to Paradise Development Pty. Ltd. Directors: Mr Colvin Miles Tempest and Mr Leon Peter Lambden Secretary: None registered Wantirna 3.074 hecatres sold to the City of Knox for $137,000. 8.37 hectares sold to Szaintop Homes Pty Ltd, for $593,500. Directors: Szanindl Szaintop, Isaac Szaintop, Daniel Szaintop (as alternative for Szandl Szaintop), Symon Sakubowicz (as alternative for Isaac Szaintop) Secretaries: Szaindl Szaintop Daniel Szaintop
Department of National Development and Energy: Estimated Expenditure Associated with
Uranium and Nuclear Energy Policies
(Question No, 5214)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
What is the estimated expenditure in 1982-83 for activities, in the Minister's Department associated with the Government's uranium and nuclear energy policies, including salaries, allowances, travel, administrative and other expenses.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Estimated expenditures in 1982-83 for activities in the Department of National Development and Energy (excluding

the Australian Safeguards Office) associated with the Government's uranium and nuclear energy policies are:

Salaries and allowances Travel and subsistence Administrative and other expenses

$ 535, I 00
16,900 61,300

613,300

These expenditures are in respect of the Uranium and General Division, the National Energy Office and the Uranium Resources Evaluation Unit of the Bureau of Mineral Resources. (The latter transferred from the Australian Atomic Energy Commission in June 1982).
In addition, a number of senior officers of the Department have some involvement in issues related to the Government's uranium and nuclear energy policies, but it is not practical to apportion the time involved.
Funds are also provided under the National Energy Research Development and Demonstration Program for nuclear energy projects. Commitments in 1982-83 for grants approved in 1981-82 are of the order of $677,400.

Australian Safeguards Office: Estimated Expenditure

(Question No, 5215)

Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:

What is the estimated expenditure in 1982-83 for the Australian Safeguards Office, including salaries, allowances, travel, administrative and other expenses.

Mr Anthony--The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Estimated expenditures in 1982-83 for the Australian Safeguards Office are:

Salaries and allowances Travel and subsistence Administrative and other expenses

$
299,600 73,700 56,000

429,300

Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No_ 5702)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the existence of an international organisation known as the 'Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo' which describes itself as the Public Relations Department of the Timber Industry.
(2) Is he able to say whether any employees of CSIRO are members of Hoo-Hoo; if so, (a) how many, (b) what are their names, (c) in what Divisions of CSIRO are they employed, (d) when did they join Hoo-Hoo and (e) have any of these employees held executive positions in Hoo-Hoo; ifso, (i) who were they, (ii) for how long did they hold these positions and (iii) what were the positions held, in each case.
(3) Is a Mr Doug Howick employed at the CSIRO Division of Building Research, Highett, Victoria; if so, what is his position.
(4) Is he able to say whether Mr Howick is currently, or has been in the recent past, President of the Melbourne Hoo-Hoo

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3385

Club, No. 217; if so, for what period has Mr Howick held that presidential position.
(5) Is he also able to say whether Mr Howick stated in his 1980-81 President's Annual Report for Club No. 217 that one of the main purposes of any Hoo-Hoo Club is to serve the timber industry in its own special way.
(6) Is he further able to say whether Mr Howick was an organiser of the International Hoo-Hoo Conference held in Melbourne in September 1982; if so, can he state the precise details of the organising role Mr Howick played and whether Mr Howick conducted any of these organising activities during working hours, of used any CSIRO facilities for this purpose; if so, what are the details.
(7) Is there any conflict of interest between Mr Howick's official CSIRO duties and his Hoo-Hoo activities.
(8) Will he take steps to ensure that no employee under his control who is also a member of Hoo-Hoo spends public service time or uses public service facilities on Hoo-Hoo activities or business; if so, what steps will he take; if not, why not.
(9) Is he able to state whether any CSIRO employees, or other employees under his control, have attended any national or international Hoo-Hoo conferences while on trips undertaken for the purpose of official business; if so, what are the details.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware of the organisation which has been known for some five years as The International Order of Hoo-Hoo, prior to which it was known as The Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo. The International Order of Hoo-Hoo, or Hoo-Hoo International as it is commonly called, is a service organisation associated with the forest products industry. Its membership is dedicated to the ideal of a united, progressive forest industry contributing to the welfare of the comunity. It seeks to instill in the individual member a desire to make a sincere contribution to the industry and society through participation in the organisation's industrial, social and community programs. While there is an element of public relations for the timber industry in the activities of Hoo-Hoo International, the organisation believes in mUltiple use of the forests: by bushwalkers, nature lovers and ecologists as well as the timber industry.
(2) Several CSIRO Divisions undertake research associated with the forest products industry, notably, but not exclusively, the Divisions of Forest Research, Chemical Technology and Building Research. As the overall functions of CSIRO include carrying out scientific research to assist Australian industry and to further the interests of the Australian community, and to encourage or facilitate the application or utilisation of the results of such research, it is expected that staff of CSIRO should interact with appropriate professional bodies, industry associations, community groups and t he like. This interaction takes place on a broad front and at various levels; several senior CSIRO scientists whose research and interests were closely associated with the forest products industries have, of their own initiative, been active members of Hoo-Hoo International over many years. Some of these officers have held executive positons in Hoo-Hoo International, just as some CSIRO officers hold executive positions in other industrybased organisations and professional bodies.
(3) Mr C. D. Howick is employed at the CSIRO Division of Chemical Technology, Highett, Victoria. He is classified as Experimental Officer Class 4 and works primarily as an entomologist with wood-attacking insects.
(4) Mr Howick was President of the Melbourne Hoo-Hoo Club in the 1980-81 year.
(5) In his 1980-81 President's Annual Report to the Melbourne Hoo-Hoo Club, Mr Howick wrote that he had always

thought that one of the main purposes of any Hoo-Hoo Club was to serve the timber industry in its own special way. Mr Howick was referring to the ideal of Hoo-Hoo International: a united progressive forest industry contributing to the welfare of the community, with Hoo-Hoo Club members participating in industrial, social and community programs.
(6) Mr Howick was an organiser of the International Conference held in Melbourne for 12-17 September 1982. His role was Chairman of the Organising Committee of the 90th HooHoo International Convention and Australian Forest Products Conference and Trade Exhibition.
A portion of Mr Howick's organising task was conducted during working hours. A very substantial amount of his own time was also devoted to his organising tasks. It is routine for CSIRO officers to be involved in the organisational side of conferences with an industry base. Mr Howick has a long record of successful operation in this area for Forest Products Research Conferences, Australian Timber Industry Stabilisation Conferences, Pest Control Seminars and the like.
(7) There is no conflict of interest between Mr Howick's official CSIRO duties and his Hoo-Hoo Club activities, which are seen to complement the valuable liaison role that he is able to conduct at the interface of science and industry.
(8) The use of official time and facilities in relation to HooHoo International and similar activities of CSIRO officers may often be appropriate for reasons explained earlier. The use of official resources and the extent of the use of such resources must be approved by the Chief of the Division. Officers of the Department of Science and Technology are not involved in the activities of Hoo-Hoo International.
(9) Mr Howick has attended two Hoo-Hoo International Conventions overseas, namely, Portland, United States of America, 1977, and Honolulu, United States of America, 1979. These have been non-quota trips, the travel costs being funded by Mr Howick personally. Within Australia and because of the industry content of the meetings, his attendance at the Hoo-Hoo Regional Conferences in Hobart 1980, and in Surfers Paradise 1981 have been regarded as official duty, although on both occasions he has met his own travel costs. To illustrate the official aspect, he chaired the industry seminar on training at the 1981 conference. The three keynote speakers at the seminar were selected from the Australian Plywood Industry, the Radiata Pine Industry and the CSIRO Division of Building Research. Mr W. G. Keating represented CSIRO. Other CSIRO officers have also, on occasions, attended Hoo-Hoo Regional Conferences in Australia as a consequence of their interests in the forest products industry.
Concatenated Order of "00-"00
(Question No. 5706)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since 1 January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes. A luncheon in Brisbane on Friday, 21st July 1978.
Concatenated Order of "00-"00
(Question No. 5720)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since 1 January 1978; if so, what are the details.

3386 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Mr Thomson~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I have not attended any functions organised by Hoo-Hoo International (formerly known as the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo) since I January 1978.
Non-government Schools in the Division of Lowe: Funding
(Question No. 5053)
Mr Maher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 14 September 1982:

(I) What moneys were paid to each non-Government school within the Electoral Division of Lowe during 1981-82.
(2) What is the enrolment at each of these schools.
Mr Fife~The Minister for Education has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) As per the following tables.

Name
Christian Brothers High School, Burwood,2134
MLC School. Burwood. 2134
St Mary's Primary School, Concord,2137
51 Ambrose Primary School. Concord West. 213X
Holy Innocenb Primary School. Croydon, 2132
Presbyterian ladies College, Croydon, 2132
5t Mark's Primary School, Drummoyne.2047
51 Joseph's Primary School. Enfield,2136
All Hallows Primary School, Five Dock. 2046
Domremy College. Five Dock. 2046
St Mary's Rosebank College, Five Dock, 2046
SL Dominic's School. Fleminglon, 2140
SL Joan of Arc School. Haberfield,2045
Meriden Grammer School. Strathfield,2135
SL MarLha's School. Strathfleld,2135
SL Patrick's College, Strathlield,2135
Santa Maria Del MonLe School. Strathfield,2135
SanLa Sabina College. Strathfield,2135

Recurrent
grants
1981

Re-

current

grants

ESL

pro-

program 1982 (e)

visional Library grants

Capital grants

Migrant

entitlepayable in

payable in

(e)

New General

ment -~---- - - - - - - education arrivals support

1982 (a)

1981

1982

1981

1982

1981

(c)

(d)

337,934 358,809 300,915 308,640

3,389

3,500 1,880

32,719 18,800

750 37,124 nil 10.000

234,665 297,298 3,422 4,326

29,671

nil 32.671

133,510 139,373

1,100

I 235

24,205

nil 30,811

144,128 198,948

1,192

1,365

36,494

nil 42,461

229,9X5 220.800

500

nil

nil

nil

74,653 109,590

2.545

1,295

7,700 12,907

nil 16,685

185,775 220,866 2,022 2,610

27,318

nil 30,767

186,352 209,064 367,228 456,500

4,267 500

3,988 1,000

3,376

32,342 32,210

3,750 33,528 750 37,492

322,295 451,935 57,739 55,638 158,016 191,080

832 2,531 4,869

1,000 1,460 3,940

18,521

13,400 18,602

3,970

33,085

750 22,030 3,750 20,669
Nil 42,084

201,295 194,400 96,849 113,524

3,625 1,483

3,879 2,180

nil 9,013

nil

nil

nil 11,724

Ii ,.. 778,196 420,960

1,149

1,945

nil

nil

nil

206,564 132,608 533.577 377,760

1.300

1,240

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

Ethnic

school

Total program (e)

ESL

1982

1981

1982

37,874

nil

nil

10,000

nil

nil

32617

nil

nil

30,811

nil

nil

42,461

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

16,685

nil

nil

30,767

nil

nil

37278

nil

nil

38,242

nil

nil

22,780 24,419 42,084

nil nil 4,440

nil nil 3,180

nil

nil

nil

11,724

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

nil

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3387

Name

Recurrent
grants 1981

Re-

current

grants

pro-

visional Library grants

entitlepayable in

ment

1982 (a)

1981

Capital grants payable in

1982

1981

ESL

program 1982 (e)

Migrant

(e)

New General

education arrivals support

1982

1981

(c)

(d)

Ethnic

school

Total program (e)

ESL

1982

1981

1982

Sydney Seventh Day Adventist, Strathfie1d, 21 35 Eurella House Special School (f), Burwood, 21 34

251,661 421,806

1,000

(b)

7,696

1,470

1,124

5,400

nil 15,000 15,000

nil

nil

(a) The payment is provisional only in so far as final enrolment figures have only recently become available, in which case some schools will not have received the amount indicated in this schedule yet.
(b) Special schools were not funded under this scheme in 1981. (e) NA figures are the amounts approved for the period Jan-July 1982. No information is yet available from the appropriate authorities on funding
entitlements for the remainder of 1982. (d) GS figures for Catholic Schools are estimates by the Catholic Education Office Commission for the whole of 1982. based on information to hand on
22.10.82. (e) Migrant Education 1981 jESL Program 1982 Ethnic Schools Program 1981 and 1982
The schedule shows details of the funding to non-government schools in the Electoral Division of Lowe for 1981 and 1982. In the case of Catholic Schools. the funds are paid to the Catholic Education Commission of New south Wales. The amounts shown for each school represent the dollar equivalent of services provided to students in the school. They do not imply that the schools received cash funds of these amounts. In 1982 the Migrant Education Program was replaced by the ESL Program. Multicultural Education Program In 1982. $1.148.500 was provided for multicultural education activities in government and non-government schools in New South Wales. In 1982, $1,379.000 will be provided, of which $220,156 will be allocated to non-government schools. These funds are distributed by the State Multicultural Education Co-ordinating Committee. The Commission does not have records of this distribution. (f) Eurella House Special School. Burwood Special Education Recurrent Grants: 1981 $17,762.24, 1982 $14, 110 so far. Severely Handicapped Children's Program grant of$8.865 for equipment and salaries of a P IT occupational therapist and PIT physio for multidisciplinary programs for ten severely handicapped children (1982).

School name

Enrolments (Current) Primary Secondary

Christian Brothers High School, Burwood
MLC School, Burwood
St Mary's Primary School, Concord
St Ambrose Primary School, Concord West
Holy Innocents Primary School, Croydon
Presbyterian Ladies College, Croydon
St Mark's Primary School, Drummoyne
St Joseph's Primary School, Enfield
All Hallows Primary School, Five Dock
Domremy College, Five Dock
St Mary's Rosebank College, Five Dock
St Dominic's School, Flemington
St Joan of Arc School, Haberfield
Meridan Grammar School, Strathfield
St Martha's School, Strathfield
St Patrick's College, Strathfield
Santa Maria Del Monte School, Strathfield
Santa Sabina College, Strathfield Sydney Seventh Day Adventist
High School, Strathfield Eurella House Special School,
Burwood

180

393

260

643

529

248

354

212

460

195

393

372 500

459 99 340

194

405

202

356

877

448 787

462 26 pupils aged between 4 and 21

Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of the Department of the Vice President of the Executive Council
(Question No. 5175)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Vice President of the Executive Council, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(1) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange lines telephones.
(5) What was the cost of a (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange lines telephones for 1981-82,
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension "umber connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose,
Sir James Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (6) The Secretary of my Department who holds this position jointly with that of the Secretary to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has a private exchange telephone connected in his office in that Department (see the answer to Question No. 5167),

3388 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of the Department of Finance
(Question No. 5176)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange lines telephones.
(5) What was the cost of a (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange lines telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) 10.
(2) I Director, Class II: 2 Directors, Class 9: I Senior Finance Office Grade 2, Class 9: I Senior Finance Officer Grade I, Class 8; I Finance Officer Grade 2, Class 7; I Finance Officer Grade I, Class 6: 3 Clerks Class 6.
(3) Yes.
(4) Direct lines are provided where it is essential that time critical communication links be maintained (eg links with senior officers in relation to maintenance of computer networks) and where experience has shown that lines routed through existing small and in some cases shared switchboards are unable to provide a satisfactory standard of service.
(5) (a) $1,471.23: (b) $12,975.33; (c) $669.10.
(6) No: see (4) above.
Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of the Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 5185)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their offices.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected toa PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange lines telephones.
(5) What was the cost of a (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange lines telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX serve the same purpose.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 385.

(2) Varied, ranging from Guardroom Attendant to Secretary.
(3) 278 lines are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) The requirement occurs for a variety of reasons, security, absence, of a PABX or PMBX facility, inability of some PABX or PMBX switchboards to cope with peak loads, back up in case of PABX or PMBX failure and for after hours access when PABX or PMBX is closed.
(5) (a) rental $71,261.84; (b) metered calls $329,700.45; (c) booked trunk calls $16,073.61.
(6) No.
Private Exchange Line Telephones: Officers of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 5192)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) How many officers in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within the Minister's jurisdiction have private exchange line telephones connected in their officers.
(2) What are the designations of these officers.
(3) Do these officers also have telephones in their offices which are connected to a PABX or PMBX.
(4) What is the rationale for providing private exchange line telephones.
(5) What was the cost of (a) rental, (b) metered calls, and (c) booked trunk calls for the private exchange line telephones for 1981-82.
(6) Would a telephone with a silent extension number connected to the PABX or PMBX service the same purpose.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Department 66; Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs (AlMA) 4.
(2) Department-Secretary, Assistant Secretary Review Panel, Regional Director Adelaide, Regional Director Perth, Journalist, Grade I, Sydney, OIC Paramatta Area Office, Clerk, Class 8 (2 in regional offices), Clerk, Class 7 (3 in regional offices), Clerk, Class 6 (25 in regional offices), Clerk, Class 5 (5 in regional offices), Clerk. Class 4 (3 in regional offices), Clerk, Class I (I in regional offices), Welfare Officers (13 in regional offices), Social Workers (6 in regional offices), Computer Centre (I in Canberra), Airport (I in Hobart).
AlMA -Director (Level 4), Deputy Director (Level 3). Chief Planning and Policy (Level 2), Chief Community Education and Information (Levell).
(3) Department: In some cases yes. In these cases private exchange lines are provided for reasons listed in paragraph 4 below.
AlMA: Yes.
(4) Department: Departmental policy governing telephones provides that private exchange lines may be provided where:
(a) There is no exchange available, including exchanges operated by other Commonwealth Departments. The nature of the Department's operations results in a number of officers working remote from the central administration in each of the regions in situations such as Adult Migrant Education Classrooms in the community; one person area offices (for example Rockhampton and AlburyjWodonga), and settlement

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3389

and welfare officers operating from small offices and facilities such as settlement centres. (b) Security is required. (c) No exchange in dialing facilities are available outside normal office hours, for example Regional Office Adelaide.
AlMA: To provide a facility for key personnel when switchboard is unattended outside normal office hours and at weekends. There is no dialing facility available on the switchboard and there is only a limited number of inward lines.
(5)--

Metered

Rent

calls Trunks

Department AlMA

$

$

11,295.66 30,269.85

554.33 2,297.17

$ 922.06
110.56

(6) No. For reasons given in paragraph 4 above.

Visual Display Units: Department of Defence Support
(Question No, 5325)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
How many visual display units were in use in the Minister's Department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Whilst the Department only came into existence on 7 May 1982, in respect of all those elements which now comprise the Department, the following numbers of visual display units were In use:
1972-7334; 1973-74 -58; 1974-75-97; 1975-76-143; 1976-77228; 1977-78292; 1978-79 -380; 1979-80-495; 1980-81--699; 1981-82 -890.

Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 5527)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polycholorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for material and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etcetera, of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.

(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (6) No materials or equipment currently in use in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet or in bodies under the Prime Minister's control are known to contain polycholorinated biphenyls.
Polychlorinated Biphenyls: Use by Department of Transport and Construction
(Question No, 5542)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 27 October 1982:
(I) What materials and equipment currently in use in the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control are known to contain polycholorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the dangers associated with the use of PCBs.
(3) What (a) statutory and (b) advisory conditions exist for the purpose of monitoring all introduction, use, transport and disposal of PCBs, and what arrangements are currently in existence for policing statutory conditions.
(4) What methods of storage and disposal are used for material and equipment containing PCBs when those items become redundant or useless.
(5) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to any contamination of the environment by PCBs which may be wholly or partly due to the use, etcetera, of PCBs by the Minister's Department or bodies under the Minister's control; if so, what are the details.
(6) Has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that all employees under the Minister's control are fully aware of the dangers of PCBs; if so, what are the details; if not, will the Minister now do so; if the Minister will not do so, what is the reason.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) See the answer to Question No. 2005, Senate Hansard, 12 October 1982, pages 1308-! 309.
(3) The Australian Code for the Transport of Dangerous Goods by Road and Rail (Commonwealth Gazette No. P2 of 24.2.82) is the basis for uniform Australian legislation to cover the transport of dangerous goods by road and rail. This Code has been adopted by the South Australia, New South Wales and Australian Government railway systems. Other States and Territories are working towards its adoption.
Australia has adopted the International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code as its national regulations covering package, storage, segregation marking and labelling requirements. Dangerous goods must be declared and shipped in accordance with the provisions of the Code. This Code is administered by my Department.
My Department ceased specifying equipment containing PCBs in 1976. With existing equipment containing PCBs, the Department is following the practice of Australian Electricity Supply Undertakings induding guidelines on precautionary measures in handling, containment and storage.
(4) See the answer to Question No. 2005, Senate Hansard, 12 October 1982, pages 1308-1309.

3390 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

(5) As far as is known there has been no contamination of the epvironment due to the use of PCBs in the Department's operations.
(6) Ip 1976 the Department. issued advice on the hazards of PCBs to all staff concerned with their procurement or handling, and the precautionary measures adopted by the Australian Electricity Supply Undertakings are being followed, and are being monitored.
Australian National Railways Commission: Appointees
(Question No. 5597)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 28 October 1982:
(I) What provisions governing age, etcetera, apply in respect of appointees to the (a) Australian National Railways Commission and (bl Australian National Line Commission.
(2) In respect of eacr organisation (a) what was the age of each commission member at the time of appointment to his current positior. and (b) when does the appointment of each expire.
(3) What is the age of each current commission member and on what date was ~Rch appointed.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) Section 8 of the Australian National Railways Act 1917 provides that:
(I) Subject to sub-section (2). the Chairman and each of the other Commissioners shall be appointed for such period, not exceeding five years, as is specified in the instrument of appointment, but is eligible for re-appointment.
(2) A person who has attained the age of 65 years shall not be appointed or re-appointed as a Commissioner and a person shall not be appointed or re-appointed as a Commissioner for a period that extends beyond the date on which he will attain the age of 65 years.
(I) (b) Section 8AOf the Australian Shipping Commission Act 1956 provides that:
(I) Subject to this section, a Commissioner shall be appointed for such a period, not exceeding five years, as is specified in this instrument of appointment, but is eligible for re-appointment.
(3) A person who has attained the age of 65 years shall not be appointed as the Chairman.
(4) A person shall not be appointed as the Chairman for a period that extends beyond the date on which he will attain the age of 65 years, but may be appointed for a period of less than five years that expires on that date.
(2) (a), (b) and (3) Answers to these questions are detailed in the table below:

Question

Name

(2) (a) Age at appointment to current position

Austnlian National Railways Commission
Mr L. E. Marks Dc H. F. Bell,OBE. Dr D. Scraftofl Mr C. F. Clements Mr D. M. Fowler

51 years 54 years 43 years 48 years 58 years

Australian ShipViag Commission
Mr N. G. Je~ner Mr R. M. Whyte Mr W. Bolitho MrC. H. Fitzgibbon Me H. T. Rogers Mr E. A. Rouse Mr S. P. Smith

48 years 34 years 51 years 52 years 62 years 54 years 57 years

(2) (b)
Date of expiry of appointment
15 March 1986 13 Oct. 1985 13 Oct. 1985 13 Oct. 1985 13 Oct. 1985
17 April 1985 130ct. 1985 20 Oct. 1987 30 Sept. 1984 27 Feb. 1984 13 Oct. 1985 J 5 March 1983

(3)
Date of appointment to Commission
16 March 1981 14 Oct. 1975 140c(.1980 14 Oct. 1980 14 Oct. 1980
1 Oct. 1970 14 Oct. 1975 21 Oct. 1982 24 Jan. 1974 28 Feb. 1979 14 Oct. 1980 25 June 1982

(3)
Age as at 11.11.82
53 years 61 years 45 years 50 years 60 years
56 years 38 years 51 years 60 years 65 years 56 years 57 years

Division of Lowe: Distribution of LeHers Signed by the Prime Mini§ter
(Question No. 5627)
Mr Maher asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 November 1982:
(I) What number of undated letters headed 'An Important Message from the Prime Minister' were distributed on his letterhead <:nd under his signature within the Electoral Division of Lowe during March 1982.
(2) What was the COSl to the Common\'iealth of (a) drafting. (b) engros~ing. (c) printing and (d) distributing the letter.

Mr Aothony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) 1 am informed that there was no cost to the Commonwealth to print and distribute 'An Important Message from the Prime Minister' to the electors of Lowe, apart from one sheet of paper used for the original text.
Sheepmeat Exports
(Question No. 5657)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 10 November, 1982:

Answers to Questions

9 December 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 3391

(I) Does Australia's Voluntary Restraint Agreement (VRA) with the European Economic Community (EEC) have an upper limit of 17 500 tonnes of sheepmeat exports annually.
(2) Is he able to say whether New Zealand's VRA with the EEC has an upper limit of 245000 tonnes of sheep exports annually.
(3) If the position is as stated, what is the justification for the large difference between these two figures.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) New Zealand's access under their VRA is limited to 245 500 tonnes annually.
(3) The large difference between the two VR levels has its origins in the history of the trade. When the VRAs were being negotiated in 1980 it was agreed that access for each of the countries entering into agreements would be based on traditional levels of trade during the 1970s and this was reflected in the final outcome.
Australian National: Haulage of Woodchips
(Question No, 5695)
Mr Burr asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
(I) What was the tonnage of woodchip logs carried by the Tasmanian region of Australian National for each of the years 1975-76 to 1981-82.
(2) What percentage of the total freight movement did the woodchip log component form in the same yearly tonnage of all freight carried.
(3) Are the woodchip log contracts to be renewed between 1983 and 1985.
(4) Was it recommended in the Joy Report that, if freight tonnages on the Tasmanian region of the Australian National dropped below a certain level, the railway be closed down.
(5) Would this be a possibility if the Tasmanian region of the Australian National loses woodchip log haulage under the new contracts.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I)-(Tonnes in parenthis): 1975-76 (362,116); 1976-77 (471,345); 1977-78 (443,812); 1978-79 (471,128); 1979-80 (779,898); 1980-81 (889,556); 1981-82 (693,503).
(2)-1975-76 22.49 per cent; 1967-77 28.66 per cent; 1977-7827.67 per cent; 1978-7925.47 per cent; 1979-8036.42 per cent; 1980-81 38.28 per cent; 1981-8232.57 per cent.
(3) No.
(4) No.
(5) The future scope of Australian National's activities in Tasmania is dependent upon numerous factors, and would not be determined solely by the extension of one type of contract.
Aboriginal Housing
(Question No, 5699)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
(I) What sum has been made available in each State for housing under the Aboriginal Housing Trust.
(2) Do these sums include provision for the administration of the program; if so, what percentage of the funds (a) is devoted to that purpose and (b) is available for housing loans.

(3) To secure a loan of $36,000 under the scheme (a) what deposit is necessary, (b) what rates of interest is it given and (c) for what duration are the loans available.
(4) Is an assessment made of the job security of an applicant for a loan.
(5) If a successful applicant loses employment during the loan period, what relief is available to him or her in the rate of repayment.
(6) How many Aboriginal houses are there in each Metropolitan Council District in the Pert h area.
Mr Wilson--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (6) There is no Aboriginal Housing Trust under which the Commonwealth makes funds available to the States for housing.
Commonwealth grants earmarked for rental housing for Aboriginals are included in the financial assistance made available to the States and the Northern Territory under the 1981 Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement administered by the Department of Social Security. These earmarked grants total $34.2m in 1982-83 (NSW $9.088m, Victoria $2.527m, Queensland $6.626m, South Australia $3.815m, Western Australia $7.222m, Tasmania $0.518m, Northern Territory $4.404m). Rental houses provided under the Agreement may be sold by the State Housing Authorities for cash but not with vendor finance.
The 1981 Agreement also establishes the general conditions under which each State may administer a Home Purchase Assistance Account with Commonwealth financial assistance. The States are able, within certain guidelines defined in the Agreement, to determine conditions of eligibility and the amounts and conditions of loans. The Home Purchase Assistance Program is available to the general community; it is not a special scheme devised to assist Aboriginals in particular.
The Aboriginal Development Commission administers a Housing Loans Scheme under which Aboriginal people may be assisted with loans to purchase homes. Information on the amounts allocated by the Commission to this scheme, the number of loans and the terms and conditions of loans is included in the Commission's annual report.
The Western Australian State Housing Commission is understood to administer three home puchase schemes. These comprise the Home Purchase Assistance Program referred to above, the Aboriginal Housing Purchase Scheme, which is funded by the State Government, and the Loan Scheme under the State Housing Act 1980. Details of loan conditions and number of houses in respect of the operation of each scheme in the State should, if required, be sought from the State Housing Commission.
Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5713)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since I January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.

3392 REPRESENTATIVES 9 December 1982

Answers to Questions

Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo
(Question No. 5728)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
Has the Minister attended any functions organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo since January 1978; if so, what are the details.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
1 have never attended any function organised by the Concatenated Order of Hoo-Hoo.
Department of Transport and Construction
(Question No. 5729)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 10 November 1982:
(I) How many day labour staff were employed by his Department or by the former Department of Construction in (a) Victoria and (b) Tasmania in each year from 1975 to 1982.
(2) What was the value of maintenance contracts let by his Department or the Department of Construction to service Government assets in (a) Victoria and (b) Tasmania during the years 1975 to 1982.
(3) What was (a) total value of Government assets to the register of fixed assets and (b) total funds allocated for maintenance of listed assets to the register of fixed assets in the 3rd Military District, Puckapunyal Division, Defence allocation, for the years 1975 to 1982.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I)

As at 30 June 1975

(a) Victoria 1,435

(b) Tasmania 69

As at 30 June
1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982

(a) Victoria
1,342 1,198 1,116 1,005
930 902 801

(b) Tasmania
72 68 61 53 57 59 53

--(-2-)------------------------------

As at 30 June

(a) Victoria (b) Tasmania

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$m

$m

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

7.25

n.a,

8.10

.98

9.84

.84

11.55

.91

17.96

1.38

17.68

1.34

(3) (a) There are some 1.500 assets recorded in the register of assets at Puckapunyal which have been constructed over a considerable number of years. Many of the assets were constructed prim to the introduction of the current register. The value of assets is not recorded in the register and is not available.
(b)

$m

1974-75

n.a.

1975-76

n.a.

1976-77

2.91

1977-78

2.61

1978-79

2.85

1979-80

3.29

1980-81

4.33

1981-82

3.75


