House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 130, 1982 Tuesday, 26 October 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Fraser Government

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2487

Tuesday, 26 October 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt. Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
RESIGNATION OF THE RT HON. SIR PHILLIP LYNCH
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that on 22 October 1982 I received a letter from the Right Honourable Sir Phillip Lynch, KCMG., resigning his seat as member for the electoral division of Flinders. I will give consideration to the date of the by-election as soon as practicable.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I inform the House that the Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner) left Australia on 22 October to attend the South Pacific Conference in Western Samoa and to visit several South East Asian countries for ministerial discussions. The Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) is acting as Minister for Defence Support until Mr Viner returns.
DISTINGUISHED VISITOR
Mr SPEAKER-I wish to inform the House that we have present in the Gallery this afternoon the Honourable Timothy Bonga, M.P., Deputy Speaker of the National Parliament of Papua New Guinea. On behalf of the House I extend to the visitor a very warm welcome.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
FRASER GOVERNMENT
Notice of Motion
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House censures the Government for its abject failure in administering the economy, especially as reflected by record unemployment, skyrocketing inflation, negative economic growth and loss of business and consumer confidence.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House)-I seek leave of the House to move a motion to enable the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) to move forthwith the motion of censure of which he has given notice for the next day of sitting.
Leave granted.
Sir JAMES KILLEN-I wish to inform the House that I accept the notice of motion given by the Leader of the Opposition as a motion of censure of the Government for the purpose of Standing Order No. 110.

Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Sir James Killen) agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition moving forthwith the motion of censure of the Government of which he has given notice for the next day of sitting.
Motion of Censure
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (1.49)-1 move:
That this House censures the Government for its abject failure in administering the economy, especially as reflected by record unemployment, skyrocketing inflation, negative economic growth and loss of business and consumer confidence.
Nothing exemplifies the failure of the Government more than the release of the inflation figures yesterday. They display beyond any doubt that the Government's tightlipped crusade against inflation has been converted into an unholy rout. On every front in the past several weeks it is clear that the Government is suffering more and more setbacks in economic administration. The indisputable fact is that on any or all of those fronts the severity off the setback finally rests in responsibility on the Government. The Government is elected to administer the economy of this country. It has had seven years in which to fulfil promises which were easily given and more easily broken year by year. No one in the corporate sector proposing for the year ahead such optimistic prospects as this Government has done year by year but then failing to achieve those prospects would be kept in a position of senior administration. Any such person would be regarded as a failure. This Government is a failure in conducting the affairs of this nation and ought to be scourged from office.
I said that on every front more and more setbacks afflict the Government. The Budget was an inappropriate instrument with which to administer the economy of this country in the year ahead. One freely acknowledges that it is extremely difficult to handle a national economy at present, given the state of the world's economy. But, on the other hand, other countries are doing much better than this country is and have been consistently doing much better than this country has been doing. They have been able to achieve that in spite of difficult economic circumstances. The outstanding example is Austria. It has far less inflation, far lower unemployment and a pricesincomes policy in place with public confidence, trust and respect. They are all of the essential ingredients to put in place a policy to give greater stability to an economy but all the essential ingredients that this Government is incapable of achieving. Does anyone think for a minute that

2488 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Fraser Government

the Fraser Government is capable of capturing that elusive quality, trust? The Government chases it from the Parliament in the way in which it conducts the nation's affairs.

I said that on every score the evidence is that
the economy is in reverse. It gives us no satisfaction to declare this obvious, indisputable fact, a
fact based on the economic statistics produced from various official and authoritative sources in
this country. They all add up to this: We have record unemployment, skyrocketing inflation,
negative economic growth and loss of business
and consumer confidence. Look at the facts. The Melbourne University Morgan research survey
for September-after the Budget-showed the
second lowest level of consumer confidence since the survey started several years ago in 1974. The
lowest level was just before the Budget. In August
only 21,500 job vacancies existed for 459,000 unemployed, that is, only one for every 21 unem-
ployed. The previous August there had been one
vacancy for every II unemployed. The WestpacConfederation of Australian Industry survey
shows business confidence at its lowest ebb for nine years. A detailed examination of production
statistics reveals that industrial production in the
year to September had slumped by about 10 per cent. Australian industry is currently producing at the same level as it was six years ago. The Govern-
ment has the economy in the productive sector in
reverse. In the housing industry the Indicative Planning Council forecasts a 22 per cent underutilisation of building industry capacity.

They are only some of the more obvious and

disturbing statistics that show that the Budget

which this House has before it has not even been

passed-it is a totally inappropriate instrument

with which to manage the economic affairs of this

country. In the Budget Speech, the Treasurer (Mr

Howard) declared that the anticipation of the

Governmen.t was that inflation would stay some-

where near ItS. present level. In fact, it is going up.

The expectatIOn was that interest rates would

lodge somewhere near where they were at the

time the Budget was introduced. The evidence

s~em~ to be that there has been a temporary res-

pite In some areas but there has been none in

housing and there is little hope that there will be

in the course of this year. The Treasurer ack-

nowledged that there would be a collapse in the

building industry and that there would be far

worse unemployment. What sort of economic strategy ~s that for a.co,untry as well set up as this

country IS, a country With so many natural advan-

tages over other .countries? We have a resource

bcaaps~eblea,n

industnal intelligent,

base and a work force of diligent people who, when

properly led, will respond to the challenge and make sure that this country is doing better than it
has been.
No one on this side of the House is even seeking to imply that we can get back, least of all quickly, to where we were in the 1960s and early 1970s before the international economic situation became so difficult. On my calculations it will take several years of sustained healthy levels of economic growth to get us back to what we normally regard as a full employment level. But the point is we can do much better if we try. After seven years of these economic policies of failure, of the Government putting its thumb on the windpipe of the economy and choking it year after year, is it not about time that we tried a different way? Is it not about time that we tried a way which respected people and acknowledged the massive social distress which takes place in Australia as a result of the unrelieved experience of these policies of austerity and recession-the policies that guarantee high inflation? Inflation in this country is high for a number of reasons. One of the major reasons is this Government's pricing policy. I will come back to that.
I ask honourable members to look at the massive social distress that must be measured in terms of the suffering of ordinary, decent people who have no control over their destiny when a government goes about handling the economy as though it were hammering it with a sledgehammer. Unemployment belleficiaries increased to 446,000 in September of this year, an increase of 54 per cent in males and 27 per cent in females.
This is the daunting, indeed disgraceful, achievement of the Fraser Government in its term of office which it brazenly acknowledges. We now have three million people who are living in poverty in this country today-three million impoverished fellow Australians. Think of the waste of human resources and human potential. In this potentially wealthy country there are as many people living in poverty as in total live in Sydney or in total live in Melbourne. More people in Australia are living in poverty than live in the whole of Queensland. That is the sort of social distress, the waste of human potential, for which the Fraser Government has been responsible.
Honourable members will remember all those grandiloquent promises that h~ve proved to be so fickle for example the promise to preserve the benefit level of pensions. One of the things for which I am greatly proud as a personal achievement is that when the Labor Government went into office in 1972 the standard rate of pension was 18 per cent of average weekly earnings. As

Fraser Government

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2489

Minister for Social Security and subsequently Treasurer I had lifted that rate of pension, according to the Labor Government's undertaking, to just on 25 per cent of average weekly earnings. It is lower than 22 per cent now and will only get back to 22 per cent when the November increase comes through. This confirms what I am saying. The people who are paying the highest price for the austerity imposed by this Government are not the Horgans of the Liberal Party, the Frasers of the western districts of Victoria or the Anthonys of the pig farming industry of the northern rivers of New South Wales, all wealthy in their own right--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will use the appropriate term for members of the House.
Mr HAYDEN-The people who are suffering are those who have no reserves of resourcesphysical, emotional or financial-to carry them safely through this distress. I ask honourable members to look at this empty promise from the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) who brazenly sits in this chamber and who moralised at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Conference last year about how much he had done for Aboriginals in this country-one of the most exposed, dependent and abused groups in our society. In the 1975 election speech of the right honourable Malcolm Fraser we find:
We will maintain present levels of assistance to Aborigines.
Let me give honourable members the facts. The cumulative real loss for Aborigines over progressive Fraser Budgets amounts to some $416.5m. Involved in these losses have been: Aboriginal health spending currently 23 per cent less than in 1975. Does it matter that trachoma is at unacceptably high levels equalled rarely in the world; that in some parts of Australia leprosy is in epidemic proportions ahead of Third World countries; that communicable social diseases are rampant; or that a whole range of health deficiencies that can be properly attended to with a sustained, well directed nutritional, housing, fresh water, job opportunity and education program could be over- ~ome? That does not matter. The levels of spendmg are cut. Aboriginal spending is down 37 per cent. Housing funds are down an estimated 54 per cent. The list goes on and on of cut-backs in the provision of funds for this extraordinarily dependent group in our community.
Let us look at a selection of some of the headlines in the daily newspapers lately. Let us measure what contemporary comment has to say about the success of the slogan: 'Fight inflation

first and then we will create more jobs.' The Sydney Morning Herald of 2 August said: '1,000 a week are being laid off.' The Adelaide Advertiser a few days ago, on 23 October, said: 'GMH plans shut-down.' The economy is in such good con-
dition under the Fraser Government that big business has to ask the workers whether they will cop a shut-down without pay for a week as starters because it cannot sell motor cars. The manufacturers cannot sell their motor cars because people cannot afford them. People cannot afford motor
cars because the Fraser Government has been too busy ripping them off with the most extortionate tax charges in our history while the tax parasites have been ripping off the rest of the community with immunity. These are the standards of the Fraser Government. Another headline reads: 'BHP plans to sack 1700 despite inquiry.' If the motor car industry is now collapsing, Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd will collapse even further. Another headline reads: '800 idle for a fortnight at Goodyear.' According to the National Times, in the past 18 months the works at Whyalla have pruned staff by 1,200. The upshot has been a rise in unemployment at Whyalla to 10 per cent.
I was in Adelaide on Friday night watching the Australian Broadcasting Commission television news at 7 o'clock. I saw our beloved national
leader, the Prime Minister, whose word is his bond. We take it for what it is worth. Its market value is such, however, that one would not be able to live on it for a week. There he was on television standing arrogantly on some raised platform in front of a group of workers who were making a mild grumble of protest. They gave every evidence of being demoralised by their experiences and at the prospect of more unemployment in the Iron Triangle. There are extraordinary high rates of unemployment there amongst the young people. Does the Prime Minister know that in
South Australia unemployment among the young is 30 per cent? These are Great Depression levels. That is what the Prime Minister's policies have
done. He arrogantly stood on the back of that raised platform and said to these workers: 'What is wrong with you? You have got jobs here, haven't you?' Well, they do not know whether they will have jobs next week. This is all a product of the sorts of policies for which the Prime Minister has been responsible. Sure, these people have got jobs, but the Prime Minister does not know what it is like in our sort of society to be battling on the bare margin of existence. Let me quote some case studies from an Australian Council of Social Service document entitled 'Living on the edge'. This is what our society is giving ordinary decent people today. We have a Prime Minister

2490 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Fraser Government

who, when he is hungry, rings a dinner bell and someone brings in his food. He cannot understand why the poor do not do the same thing. It is not quite as easy as that.
Mr Good luck-Practise what you preach. What about you? You get a big salary.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Franklin will return to his own seat and cease interjecting.
Mr HAYDEN-I do not happen to wear the poverty I experienced in my early life as a badge of honour at all. I rarely refer to it, but I read this sort of thing and I know what it is like. Let me tell honourable members what it is like. I hope they will understand it. The rich men in the Government would not understand. Under the heading 'John-A lone father', the article states:
. . . John's income totals $108.88. With this he supports 2 children, 8 and 5 years old.
with the $14.38 that is left after costs, John struggles first to pay the power bills, then to clothe the kids and himself, and then pay any 'extras'. Getting any left over to put towards debts or repairs is impossible.
Often John finds the house is short on food 'sometimes the kids have Weeties for tea'.
There is poverty and depression in this country for tens of thousands, indeed, three million Australians today, such is the nature of the policies of the Fraser Government. The article goes on quotingJohn:
'I can't give things to the kids; I will go out with others whose kids have nice clothes and it gets me down when other kids have nice dresses and Lisa has used clothes'. Preschool is also 'a luxury'.
Colin and Jenny are another family. They find that they borrow from friends nearly every week and are on an account at the local garage. They find they have to seek the help of welfare agencies extensively-six times in the past 12 months. They pawn their old furniture. All members of the family need shoes desperately. Several school excursions have had to be missed-even to the zoo.
Let us look at another family, George and Brenda. George supports his family on an income of $161.90 a week. The article goes on:
All that remains is $8.60 and from this has to come the quarterly gas and electricity, all the family's clothing, any recreation and any extras . . . it's not surprising to find that George and Brenda are behind in their chemist payments by $25 and still owe $1500 On the car and $100 to a Waltons
account.
Let us take this quote from the Age of May 1982 discussing the struggles for supporting mothers. The article states:
She feeds Jamie and Joanie with lots of soup, mince and carrots, clothes them in opshop specials and her sister's

cast-offs. She scours the papers for news of free entertainments. And when there is enough petrol for her car-- "a crappy old '64 Falcon, it cost me $399"-she makes some soup and they go off for a picnic.
What a grand treat! Some people have to celebrate on watered-down vegetable soup. That is the product of the Fraser Government's policies.
I am getting away from the economic statistics, the level of inflation, the level of unemployment, the lack of-in fact the negative-economic growth in the community, the high interest rates, the fact that people are being forced to sell homes they desperately want and cannot afford to pay off. I am talking about the dimensions of human suffering that is going on in this country. What did the Treasurer say about all this after seven years? He said this last night:
A reversal of current economic policy is not the answer to our present level of unemployment.
Well, what is the answer the Government has? For seven years the Government has been talking about the need for sacrifices for a better day. But the sacrificial blood on the altar of the narrow minded ideology of the Prime Minister is the blood of ordinary, decent Australians who deserve better. It has to come to an end. What is the Government's defence in respect of all this? Is it the drought? Certainly, the drought creates problems. Wherever we can we will assist the Government in explaining its problems and promoting policies to assist people who are disadvantaged by the drought. But do not forget that it is not unusual for natural calamities to befall a country during a term of a government's administration. We experienced it in 1974. We had to reconstruct Darwin and reconstruct the south-east corner of Queensland in the wake of a cyclone and a massive flood. We got no credit for that from the Government, then in opposition. That added to our economic difficulties. We at least are generous and acknowledge the Government's problem. The Government says it is the States who are to blame. The Government has cut real per capita provision of funds to the States by 20 per cent in the last seven years. But the spending of the Government shows no abatement. Commonwealth tax revenue is up by 150 per cent; Commonwealth resources to the States are up by only 90 per cent. So, the States are left with no alternative. They will have to raise revenue or engage in widespread closing down of services and retrenchments. So they raise revenue as much as they can. They have to resort to charges and indirect levies. They are all inflationary. The Government, through its cleverely concocted economic policies of fighting inflation with increased costs, forces the States to join in that sort of spurious battle. The Government says that the inflation is caused

Fraser Government

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2491

by wages. Average real labour costs have increased by 7 per cent since 1975-76 and average labour productivity by more than 9 per cent.
But the real fault on the wages front rests with the Prime Minister. He destroyed the centralised wage fixing arrangement and in destroying it declared that it would be better for wage fixing to be adjusted by market forces. Well, he now has market forces. And he is whingeing. He was whingeing at the Metal Trades Industry Association of Australia dinner last night. But last year, at his annual Christmas party held at The Lodge, according to Mr Des Keegan of the Australian when the Prime Minister was talking to journalists there he said that he was 'not unduly worried about the metal trades proposals or fears of a flow-on to the rest of the work force'.
If the Government is in trouble over wages I acknowledge-it would be economically illiterate not to acknowledge-that wages can be an inflationary pressure. But if the problem is wages, where is the Government's wages policy? It is running the affairs of this country, not the trade union movement. The Government says that industrial disputes are to blame. The total number of days lost through industrial disutes for the seven months to July 1982 as against the comparable period last year shows a reduction of 37 per cent, and in the metal trades industry a reduction of 79 per cent. It is spurious nonsense for the Prime Minister to try to concoct this sort of defence for failures which are explicitly his. The trouble with this country is that it has had Fraser's seven fatal years of failure in economic management. Look at what he said in 1975. He said:
Let us all as Australians determine to restore prosperity, defeat inflation and provide jobs for all.
Why did he not do that? He said:
We will work positively in cooperation with trade unionists.
He then set about berating and abusing them in a way which could be described only as a continuous smear against a whole class of Australian citizens-trade union officials. How does he respond to that? He said:
We will fully index personal income tax for inflation over three years.
He never did it. He said:
.Only under a Liberal-National Country Party Government Will there be a return to business confidence.
There is not such a return. In all this there is, indeed, a gem of all gems. The Prime Minister talks about the restoration of trust, confidence and respect for government in the community. He ha.s been able to achieve absolutely none of those thmgs. He said that the fault is concerned with wages. If the fault is concerned with wages it is the

fault of the Government to the extent that it may be a contributing factor. It is the fault of the Government because it has no orderly, fair, centralised wage fixing system and that is exactly what we are working towards achieving through our association with the trade union movement.
What is desperately needed in this country today is an immediate rescue operation on the economic front. I make some suggestions: In view of the fact that so much of the contribution to inflation is now coming from increased government charges, the Government should call a Premiers Conference urgently and explore with the States, by proposing to them, the possibility that they establish a 12-month freeze on State government charges, that the Commonwealth agree to do the same with its charges and that the Commonwealth make up the difference for all the States in the revenue they would have gained from any forthcoming increases in charges they would have lost through this freeze. Next the Commonwealth should provide the States with a one-off increase in capital and recurrent grants to be used during the forthcoming 12 months to provide jobs in the State government sector. The Government should also immediately increase its funding for housing in particular. Part of the increased allocation to the States would be specifically directed towards local government which can quickly use it for community works and so on.
Next, the Commonwealth should announce that it will not reduce the level of protection currently provided to any Australian industry for a 12-month period and that, in view of the seriousness of the employment situation, it will review its decision on temporary assistance for the steel industry in exchange for a commitment from BHP about employment security. Further, again in view of the seriousness of the situation and the urgency with which it must be dealt, the Commonwealth should seek an immediate conference with union peak councils with a proposal that over the next 12 months both the unions and the Commonwealth 'vould support the maintenance of real wages but nothing more than that, in view of the circumstances, forgoing productivity increases entirely.
This is not, nor is it meant to be, a comprehensive incomes policy. However, it should be the first element, together with the proposal for restraining government charges, towards such a policy. Despite our scepticism about the Budget estimates the Opposition acknowledges that from the Government's point of view the economy is now in a worse state than it was when the Budget was put together. This means that the Budget

2492 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Fraser Government

measures will be insufficient to cope with the worsened economic situation. We therefore propose that the Government introduce a mini-Budget before Parliament rises this year directly aimed at providing new job opportunities and, where possible, job security and, where possible, increases in disposable incomes in order to restore consumer demand. We want people to have the capacity and willingness to increase their spending before Christmas. Elements of such a mini-Budget would obviously include increased capital works funding and proposed increases in pensions and benefits. The key thing about this proposal, if it were directed in these ways, is that it would receive the unequivocal support of the Opposition, which would guarantee its rapid passage through Parliament in the interests of Australian families. If the Government introduces measures along these lines straight away the Opposition will do everything it can to gain the support of the public and State Labor governments as well as the trade union movement. We regard this as a critical situation.
On every front the economic indicators are giving a disastrous reading. There has to be a change of economic policy. Government policies are pushing up inflation. Just as they push up inflation, by reversing them the Government can bring inflation down. OUi' universal health insurance program alone can reduce inflation by 2 per cent in one year. Capital works programs and increased spending on public sector and private sector housing will create jobs and accelerate demand activity in the economy. All this has to be underpinned by a responsible, fair, orderly pricesincomes arrangement with the trade union movement. But that cannot finally be achieved unless trust, respect and confidence are established between government and that sector of the community. That, I suspect, is almost impossible with the present Prime Minister. We censure the Government.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?
Mr Willis-I second the motion and reserve my right to speak.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (2.17)-The speech of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) was remarkable for two reasons. Firstly, it was not until the last five minutes that he rushed out what purported to be the elements of some alternative economic strategy. The second remarkable feature of the Leader of the Opposition's speech was his almost total refusal even to acknowledge the possibility that wage increases may be an element in high inflation in Australia at present. The very most that

the Leader of the Opposition could do to acknowledge the fact that the extent to which large wage increases of people who are lucky enough now to have jobs have contributed not only to the disemployment around Australia over the past 12 or 18 months but also to the level of inflation, which the Government regards as not only disturbing but also unacceptable, revealed by the consumer price index figures released yesterday, was simply to say that wage increases can have an impact on inflation. He did not even have the decency to acknowledge that they might have been a factor, even if not in his view the most important factor, contributing to our present economic difficulties. For 30 minutes we heard a speech from the Leader of the Opposition that was very strong on personal abuse but very short on alternativ~ economic strategy and very short on correct analysis of the reasons for our current economic difficulties.
The Leader of the Opposition derides the fact that excessive wage increases have contributed to our current economic difficulties. Of course his colleague the honourable member for GelIibrand (Mr WilIis) does not want to acknowledge that fact either. The truth of the matter is that average weekly earnings in Australia in 1978-79 rose by 7.7 per cent; in 1979-80 they rose by 9.9 per cent; in 1980-81 they rose by 13.5 per cent; and in 1981-82 they rose by about 14 per cent. In the teeth of that sort of evidence how can the Leader of the Opposition claim, to use one of his own favourite expressions, economic literacy, and make a speechabout the Australian economy which has absolutely no reference to the contribution that wage increases have made? All he can do is heap personal abuse on my colleagues and totally ignore the basic causes. He totally ignores the contribution that those increases have made not only to our present level of inflation but also to the present high level of unemployment. It is little wonder that Australian firms have difficulty selIing goods overseas when wage increases in Germany are now running at the rate of about 4 per cent, in Japan at 3 per cent to 4 per cent, in the United States of America at 6 per cent, and in the United Kingdom, which has a slightly higher inflation rate, at around 7 per cent. Is it any wonder that this country is uncompetitive? Is it any wonder that firm after firm has found it necessary to retrench people because it has proved economically impossible for those firms to retain the larger numbers of employees that they have had in earlier years?
The first thing I would say to the Leader of the Opposition and his colleagues is that, if they presume to censure the economic policies of this

Fraser Government

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2493

Government, any censure, any submission and any speech they might make on economic management at present which ignores the contribution that wage increases have made, not only in a direct sense but also in an indirect sense towards high inflation in Australia at present, is to ignore reality. I take honourable members opposite back to what has happened to average weekly earnings in Australia over the last few years. I take them back to when they rose to 16.2 per cent in 1973-74; 25.4 per cent in 1974-75; 14.4 per cent in 1975-76; 12.4 per cent in 1976-77; 9.9 per cent in 1977-78; and then 7.7 per cent, 9.9 per cent, 13.5 per cent and 13.6 per cent. A reading of that list illustrates very clearly the contribution that excessive wage increases have made to the high levels of inflation that were experienced through the early and middle years of the 1970s and to the level of
inflation being experienced by Australia at present. I made it very clear yesterday, when the consumer price index figures for the September quarter were released, that they were a matter of concern to the Government. They were frankly higher than the Government had believed was likely. There are a number of particular reasons for that.
I do not know whether the Opposition is interested in an analysis of the CPI figure for the September quarter, but some of that analysis bears study. There is no doubt that a significant contribution to the increase in the consumer price index has been made by State and Federal government charges. The contribution made by the increases in electricity charges around Australia, particularly in New South Wales but not only in that State, are an element in that. Of course, that takes us back to a time a couple of years ago when the New South Wales Government bought industrial peace with the power unions in that State by granting them a 37t hour week. We warned on that occasion that that decision would unleash a number of industrial pressures and a number of wage increases which would inevitably result in higher electricity charges in New South Wales. Anybody who has studied the pattern of what has happened in that State will see that the truth of what the Government warned at that time has indeed been borne out.
There is also no doubt that the CPI increase for the September quarter was affected by the increases in petrol prices which have occurred around Australia-in particular, the introduction of a petrol tax in New South Wales and also the imposition of the 1c levy in the Budget to finance the Australian Bincentennial Road Development Program. There is no doubt that exchange rate depreciations, which have affected the declining

competitiveness of Australian industry, have also played a major role. I think it is also worth pointing out to the House that the method of collection of statistics has recently been altered by the Statistician. This could easily have resulted in a number of prices which otherwise would have shown up in the December quarter CPI in fact being included in the September quarter. So I say to the House that although the outcome for the September quarter is a matter of serious concern, is disturbing to the Government, and ought to be disturbing to all members of the House who are concerned with greater economic growth and greater economic recovery, it really is not an alternative to embrace the policies which I understand the Opposition stands for-although the Leader of the Opposition did not provide us with much of a clue today as to what those policies really are.
Perhaps we can go behind the Leader of the Opposition and see whether we can find out from the honourable member for Gellibrand, Labor's spokesman on economic matters, what the Opposition's alternative economic policy is. Yesterday, being interviewed on the Today with Mark Day program, he said that it would be a good idea if we had a small increase in the deficit. The interviewer said to him:
How big is a small increase in your opinion?
This is what the honourable member for Gellibrand answered:
Well, one must relate this to technical things like the rate of growth of money in the community and so on, and one must not increase . . .
He meant the deficit-
to the point where there is a large increase in the money supplies, the amount of money floating around. But within the constraints that that imposes there is flexibility and a degree of possibility for increasing the deficit which enables the Government to give the economy a . . .
A boost presumably-
to create some jobs, but not have an inflationary impact.
Of course, the honourable member for Gellibrand in that answer was trying to have two bob each way. He did not really want to admit that he was a big deficit man. He said that a Labor Government would create some jobs, yet in Adelaide on Friday the Leader of the Opposition was talking about 150,000 jobs in the first year that Labor was in power. How does that compare with what the honourable member for Gellibrand was saying? He was trying to play down the impact on the money supply of the sorts of policies in which he really believes, yet his leader only a few days earlier was waxing eloquent. The Leader of the Opposition was also talking about how under a Labor government there would be a new era of Commonwealth-State co-operation. We ought to

2494 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Fraser Government

remember what the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) has said about State government charges in the minerals area. He has made it very clear to the mining industry of Australia that if Labor ever becomes the government of this country it will ride completely roughshod over the rights and the interests of State governments so far as levies and charges are concerned. There can be no doubt that there is not only an unwillingness on the part of the Leader of the Opposition to come clean as to what his real alternative economic strategy is but also a good deal of conflict between the honourable member for Gellibrand and the Leader of the Opposition. When it comes to talking about the size of the Budget deficit, the honourable member for Gellibrand very clearly wants to run for cover. He knows as well as everybody else in this House that if an alternative economic strategy were applied it would not be more anti-inflationary, it would be less anti-inflationary. What we need at the moment are policies which exert a greater downward influence, not a greater upward pressure, on inflation. If we adopt policies that are far more permissive so far as the money supply is concerned, if we have the much larger deficit that Labor stands for, if we adopt the exchange rate policies which have been constantly advocated by the Leader of the Opposition, and if we adopt the fiscal policies that were again advocated today by the Leader of the Opposition, the net effect will be to create a far more inflationary climate than exists at present. Any sober objective economic analysis would hav~ ~o acknowledge that, if we adopt more permissive monetary and fiscal policies the prospect of securing a greater level of wag~ restraint will be even further down the track.
The Leader of the Opposition accuses us of being insensitive to the plight of poor Australians. He accuses us of adopting a confrontationist attitude to the trade union movement. He accuses us of being unwilling to talk to all sections of the Australian community. Has the Leader of the Opposition not taken a careful look at many of the benefits in the personal taxation and family allowance area contained in the last Budget whereby average Australian families will be better off to the tune of $17 to $20 a week? Many of those concessions were in fact put together by the Government after very extensive consultation not only with the trade union movement but also with representatives of Australian industry. It was an attempt by this Government to respond to the needs of average Australian families; it was not only an attempt but I believe a very successful attempt.

The speech of the Leader of the Opposition was noticeably silent on those subjects. He was noticeably silent about the fact that tax cuts on a full year basis of about $2,500m will come into effect next week and will make a significant contribution to the living standards and the position of average Australian families. Those income tax reductions, the family allowance increases and the mortgage rebate scheme have not been directed at the wealthy people of Australia; they have been directed at ordinary, average, individual Australians and ordinary, average Australian families. The Leader of the Opposition once again is very strong on abuse and on personal invective but very light on proper, objective analysis.
I reject completely the charge made by the Leader of the Opposition that this Government's policies have not been directed towards the interests of ordinary, average Australian families. I condemn the unwillingness of the Leader of the Opposition to recognise the contribution that wage increases have made not only to our present high level of inflation but also to the unemployment which is occurring around Australia at present. The way the Leader of the Opposition talks, one would imagine that Australia is the only country in the industrialised world that has a high level of unemployment at present. Does he tell us that it has reached 13 per cent in the United Kingdom, something like 12.2 per cent in Canada, something like 8 per cent in West Germany which, until recently, had a social democratic government, and about 9 per cent in France, which has a socialist government, and indeed that it is at comparable levels in many other parts of Western Europe? Yet he comes into this House and berates us and our policies without making any reference to that point.
There can be no doubt that Australia is now, in common with the rest of the industrialised world, experiencing a very severe recession. That recession hit Australia later but it is not hitting us any less hard because of the timing difference. That has inevitably meant that our growth prospects have slowed quite dramatically, but although much of the blame for the economic downturn in Australia is the result of this economic recession we must not blind ourselves to the fact that home-grown factors have played a major role. When international circumstances are running against us it is not the time to adopt domestic policies which will exacerbate rather than reduce those adverse international economic pressures. The P?!icies advocated by the Leader of the OpposltlOn-:-~he policies of a higher deficit, of a more permiSSive fiscal and monetary policy, of

Fraser Government

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2495

exchange rate policies that would be more inflationary than at present and of a general approach to wages which would inevitably underwrite a larger increase in wages in the future-are not the alternative policies that this country needs at present.
I do not for a moment pretend that the Government draws anything other than great concern from and is disturbed by the inflation figure that was revealed yesterday, but to suggest that the alternative to the policies that are being followed by the Government is to adopt policies which would be more inflationary rather than less inflationary is, in my view, absurd, If the policies advocated by the Leader of the Opposition were in fact to be implemented I put it to the House that we would have not only higher unemployment but also higher inflation,

Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (2,34)-Mr Speaker-

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided,

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon, Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

63

Noes

44

Majority

19

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J. Jenkins, H. A.

Johnson. Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Maher,M.J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Mountford,J.G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Dobie,J. D. M. Chapman, H. G. P. Viner,R.1. Jull,D. F. Braithwaite, R. A.

Cass,M.H. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi, R. Morrison, W. L. Young, M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Hayden's) be agreed to.

The House divided,

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon, Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

44

Noes

63

Majority

19

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J, D, Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown. N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron. Ian Carlton,J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly, D. M. Dean,A.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Fraser. Malcolm Giles,G.O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.e. Moore,J. e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter.J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. MeC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, e. w.
White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, 8. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins,J.S. Duffy, M.J. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J. Jenkins, H. A.

Adermann, A. E. Anthony,J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A.

NOES

Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones. Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Maher, M.J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.
Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T.

2496 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Notices ofMotion

NOES
Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron. Ian Carlton,J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly, D. M. Dean, A. G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife, W. e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Fraser, Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R.J. Harris. G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Macphee, I. M. Millar, P. e. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender,J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson,l. B. e.

PAIRS

Cass, M. H. Everingham. D. N. Jacobi, R. Morrison, W. L. Young, M.J.

Dobie, J. D. M. Chapman, H. G. P. Viner,R.I. Jull, D. F. Braithwaite, R. A.

Question so resolved in the negative,

DEPARTMENT OF IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS: PROCESSING OF APPLICATIONS
Notice of Motion
Mr MAHER (Lowe)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) views with concern the inordinate length of time being taken to process applications within the Sydney Office of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs which is causing anxiety and frustration for Australians seeking to be reunited, in this country, with members of their immediate families, and
(2) calls upon the Government to reduce the aforesaid delay by appointing sufficient additional staff to process applications expeditiously.

PETROLEUM RETAIL MARKETING SITES AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I give notice of my intention to present at the next sitting a Bill for an Act to amend the Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Act 1980,

SOUTH WEST TASMANIA Notice of Motion
Mr MILTON (La Trobe)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-

( I) condemns the Premier of Tasmania for breaching an international understanding by communicating directly with the World Heritage Commission in a philistine attempt to prevent the Franklin River region being declared a World Heritage area as nominated by the Federal Government;
(2) deplores the campaign by the Premier to depict the preservation of the South West Wilderness of Tasmania as being the sole responsibility of the Tasmanian State Government in total contradiction of strong constitutionallegal opinion; and
(3) demands that the Minister for the Capital Territory and the Minister for Administrative Services support their ministerial colleagues on an issue of great national significance.
PRIME MINISTER: ADELAIDE POLICE Notice of Motion
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House is of the opinion-
(a) that the Prime Minister's action in having the Adelaide Police 'Star Force' accompany him on a recent visit to Whyalla was a provocative act;
(b) that this provocative action lead to the unwarranted arrest of two union officials who were endeavouring to present a letter to the Prime Minister expressing the concern of Whyalla people over massive unemployment in Whyalla; and
(c) calls on the Prime Minister and the Government to show the same degree of concern for Whyalla workers that it espouses for workers in Poland.
CENSURE DEBATE: SPEAKERS
Notice of Motion Mr HURFORD (Ade1aide)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House views with contempt the action of the Prime Minister in over-ruling the Leader of the House in the agreement he had reached for at least two speakers from each side in the Censure Debate of 26 October 1982.
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS
Notice of Motion
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) notes with concern the address of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs to the National Language Conference last Friday, 22 October 1982, which has alienated the majority of ethnic communities;
(2) condemns the Minister's refusal to seriously discuss the need for a national language policy; and
(3) totally rejects the Minister's assimilationist statements which contradict the goal of a multicultural society.

Fraser Government: Economic Record

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2497

AUSTRALIAN BICENTENNIAL ROAD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
Notice of Motion
Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, 1shall move:
That this House condemns the Government for its refusal to provide set allocations of funds for National Highways to the States and the Northern Territory under the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program.

FRASER GOVERNMENT: ECONOMIC RECORD

Suspension of Standing Orders

Mr KEATING (Blax1and) (2.54)-1 move:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as
would prevent the honourable member for Blaxland from moving:

That this House condemns the Prime Minister's coward-
ice in not defending his Government's economic record and for frustrating discussion in the Parliament by wilfully breaking speaking agreements entered into between the
Leader of the House and the Manager of Opposition
Business.

1 move that motion because of the fact that at a
time when the consumer price index is at its highest-

Motion by (Mr Bourchier) put:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon, Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

63

Noes

44

Majority

19

AYES
Adermann, A. E.
Anthony. J. D. Baume. M. E. Birney, R. J.
BouTchier,J. W.
Bradfield. J. M. Brown, N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman, A. G.
Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron. Ian Cariton, J. J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Dean,A.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.c.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Fraser. Malcolm Giles,G.O'H.
Good luck, B. J. Groom, R.J. Harris, G. MCD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e.

Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Killen, Sir James Lloyd. B. Lusher. S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar. P.e. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P.l. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock. A. S. Porter,J.R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,l. McC. Spender.J. M. Street. A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson. D. S. Tuckey, e. W.

Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

AYES

White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

NOES
Armitage, J. L Blewett. N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Child,l. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.l. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J. Jenkins, H. A.

Johnson, Les (Teller) J ones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Maher,M.J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Dobie, J. D. M. Chapman, H. G. P. Viner,R.t. Jull,D. F. Braithwaite, R. A.

Cass,M.H. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi, R. Morrison, W. L. Young, M.l.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

Mr HAWKE (Wills) (3.0)-Mr Speaker, 1
second the motion. Today we have seen incompetence compounded by cowardice.

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

63

Noes

43

Majority

20

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian CarlLon,J.J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Dean, A. G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.

AYES

Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.e. Moore,J. e. Newman, K. E.
Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M.

2498 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Fraser Government: Economic Record

AYES
Fire. w.e.
Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Fraser. Malcolm Giles. G. O-H. Good luck. B. J. Groom.R.J. Harris.G. McD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges.J.e. Hodgman. W. M. Howard.J. W. Hunt. R. J. D.

Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender. J. M. Street. A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey. e. W. White. P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Blewett.N. Bowen. Lionel Brown. John Brown. Robert
Campbell,G. Child.J. Cohen.B.
Cunningham. B. T.
Darling. E. E. Dawkins. J. S. Duffy.M.J. Free.R.V. Fry.K.L. Hawke. R. J. L. Hayden. W.G. Holding. A. C. Howe.B. L. Humphreys. B. e. (Teller) Hurrord. C. J. Jenkins. H. A.

Johnson. Les (Teller) Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles Keating. P. J. Kelly.R.J. Kent. L. Kerin.J. e. Klugman. R. E. McLeay. Leo McMahon, Les Maher, ~d. J. Mildren.l. B. Milton.P. Morris. P. F. Mountrord. J. G. Scholes. G. G. D. Scott. J. L. Theophanous. A. e. Uren. T. Wallis. L.G. West.S.J.
WiIIi-- R.

PAIRS

Dobie. J. D. M. Chapman. H. G. P. Viner.R.I.
Jull.D.F. Braithwaite. R. A.

C.... M.H. Everingham. D. N. Jacobi. R. Morrison. W. L. Young.M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (3.7)- Resignation remains the only honourable COurse for this feeble Government-

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

63

Noes

43

Majority

20

Adermann. A. E. Anthony. J. D. Baume. M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier. J. W. Bradfield. J. M. Brown. N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman.AG. Cameron, Donaid
Cameron, Ewen
Cameron, Ian

AYES

Hyde. J. M. Jarman. A. W. Killen, Sir James Lloyd. B. Lusher, S. A.
MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean. R. M. (Teller) McVeigh. D. 1. Macphee, I. M. Millar. P. e. Moore, J. C.
Newman, K. E.

AYES
Carlton.J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly. D. M. Dean.A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife. W.e. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Fraser, Malcolm Giles.G.O-H. Good luck. B. J. Groom.R.J. Harris, G. McD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. e.
Hodgman. w. M.
Howard.J. W. Hunt. R. J. D.

Nixon, P. 1. O-Keefe. F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J.R.
Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender. J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling.G.E.J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey. e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Blewett. N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell.G. Child.J. Cohen. B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins, J. S, Duffy. M.J. Free, R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke. R. J. L. Hayden. W. G. Holding. A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys. B. e. (Teller) Hurford. e. J. Jenkins, H. A.

Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating. P. J. Kelly. R.1. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman. R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Maher.M.J. Mildren. J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F.
Mountrord.1. G. Scholes. G. G. D. Scott. J. L. Theophanous. A. C. Uren, T. Wallis.L.G. WiIlis.R.

PAIRS

Dobie.J.D.M. Chapman. H. G. P. Viner, R. L Jull,D. F. Braithwaite, R. A.

Cass.M.H. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi, R. Morrison. W. L. Young.M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Keating's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

41

Noes

62

Majority

21

Armitage. J. L. Blewett. N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert
Campbell.G. Child.J.
Cohen. B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling. E. E.

AYES

Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C.
Klugman, R. E.
McLeay, Leo
McMahon, Les Maher,M.J. Mildren, J. B.

General

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2499

AYES
Dawkins. J. S. Duffy.M.J. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Holding, A. e. Howe. B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
NOES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume. M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier. J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron. Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton.J.J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Dean. A.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Harris. G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Milton, P. Morris,P.F. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous. A. C. Uren. T. Wallis, L.G. Willis,R.
Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher. S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) MacVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P. e. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender,J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

PAIRS

Cass,M.H. Everingham. D. N. Jacobi. R. Morrison, W. L. Young, M. J.

Dobie,J.D.M. Chapman, H. G. P. Viner,R.1. Jull,D. F.
Braithwaite. R. A.

Question so resolved in the negative,

QANTAS AIRWAYS LTD Mr FIFE (Farrer~Minister for Aviation)~ For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of Qantas Airways Ltd for 1981-82,
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned,

COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT REGIONAL MEETING
Mr FIFE (Farrer~Minister for Aviation)~ For the information of honourable members. I present a statement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on the recent Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting,

together with a communique issued after the meeting,
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY CONSUMER AFFAIRS COUNCIL AND AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
CONSUMER AFFAIRS BUREAU
Mr HODGMAN (Denison~Minister for the Capital Territory)~For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Australian Capital Territory Consumer Affairs Council and the Australian Capital Territory Consumer Affairs Bureau for 1981-82.
Motion (by Sir James Killen)~by leave~ proposed:
That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of the report of the Australian Capital Territory Consumer Affairs Council and the Australian Capital Territory Consumer Affairs Bureau, for the year 1981-82.
Mr FRY (Fraser) (3,21)~This report, the publication of which has been sought, is relevant to a statement made by the Attorney-General's Department last week claiming that there had been no undue delay in legislation in the Australian Capital Territory, I understand that in this report there is a great deal of evidence indicating that in regard to several very important pieces of legislation there have been very substantial delays over many years, I cite the weights and measures legislation, which was first sought in 1969, the perishable food-dating legislation, which has been going on for many years, the mail order merchandising legislation, and the debt recovery legislation, All of this legislation has been in the pipeline for many years and still has not eventuated, I know it is not the responsibility of the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) but of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack). If in fact the Attorney-General's statement was misleading, I think the Minister for the Capital Territory should correct that statement and indicate that there have been substantial delays in many very important areas of consumer legislation.
The other matter which I mention briefly is the status of the Australian Capital Territory Consumer Affairs CounciL My understanding is that the term oflast year's Council expired on 12 September and that in fact there is no such thing as the Consumer Affairs Council existing in the Australian Capital Territory today, Unless that matter has been made good in the last 24 hours, I should like the Minister to indicate why there is no CounciL It is a very important body; it has served the community welL What action is the Minister taking to see that the Consumer Affairs

2500 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Personal Explanations

Council is reconstituted at the earliest possible opportunity?
Question resolved in the affirmative.
GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE PARK AUTHORITY
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs~Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)~Pursuant to section 60 of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975, I present the annual report of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority for 1981-82.
AUSTRALIAN IONISING RADIATION ADVISORY COUNCIL
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members. I present two letters from the Australian Ionising Radiation Advisory Council concerning its review on the management of radioactive waste and Synroc.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth)-Mr Speaker, I seek leave to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-I think the honourable gentleman would be wiser to ask for my indulgence rather than to seek leave. Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr COLEMAN-Yes, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member may proceed.
Mr COLEMAN-Last Friday, 22 October, the Melbourne Age published a report of a speech I had made during the adjournment debate the preceding Tuesday. In that speech I attempted to draw to the attention of the House the sacking by the Age of a journalist who is a respected media critic and to what I believe to be the political implications of that sacking. I said:
I do not know as a matter of hard fact precisely why hec-
That is, Anthony McAdam--
was sacked, but many observers-I agree with them-believe the sacking has all the signs of a leftist operation against an independent critic . . . In short, it looks as though the Left was out to get McAdam and succeeded.
The report of this speech appearing in the Age of last Friday contained an editor's note which said that the sacking of McAdam was simply part of an economy drive. It said I was 'misinformed' and described my comments as 'totally incorrect', 'wholly inaccurate' and 'scurrilous'. In preparing my adjournment speech on Tuesday, 19 October, I discussed the issue with a number of academics, journalists and public figures in Melbourne who were concerned about it, many of whose letters to

the editor the Age had refused to publish. I had several long discussions with Mr McAdam who also allowed me to read copies of correspondence that he had with the Editor and the Assistant Editor of the Age. I also examined the files of the Age 'Green Guide' and the correspondence that the 'Green Guide' chose to publish about McAdam's column. On the basis of these inquiries I am satisfied that it is reasonable to say that in the past 18 months, since McAdam began criticising terrorist Palestine Liberation Organisation and Irish Republican Army propaganda on the so-called community stations 3CR and 3RRR and leftist propaganda on some Australian Broadcasting Commission programs, he has been harassed professionally and censored politically before being sacked. I believe there is strong evidence that the motivation for the sacking was political--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now arguing his case.
Mr COLEMAN-I do not therefore accept the Editor's statement that my speech was inaccurate, misinformed or scurrilous, or that the reason of the Age for the sacking of McAdam was an economy drive. I can see no economy when one freelance writer is replaced by another. In concluding, let me say that I raised this matter last Tuesday, not out of corRlern at any unfortunate plight of McAdam who is well able to look after himself, but rather out of concern at the unfortunate condition of the Age which has such difficulty in publishing the work of an effective and popular critic ofleftist orthodoxies.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman claims to be misrepresented and wishes to make a personal explanation he may proceed.
Mr DAWKINS-Last Wednesday, 20 October, I raised with you an interjection from the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) which carried the innuendo at least that I had been involved in, to use his words, 'cheating on the taxpayers' in relation to an airline ticket. I raised with you the question of how to proceed with that matter. Later that day the honourable member for Fadden rose to make an explanation of what he had alleged in that interjection. It is worth recording that during the time he was trying to make that explanation the Deputy Speaker, who was acting in your place, asked him to stop because he thought he was going beyond the indulgence with which the Chair had provided him. At that stage I offered the leave of the Opposition for him to continue and he did

Personal Explanations

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2501

so. He proceeded with his allegations, to his satisfaction at least. The Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) then came in and, at my suggestion, tabled documents which gave details of the circumstances on which the-
Mr SPEAKER-I hesitate to interrupt the honourable gentleman but he is recounting events of which I am aware. I think he should state the misrepresentation.
Mr DAWKINSYou are absolutely right, Mr Speaker. I want to say that the reporting in the newspapers did me considerable damage because they simply reported the allegation and the denial. They did not, however, mention the fact that this matter would not have been brought on without my requesting it to be brought on. The honourable member for Fadden would not have been able to make the allegations without my having granted him leave to do so. The documents which detailed the circumstances would not have been tabled unless I had agreed to their being tabled. The documents that were tabled by the Minister revealed that the allegations that were made by the honourable member for Fadden were entirely baseless. Regrettably, the time of day was such that the newspapers could not report that matter. There is absolutely no question that anyone who reads those documents will realise that there is absolutely no justification for saying that I cheated on the taxpayers in any way. The next point I want to make-I have raised it with the honourable member for Fadden-is that I think he was misinformed about the circumstances on which he based his allegations. I think to that extent I am certainly entitled to an apology from him.
The other matter that I raise relates to the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) and the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman), both of whom have grubbied themselves in this business. The honourable member for O'Connor has, on a couple of occasions, the most recent of which was last Wednesday, said by way of interjection, 'What about your airline tickets?' At one stage during the proceedings the Minister for the Capital Territory asked why did I not just plead guilty. Given that the documents have now been tabled and clearly reveal all the circumstances and completely exonerate me from any suggestion of wrong-doing, I now call on the Minister and the honourable member for O'Connor, as well as the honourable member for Fadden, to give me the apology to which I am entitled.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I wish to draw to the attention of the House to the telegram that was sent by the honourable member.

Mr SPEAKER-I interrupt the honourable gentleman. Is he claiming to have been misrepresen ted?
Mr TUCKEY-Inasmuch as I have been called upon to apologise for something I did not do.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman wishes to state that he has been misrepresented and that he did not say what he is alleged to have said, he may proceed.
Mr TUCKEY-The statement from the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) is that I called the attention of the House to a situation that, in fact, did not exist. I referred to an air ticket and the inference was that the cost of that air ticket had been claimed unjustly. I wish to put my position on that matter. I will quote from the papers which the honourable member for Fremantle says exonerate him completely. On 15 September he sent a telegram.
Mr SPEAKER-I will not permit a repetition of an accusation against any honourable member unless it is done on a direct motion.
Mr TUCKEY-Well, I do not apologise.
NEW FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE PARLIAMENT
Mr SPEAKER-Since becoming Speaker, have asserted that it is necessary for the Parliament to control its own financial and staffing resources so that it can exercise its role in the tripartition of power in accordance with the practice of parliamentary democracy and the provisions of the Australian Constitution. As a former Treasurer, I knew that the estimates for the House of Representatives and the other parliamentary departments were submitted by officers of the Parliament to officers of the Executive department responsible for financial control, initially the Treasury, and now the Department of Finance. Those estimates were then negotiated and finalised at that officer level. This was detrimental to the Parliament because the officers of the Parliament were not able to withstand the pressures that the Executive's strength was able to assert over them. Following this process the final figures were given Cabinet endorsement and included in the main Appropriation Bill for the ordinary annual services of government in the same manner as the proposed expenditures for Executive departments.
This process clearly did not accord Parliament its proper constitutional position. Therefore I directed, with the concurrence of Senator Sir Condor Laucke, President of the Senate, that the estimates were not to be discussed by any officer of the Parliament with any officer of an Executive

2502 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Financial Arrangementsfor Parliament

department. Specifically, they were not to negotiate in any sense. However, the officers were to provide fully any information requested by the Executive departments. We, that is the President and I, informed the Prime Minister of this decision and we suggested a changed procedure for determining the parliamentary departments'
estimates.
The procedure I proposed was that the Presiding Officers should deal directly with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). The Prime Minister instead requested that we agree to discussions with the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) and the Leader of the Government in the Senate (Senator Sir John Carrick). This was done and it resulted in the following procedure being adopted for Parliament's estimates for the financial years 1980-81 and J98 J-82:
The Presiding Officers proposed bids of estimated expenditure directly to the Minister for Finance;
If any bids were questioned, they would be discussed between the Presiding Officers and the Leader of the House and the Leader of the Government in the Senate;
There would be no alteration of the Presiding Officer's estimates without consultation.
It was also agreed that Parliament's proposed expenditures would be listed in a truncated form in the Appropriation Bill so as to provide Parliament with greater flexibility in financial administration. Further discussions were to be held in relation to subsequent years.
While these arrangements recognised Parliament's constitutional position they did not fully establish the proper role for the Parliament. Accordingly, I continued to argue that, within the context of the Government's main Appropriation Bill, a single-line entry for the estimates of the Parliament should be a first stage, but that the best solution was the introduction of a separate parliamentary appropriation Bill funding the Parliament separate from the ordinary annual services of government.
Late in 1981 and early in 1982 events occurred which precipitated major changes. On two occasions the Executive interfered with the Parliament's funding without the agreed consultation taking place. In seeking and obtaining restoration of the funds and of the arrangement, I stated on several occasions that, in light of these develop- ~ents and if the negotiated arrangement contmued to be abrogated, the Parliament would have to reconsider its position. I indicated that the current agreement was a compromise. As such,

the agreement fell short of independence. Parliament had honoured its obligation. If the agreement was not honoured by all parties, the Parliament would be forced to re-examine its position.
During this time. I had appeared before the Senate Select Committee on Parliament's Appropriations and Staffing and presented to it the views which I have just stated. Soon after, that Senate Select Committee reported and recommended sweeping changes, incorporating many of those which I had been advocating, to ensure the independence of the Parliament.
I welcomed the Government response to the Senate Committee report. The Government agreed to the introduction of a separate Bill to provide for Parliament's funding, commencing with the financial year 1982-83. Discussions were then held between the Leader of the House, the Leader of the Government in the Senate, Mr President and myself to formalise the arrangement. The financial procedures which have been adopted to operate commencing with this year are as follows: Within the Department of the House of Representatives the Clerk will be responsible for the formulation of the estimates in the same way as hitherto. Those estimates will then be subject to the approval of Mr Speaker who will examine them closely to ensure that they are properly based. Within the departments of the Library, Joint House and Hansard the permanent heads will be responsible for the formulation of the estimates in the same way as hitherto. Those estimates will then be subject to the approval of Mr Speaker and Mr President who will examine them closely to ensure that they are properly based. In relation to the Department of the Senate a different estimating procedure has been adopted which accords with the recommendations of the Senate Select Committee. That procedure was not favoured by the Executive Government or by me in relation to the House or the joint parliamentary departments.
This procedure I have described will occur at the same time that the annual estimates for the ordinary annual services of government are being prepared by the executive departments for incorporation in the main Appropriation Bill for the year. The Presiding Officers, the Leader of the House and the Leader of the Government in the Senate will meet to consider the Parliament's draft estimates. When Parliament's estimates are agreed by this process they are sent to the Minister for Finance to be incorporated in the Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill. The first of these Bills was presented on Budget night

Financial Arrangementsfor Parliament

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2503

1982. It appropriates sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for each of the parliamentary departments which had been agreed upon by the Presiding Officers and the Executive.
The Bill itself is a major constitutional advance in the financial independence of Parliament. The form of the Bill is a further major reform. The funding of each parliamentary department is represented by single-line totals for each of recurrent and capital expenditure so affording the Parliament enhanced financial flexibility. Further, the Bill provides Advances to the Speaker, the President and the Presiding Officers jointly to enable moneys to be made available for expenditure that is urgently required and was unforeseen at the time of the preparation of the Bill.
The Executive has agreed with Mr President and myself that there will be incorporated within the Parliament responsibility for all functions which have previously been administered by executive departments on behalf of the Parliament. Responsibility for a number of functions has been transferred in the current financial year. They are: Contributions by the Commonwealth of Australia to the Inter Parliamentary Union and the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association; members' subscriptions to the Commonwealth Record; cost of members' badges of office; and hospitality for school parties visiting Parliament House, Canberra. This is a small group at present but consultations are proceeding for the purpose of transferring all functions exercised by executive departments on behalf of the Parliament. Incorporated in the Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill is the funding for these functions. Discussions are continuing between the Executive and the Parliament concerning the total financial provisions and administration of all functions relating to the Parliament by the parliamentary departments.
With the adoption of these revised arrangements it is important that members of parliament will be kept fully informed of the disbursement of the parliamentary departments finances. Regular reports to both Houses will be made by the Presiding Officers on the use of their Advances. For some time an annual report has been presented to the House which provides information on, amongst other things, the financial and staffing management of the Department of the House of Representatives. In addition to this, detailed explanation of House expenditures will continue to be available to House Estimates committees. Copies of a paper indicating the details of the House of Representatives Department's expenditure for 1981-82 and the basis of the estimates of proposed expenditures for 1982-83 are available from the

House of Representatives Table Office. I will be present during consideration in Committee of the Whole of the Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Bill 1982 so that honourable members may raise for answer queries concerning the proposed expenditures for any parliamentary department for which I bear administrative responsibility.
The Parliament has also obtained independence in staffing matters. The staff of the parliamentary departments are currently employed under the Public Service Act, but in a way that recognises the special position of the Parliament's staff; the Presiding Officers exercise the powers and perform the duties with respect to parliamentary department staff that are vested in the Public Service Board with respect to the staff of executive departments. The Executive Government has now indicated that it will adopt measures to transfer the control over staffing numbers, the creation and reclassification of positions, and promotions procedures for all officers except the parliamentary permanent heads.
Many of these measures will come into effect with the passage of the Public Service Acts Amendment Bill currently before the Senate and the proclamation of certain of its sections. However, some provisions, for example, control over staff ceiling numbers, do not require legislative action and have now been put into effect. The measures I have outlined represent a major advance towards parliamentary reform in Australia by according the legislature its proper role as one branch in the tripartition of power under the Constitution.
ASSENT TO BILLS
Assent to the following Bills reported:
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Bill 1982.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Bill 1982.
PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE
Reports
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, I present the reports relating to the following proposed works:
Stage I construction of new works and upgrading of existing facilities for the new tactical fighter project at Fishermens Bend, Melbourne; and Development of the military area at Woodside, South Australia, for the 16th Air Defence Regiment.
Ordered that the reports be printed.

2504 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Government Anti-inflation Policy

GOVERNMENT'S ANTI-INFLATION POLICY
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPliTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Government's anti-inflation policy.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places,
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.44)-The matter which the Opposition brings before the Parliament is an important matter but nowhere near as important as the censure motion which this Government squibbed this afternoon, When the Opposition puts forward a very serious censure motion against the Government, properly brought before this House, ahout a matter as basic as the economic strategy which is applying in this country and what is happening to the Australian economy, it is deplorable that the Government puts up only half a speaker. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) was the only person who spoke for the Government and he spoke for half of his allotted time, The Opposition was gagged so we had only one speaker. Despite the fact that we understood that there was an agreement with the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) that two speakers would be allowed from the Opposition side, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) apparently saw fit to overrule that arrangement. So there was only one speaker from this side of the House and only half a speaker from the Government side.
What a pathetic indictment of the Government that it is prepared to have such a truncated debate on a censure motion relating to the economy, surely the most important issue facing the Parliament at the present time. It is incredible that the Government shoul~ adopt that kind of approach to the censure mOtion and then by way of some sort of make-up to the Opposition say: 'You can have the matter, of public importance, perhaps with one speaker, Frankly, I am not sure whether we are to get one or two speakers. I doubt very much }Vhether ~he ~reasurer or any Minister will respond to me m thIS debate, The Government is really squibbing this issue, We had a Minister speaking for hal~ his allotted time in the debate on the censure motIOn. No other Minister let alone the Prime Minister was prepared to get 'up in that debate and speak for the Government in defence of its record on the economy.

What is clearly happening is that the Government is running away from the discussion on the economy. It is devastated by the fact that after seven years it has not only made no progress but also gone hackwards by a mile. The reality is that inflation is now as high as it was when the Government came into office-indeed, fractionally higher-and unemployment is twice as high. The state of the economy is much worse than it was when this Government came into office. The crushing reality which faces this Government is that after seven years it has achieved nothing; in fact, its achievements have been very negative. It is now afraid to discuss these matters in the Parliament, so important censure motions do not get discussed in the Parliament except to the minimal degree possible. Instead we are allowed to have a truncated debate on a matter of public importance, a debate which inevitably attracts less public attention. That is all part of the plan to deflect public attention from what is this Government's very vulnerable spot.
When the Treasurer spoke on the censure motion he made a couple of rather pathetic points, He said that wages were to blame for inflation. That is a fairly common line from the Government. He ignored the fact that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) had made the point in his contribution that wages were an element in the inflationary process. We are not saying that they are not a relevant factor to take into account. The Treasurer ignored that point and simply went on to stress that this was the basic cause of the Government's problems.
Let me reiterate the point that was made by the Leader of the Opposition in opening the censure debate. If wages are seen by the Government as being a problem, it is a problem for which it must bear the responsibility. The Government destroyed the wage indexation system, a system which would have ensured rationality in wage levels, Had it been properly continued there would have been a boost to industrial relations. From the time this Government came into office it set about destroying the wage indexation system despite a promise in 1975 to maintain that system. It finally achieved its aim a year or so ago. The Government then had the situation which it wanted-a situation in which wages would be set in the market-place rather than by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, When the market-place worked out its result the workers got an increase in real wages which was higher than the Government wanted. It then said: 'That is all the unions' fault. They have destroyed the

Government Anti-inflation Policy

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2505

economy by increasing inflation through increasing wages'. That is a system which the Government brought into operation by its own actions. This Government, more than anyone else, is responsible for the destruction of wage indexation. It must, therefore, live with the fruits of that destructive policy. It is just not a goer to say: 'This is something beyond our control. This is the unions' fault'. This Government has been applying a wages system for which it is responsible. If that is bringing about the results which it now does not like, it is something it has to live with. It cannot
walk away from its responsibility in that regard.
The Treasurer also said in his very short speech on the censure motion that if we had an increase in the deficit it would be terribly inflationary. I find it interesting that the Treasurer should say that in the context of having just introduced a Budget which involves some increases in the deficit. If he really believes what he said here today, presumably he is saying that the Budget he brought down a couple of months ago with an increased deficit will increase the inflation rate. He has not admitted this before, but the implication of what he said here today is that that is his belief. If that is his belief, it is interesting. We note with interest that the Treasurer now acknowledges that in his view, the Budget which he brought down, is an inflationary Budget.
A more substantive point is that an incredible amount of simplistic nonsense and rubbish is spoken by people from the other side, most particularly the Treasurer, about the relationship between deficits and inflation. It is simply not true that there is any sort of hard and fast relationship between deficits and inflation. I am not saying
that deficits do not matter. Of course deficits matter. They have an importance in that they add to the money supply. One cannot simply go on increasing deficits regardless of their impact on the growth of the money supply and the possible implications that can have eventually on inflation. It is just nonsense to say, as Government members keep saying, that there is some hard and fast relationship.
In other countries it is impossible to see any clear relationship between deficits and inflation rates. A table in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Economic Outlook which was published in the middle of the year shows the 1982 deficit for various countries as estimated by the OECD and the levels of inflation as estimated by it for 1982. There is an incredible jumble of relationships between deficits and inflation. The country which is shown as having the smallest deficit of all the major OECD countries-some 15 or 16 countries are listed-is

Australia. In fact, on the standardised basis of deficits utilised by the OECD, Australia has a Budget surplus. This estimate was done before the latest Budget was brought down; it was done in the middle of this year. The estimate for 1982 shows Australia as having the lowest Budget deficit-in fact, a small surplus. It has an inflation rate which is one of the highest. If there is some sort of relationship between deficits and inflation of the kind that the Government asserts, one would find this a rather startling result. On the other hand, Japan has a deficit far greater than Australia's as a proportion of gross domestic
product, but has an inflation rate of 3+ per cent compared with Australia's estimated inflation rate of 11 per cent. Japan is a country with a much higher deficit and a much lower inflation. Sweden, which has a deficit of 5.9 per cent, far greater than that of Japan, has an inflation rate still far below that of Australia. The deficit for all the countries shown is far in excess of that for Australia. The inflation rate, on average, is far below that for Australia.
Let us have an end to this simplistic nonsense and rubbish which we keep getting from the
Government about there being some hard and fast relationship between deficits and inflation. In the end, if we keep on belting up the deficit, it can have an inflationary impact, but it is a much looser relationship than the Government makes out. Other things which occur are very important and must be taken into account. In that regard I believe that what has been said by the Treasurer here today is ridiculous, an absurdity and a trav-
esty of the truth, something which we are used to hearing from the other side but which needs to be nailed in this Parliament.
The Government, in asking us to believe that its economic policies are on the right tram, despite the fact that inflation is now higher than when it came into office, is asking us to proceed on the basis of some blind faith that those policies will eventually work. The extraordinariness of this is vividly demonstrated by some recent comments by the Treasurer, who said that what was happening in the United States of America and the United Kingdom, where policies similar to this Government's policies are being pursued, was evidence of the correctness of the Fraser Government's policies because in those countries the inflation rate was coming down. He says that if we can only stick with these policies we can be like the United Kingdom and the United States. We can get our inflation rate down. It will be terrific.
The Treasurer slides over the fact that we will have a 14 per cent unemployment rate. He slides over the fact that people are talking about the

2506 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Government Anti-inflation Policy

United States economy absolutely collapsing. He says that the policies we are pursuing are right. Of course they are not bringing the inflation rate down now. He says that if we can just create a lot more unemployment that will bring about the terrific results that the United Kingdom and the United States are getting. What an incredible kind of rationale that is for policies in this country. It is as though we should all leap with joy about the fact that we are looking forward to that economy developing in Australia. Undoubtedly if we persist with this Government's present policies we will eventually get up to a 10 per cent unemployment rate. In fact, we will achieve that rate by the middle of next year. We are very close to it. The Flinders University Institute of Labour Studies, to take one independent source, says that it will be at 9.2 per cent by June of next year. Certainly if this Government remains in office we will reach that level. We will most probably have an unemployment rate of 10 per cent, or maybe welt in excess of that by the end of 1983.
I guess that if the Government keeps on pursuing those policies for long enough, if it creates enough unemployment, eventually, yes, the inflation rate will come down. But is that the kind of policy which we really want to pursue in this country? Do we want to go on grinding our young people into the dirt by not offering them jobs and by having people sacked from their jobs to the point where we have massive unemployment and deepening recession all the time as a means of reducing the inflation rate in this country? Is that what we think a sophisticated economic policy is all about? That apparently is the Government's belief. We regard it as one which is absolutely extraordinary. It is a policy which is totally destructive and if it works to bring inflation down, it will do so at a fantastic cost to the Australian economy both in economic terms and social terms. I do not have time to elaborate on that now.
It is true also, of course that whilst the Government has been busily creating unemployment to bring the inflation rate down it has also been counteracting that policy by busily jacking the inflation rate up. We have seen year after year, most particularly in the last two years, the Budget incorporate various policies to ensure that the inflation rate stays up and that the unemployment that the Government is creating does not succeed in bringing the inflation rate down. So the Government has this rather bifurcated policy. It keeps piling up unemployment without an impact on inflation because the Government itself keeps ensuring that the inflation rate stays up.

In this latest Budget we have over $1,OOOm of

indirect tax increases which, on the Treasurer's

own figures given in this Parliament a year and a

half ago, will add directly and indirectly some-

thing like 2 per cent to the consumer price index.

The Treasurer said that some $500m of increased

indirect taxes will on average add one per cent to

the consumer price index. On his own figures

there will be something like a 2 per cent increase

to the CPI from those increased taxes and

charges. There has been also the matter of hospi-

tal charges which have been enormously increased

by a deliberate action of this Government. In the

last year we have had a fantastic increase in hospi-

tal charges which as a result of this Government's

cutback in funds to the States and the forcing of

the States to increase those hospital charges will

mean that the health services component of the

consumer price index has gone up by 60 per

cent-not 16 per cent-in the last 12 months.

T1+hapteirs

a fantastic increase. This cent to 2 per cent to the

alone has added consumer price

index, to the inflation rate.

Here is a Government which quite clearly on
the basis of those kinds of figures has been ensuring that the inflation rate stays high at the same time as it has been creating unemployment to bring that inflation rate down. So long as the Government persists in this policy we will go on having high inflation and high unemployment.
This disastrous policy will continue to force the Australian economy into the worst economic state it has been in since the 1930s. Relative to other
countries, there will be a rapidly deteriorating situation in Australia. Already our present inflation rate at 12 per cent is about 4+ per cent in excess of the average for OECD countries. It is about 5+ per cent in excess of the average for our trading partners. Quite clearly, that kind of inflation rate is very damaging to the economy.

This Government, by ensuring that the inflation rate stays up through its idiotic action, is creating enormous damage to this country. It is ensuring that if we have the possibility of economic
recovery in the future, that recovery would start off from a higher inflationary base. For that reason of course, there will not be economic re-
covery under these policies. This Government offers no prospect of higher inflation without massive unemployment. The reality is that this Government has no economic strategy that .is
worth the name.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Government Anti-inflation Policy

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2507

Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (3.59)- First of all, I want to say that, when we are talking about aberrations in the Australian economy such as the recent far too high quarterly inflation rate and aberrations such as the far too high unemployment rate in Australia at the present time, the Government has great concern. The Government has had continuous concern about both of these indicators-indicators which, admittedly, do not affect many Australians but which, unfortunately, still affect far too many. (Quorum formed).
It is quite evident that at least the Australian Labor Party agrees with the Government that an anti-inflationary policy is important. The honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), by some of the confused things that he said, seemed to go along with that. So, we are agreed on one point. I think we probably agreed for very good reasons. If there are any honourable members opposite who disagree with the basis of an anti-inflationary pol-
icy they ought to ask the pensioners, the housewives, the wage earners and the businesses, why they have consistently agreed with the Government in the past few years that an anti-inflationary policy is of the utmost importance to this country. It is true, as I have just said, that in the period between May and August this yearthe period for which the recent figures applythere was a 3.5 per cent increase. This was far too
high a proportional increase. It is true also, as has been said in the media yesterday and today, that that has been due, apart from any other reasons, to two important factors: Firstly, an increase in both State and Commonwealth government charges and, secondly, a massive increase in wages in the last quarter of last year and in the first two quarters of this year. As I said, we are talking about both State and Federal government charges. In that context-certainly in my State of New South Wales-on the estimates of the officials of the Department of the Treasury something like one per cent of that 3.5 per cent increase has been due to State charges. This is a high increase but, I hope, a once and for all increase.
I want to talk at length about the state of confusion in the minds of members of the Labor Party. Whilst members of the Labor Party comdemn us today for an anti-inflationary policy that is not working, the policies which the Labor Party, by the words today of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the honourable member for Gellibrand, would advocate would lead us into even higher inflation. What do ~embe~s of the Labor Party want? Do they want ~lgher Inflation by their own policies? Do they Just want to stand back and criticise us for trying

to bear down on inflation and for not being quite successful? What are their policies? It has been stated time and time again-it has just been stated by the honourable member for Gellibrand-that the Labor Party wants increased government spending fuelled either by higher taxes, presumably, or by a higher deficit. There are only two ways that can be done. What does the Labor Party want us to spend the money on? Apparently, it wants us to set up a massive new Medibank system which would entail spending many hundreds of millions of dollars. I hear from the Labor Party's recent statement about Commonwealth-State arrangements that should a Labor government get into office it would spend a greatly increased amount on the States. It wants to contribute more money towards pretty well every area of government spending. That means either higher taxes-that is, higher government charges-or an increased deficit.
It is all right for the honourable member for Gellibrand to run away from the effect of a deficit and to say that higher deficits do not matter. That is what he said. But what about the effect of a higher deficit on interest rates? What about the effect of a higher deficit on the repayments schedule in each year's Budget? In the last few years we have seen the Government having to pay off an ever increasing amount through interest on government debt. Again that amount will have to come from the taxpayer through either charges or direct taxes. Obviously the Labor Party, from its statements today, wants increased government charges. That and other statements it has made today will result in increased inflation.
What does the Labor Party think about wages? An arm of the Labor Party is frequently called the industrial wing. It is the union movement. What does the Labor Party encourage the union movement to do? It encourages the union movement to look for a 38-hour week as against a 40-hour week, and to look for a 5 per cent to 8 per cent increase in wages with no increased productivity. That is a simple piece of arithmetic. I am not saying that in the long term we should not have shorter working hours as long as people understand that that means lower real wages. The Labor Party is encouraging people in the union movement to push for shorter working hours, which will have an obvious inflationary effect. What will that do to our economy?
Let us consider the people from the mining industry who are in Canberra protesting today. They have been duped by their union leaders into looking for shorter working hours and, therefore, higher wages with no increased productivity. Honourable members should see whether people

2508 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Government Anti-inflation Policy

have been put out of work, as we warned. They should see where the union leaders are and ask whether they are still being paid ever-increasing wages. We can bet our lives that the union leaders are still wandering around in their big black cars and that they could not care one hoot about the unemployed of this country. The union leaders look for ridiculous conditions in difficult economic times, and they are duping the labour force of this country. That is what is happening in the industrial wing of the Labor Party. The Labor Party does not stand up in this place for the working people in Australia, who are being duped. That is what the Labor Party thinks about increased wages. There is absolutely no doubt that increased wages have been a major factor in producing the latest consumer price index figure which, as I have said, relates to the period from
May to August.

What does the Labor Party think about our
currency? It wants to devalue; it wants to increase the cost of imports. Therefore, it wants to increase
the amount of inflation. That has been stated
often enough by the Labor Party. What does the Labor Party want to do about the money supply?
The Leader of the Opposition often says: 'Why don't you loosen the screws on the money
supply'? Of course, he does not recognise that at
present there is enough money supply to go
around. He says: 'Let us loosen the screws'. Let us take all the soft, typical, Labor Party, fairyfloss
options. Just for the sake of a few votes in another election, let us loosen the screws and make it look
as though that is the right thing to do for Australia. What happens when the money supply
blows out? Let us consider the statistics at every time in the last generation or so when the money
supply has blown out. Let us consider the statistics on what happens to inflation after a period of perhaps 12 months.

Mr Robert Brown-- You obviously have not looked at them or you don't understand them.

Mr SAINSBURY--If the honourable member

for Hunter, who I understand comes from some

sheemmii-gahc~adleemarinc

pursuit would care to have something. That is what the

a look Labor

Party thmks about the money supply. Obviously it

wants that too to fuel inflation. What has the

Labor Party tried to do with its so-called deal with

the trade unions on a prices and incomes policy?

Has the Labor Party for one second encouraged ~he trade union movement to look for a trade-off

m wage ?emands against reductions in direct

taxes whIch are about to flow through in

N.ovember? In November-next month--there

wlll be .qUlte substantial direct tax reductions in

Austraha. The Commonwealth Statistician wi!!

not take that into account in the calculation of the consumer price index because the reductions will not flow through directly to the prices of goods.
Will the Labor Party encourage its industrial arm to take that into account in its wage demands? Of course it will not. The one thing the Labor Party has wanted since I entered this place-that is the position from which I can observe-has been to cause as much disruption, unemployment and inflation and as many increases in interest rates as it can possibly manage for pure, petty, political purposes. I appeal to the Labor Party to wake up and understand that we are all Australians. It is about time we pulled together. We do not want this confrontationist business we have had outside Parliament today. The union people have been duped by the union bosses into trying to send their bosses broke. Those people have come to Canberra thinking that somehow the situation has something to do with this Government. It is entirely due to the industrial wing of the Labor Party, and the Labor Party, with all its fairyfloss arguments, could not give a hoot for those people in the work force in Australia. That has been demonstrated time and time again. What the work force of Australia wants is production to back wages. In any economy, until we produce we cannot have the fruits of that production. We can increase wages; we can manufacture money, as the Labor Government tried to do when it was in power previously. We can go through all these fancy, ephemeral, pseudo-economic exercises, but it will not help one bit if it is not backed by production.
In Australia at the moment we are looking at two alternatives. At this stage I indicate that I am prepared to debate the economy at any stage and I am prepared to debate the fact that our Government has an economic record on which it can stand. There are two alternatives brought about by the sorts of attitudes the Labor Party has engendered. Either we will have an even more painful shake out-do not worry, at the end of the shake out we will have lower inflation-which will hurt more and more ordinary Australians, or we will have a change of attitude which says that if we work a bit harder or perhaps even a little longer for the same wages, if we have wage restraint and if we have employers who are prepared to involve their employees more closely in our capitalist system, we can get out of this recession less painfully. We have two alternatives. We will come out of the recession; we know that. This country has far too many resources and far too much innovative power amongst its people not to come out of it.

Government Anti-inflation Policy

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2509

With the way we are heading at the moment and with the attitudes engendered in the industrial wing of the Labor Party, either we will have that very painful shake out-I fear that people who have been here are already the victims of that-or alternatively, as I have said, we will have to work harder. We will have to understand that without production we cannot have the real wages to match it. We have had the real wage increases, do not worry about that. The Labor Party believes the CPI figures from the Statistician so it will obviously believe him when he says also that we have had real wage increases, but without increases in production they are futile. We have been going through a bad drought and our export markets are a particular problem because of the closing of trade barriers overseas. We are heading for a very difficult period.
I want to say one other thing in relation to inflation. In 1981-82 the CPI was 10.4 per cent--far too high-but in the three years when Labor was in power the lowest CPI movement was 12.9 per cent. I want to put that on record if we are talking about inflation. That is not to say that I have yet heard the Labor Party address the real economic issues in Australia.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (4.13)-We now have absolute confirmation of the disastrous nature of this Government and the effects of this Government's policies.
Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:
That the business of the day be called on.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

57

Noes

38

Majority

19

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony. J. D. Birney, R. J. BouTchier, J. W. Bradfield.J. M. Brown. N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr.M.A. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron. Ian Carlton. J. J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly. D. M. Dean.A.G.
Drummond. P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fif-- W.e.
Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles.G.O-H.
Good luck. B. J.

Hyde.J. M. Jarman.A. W. Killen. Sir James
Lloyd. B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean. R. M. (Teller) McVeigh. D. T. Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O-Keefe. F. l. Porter,]. R.
Robinson. Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair. I. MeC. Spender. J. M.

Groom. R. J. Harris, G. McD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard, 1. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

AYES

Street, A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White. P. N. D. Wilson, l. B. C.

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Blewett, N. Bowen. Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell.G. Child.J. Cohen, B. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Holding. A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Hurford. C. J.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly. R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e. Klugman. R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les
Maher. M. J. Mildren, J. B. Morris, P. F. Scholes,G.G. D. Scott. J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis.L.G. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Dobie.J.D.M. Chapman, H. G. P. Viner,R.1.
Jull.D.F. Braithwaite, R. A.

Cass,M.H. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi, R. Morrison, W. L. Young. M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

PETITIONS
The Acting Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:

Australian Postal Commisssion
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
I. that Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. that the Australian postal service meets the needs of all Australians.
3. that any reduction in Australian Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward will destroy the concept of the national postal service and result in:
Increased rates for mail carried outside the capital cities;
A reduction in mail delivery and collection frequencies in non-profitable areas;
The closure of post offices.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mildren and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.

2510 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Petitions

Australian Postal Commisssion
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of certain citizens undersigned respectfully showeth:
I. that Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. that the Australian postal service truly meets the needs of all Australians.
3. that any proposal that Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward be diminished will destroy the concept of the national postal service.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members in the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the taxes of all Australians will be used to finance a dam that would flood the Lower Gordon and Franklin Rivers in South-West Tasmania. Your petitioners declare that the intrinsic values of this area. and the provision of funds from the taxes of all Australians. for the destruction of this area of the National Estate and of world heritage value. does make this a national issue. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government take all possible steps, including financial and legal steps and fulfil its responsibilities under the Australian Heritage Act to prevent the destruction of this area of the National Estate. and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Dr Cass, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher and Mr West.
Petitions received.
Macedonian Language
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
(I) That the Macedonian language be used by Government Departments In multi-lingual publications.
(2) That the petitioners urge the introduction of the Maced~man language as a Higher School Certificate (H.S.C.) subject In Secondary schools.
(3) That the petitioners urge the introduction of the Macedoman language in tertiary institutions and that a course be mtroduced at Monash University in the Department of Slavic Languages.
Your petit.ioners,. therefore, humbly request that Parliament take Immediate action to implement the above measures. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland To the Hon,?ura~le the Speaker and members of the House of
RepresentatlV~ m Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth

that Australia Council funding for the Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland has been entirely cut for 1983.
The Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland has made an important contribution to the cultural and artistic life of the Australian community for the past eight years taking innovative and original theatre to sections of the community who would not normally attend live theatre performances.
The Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland is the only theatre company in Australia which consistently presents theatre of social comment and tours nationally every year.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament will resolve to ask the Australia Council to reverse its decision in respect to the Popular Theatre Troupe of Queensland.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Proposed Student Loans Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the introduction of a comprehensive student loans scheme will:
I. Restrict Access to Education
People from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from studying by the prospect of incurring large debts. These people, if they enrol, will be forced to amass loan debts. Richer students do not face this handicap.
2. Undermine the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme
TEAS should cover the basic living costs of students. Currently the scheme only assists 38% of full-time students and the maximum level of TEAS is a mere $49.67. Government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced.
3. Disadvantaged Women
Women students would be disadvantaged by a loans scheme as they have a lesser ability to repay loan debts, because on average women earn less and have a higher unemployment rate.
4. Disadvantage Mature-Age Students
Usually mature age students forego income to study and already have large financial commitments. They could not return to study if it meant incurring substantial debts.
5. Distort Educational Choices
Mounting loan debts would force students into studying shorter courses or not continuing with post-graduate study.
6. Result in Massive Attrition Rates
Students will attempt to undertake extensive part-time work or overload courses to minimise their loans. Increased failure rates will result forcing students to "drop-out" rather than continuing study and increase their debts.
7. Cause Administrative & Financial Difficulties
Overseas experience shows high default rates will occur on student loans. Government money will be channelled away from TEAS to paying of banks. The government will also bear the administrative burden of pursuing defaulters.
Therefore, the proposed student loans scheme will have disasterous effects on tertiary education, which we believe benefits the whole community, not just the individual student.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject the introduction of a student loans

Petitions

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2511

scheme. And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever humbly pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That all members of the Women's Services 1939-45 War qualify as 'Australian Soldier' under the Defence Service Homes Act for loans because on voluntarily joining the Australian Forces they took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies making themselves available for combat duty in War Zones, and according to Acts and Regulations of the period the Military women had enlisted for service anywhere, some Naval women to sail in any waters, with all servicewomen available for service in Papua New Guinea.
As those members of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force of 1939-45 War who were not sent to War Zones are granted loans, refusal to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you amend the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (d) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Falconer.
Petition received.
Alamein Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia showeth that the present funding for the Alamein Community Youth Support Scheme is insufficient to provide an adequate and viable service to the unemployed young people residing in the areas of Ashburton, Ashwood, Chadstone, Glen Iris, Burwood and Jordanville.
We therefore pray that extra funds be made available to continue and extend the service available through the Alamein Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Harris.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of ~e'presentatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned cItIzens of the electorate of Kennedy respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,

(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegrams operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Katter.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Brisbane respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the serVice,
(4) withdrawing telegrams operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Fremantle respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:

2512 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Petitions

(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegrams operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Forrest, WA., respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegrams operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of t~e Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Drummond.
Petition received.

Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Chisholm respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegrams operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Harris.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Flinders respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegrams operating facilities from a
large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Petitions

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2513

by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Melbourne respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrInnes.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Hindmarsh respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of

the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scott.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of New South Wales respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
I. planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
2. closing country telegraph offices,
3. increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
4. withdrawing telegrams operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
5. generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30% of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles Jones.
Petition received.
Tasmania: Broadcasting Licence
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of the North-West Coast of Tasmania shows:
That the local community wish to commend the value of a Christian broadcasting service in this area and therefore request the Minister for Communications or the appropriate Governing agency to grant to Christian FM broadcasters a permanent FM licence to broadcast in the North-West region of Tasmania.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Groom.
Petition received.
King Island, Tasmania: Air Fares Subsidy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of King Island.
Our petition is therefore pray that we the undersigned request that Parliament implement immediately the recommendations of the Rae Senate Committee and Nimmo report, for a 20% subsidy on air fares between King Island and the Australian and Tasmanian mainland.

2514 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

by MrGroom.
Petition received.
AdYertising of Alcohol
To the Honourahle the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives In Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the citilcn, at Quee,lsland respectfully showeth:
Last year. o,er 3'}OO people died on Australian roads;
Alcohol is a factor in 50% of road deaths;
Alcohol advertisements do not show the perils of driving after dnnking alcohol;
Alcohol advertisements are glamourous and increase their effect on teenagers, indicating drinking alcohol as the social pastime;
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will legislate to ban the advertising of alcohol from commercial television and radio.
And your petil joners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrJull.
Petition received.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
In Committee
Consideration resumed from 21 October.
Schedule 2.
Department of Primary Industry
Proposed expenditure, $124,445,000.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (4.23)-We are back to the old styie of Estimates debates; the committee experiment has gone. At this time in other years I was critical of the Estimates committee ~yst.em. I felt that it could have been improved but It did give quite a few honourable members a real chance to talk to departmental officials, through the Minister, and to do some searching inquiring and examination of the way Estimates were composed and what was at the back of some of the very large figures. There is no doubt that the reason that the Estimates in that form have been called off this year is that the estimates in this Budget are very rubbery indeed in quite a few areas and the Government did not want them to have the scrutiny that the Opposition would like to give them. I will speak mainly on the administration of the Department of Primary Industry and the standards of this inept, hopeless Fraser ?ov~r.nme~t, particularly the Country Party admmlstratlOn of the Department. I do not think ~ should call it the Country Party because as we
now, It has taken the Party out of the country and at a meeting a couple of weekends back it ~~ok the Country out of the Party. I would also I e to talk about the problems that the Government has had with maintaining any consistent standards of ministerial responsibility.

The Department of Primary Industry is an administrative body. It has gone through 2-!- years of upheaval and is only now coming out of it. I think this is something that has given the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) quite a bit of thought and trouble over the years that he has had to administer this Department. Some of the criticisms of the Department that have been levelled against it by bodies such as the Senate Standing
Committee on Finance and Government Operations and discussion and criticism within this chamber and outside, have related to the problems the Department had largely two or three years ago.
It is fair enough to say that the Department of Primary Industry is coming out of that problem. There has been quite a bit of change in the structure of the Department. There have been very definite changes in respect of inspection standards. There have been changes in personnel and in the way the Department operates, particularly through the First Assistant Secretaries. Part of the criticism which we levelled here was that the FASs at the top of the Department were too dependent on the client groups. In many instances it was very obvious that the Department was not acting in a cohesive manner to give alternative advice to the Minister or was acting in a disjointed way. It is fair to say that the Department has gone through all that. We now see the Department in better shape than it has been in for a long time.
Of course, there has been a fair amount of defensiveness within the Department. Ministers have resorted in this House to not really defending the Department but allowing people to think that all the problems that the Government has had have been due to the Department. That has been very regrettable. We have had problems with Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd and with the meat substitution, including some alleged coverups arising out of those matters. These things have largely been put behind us. We have had the Landos notes and the report of the Kelly Committee, the Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems. These matters have been very much the stuff and being of the criticism by the Opposition and particularly by primary producers, who have been unhappy with the Department.
I return to the manner in which Ministers have failed to perform their duties. The former Minister for Primary Industry, now the Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair), said that the Department was okay when he left it. The Minister said that the Department did not give him correct advice with respect to the meat substitution. That does not look like togetherness between the former

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2515

Minister and the present Minister. I thought that the present Minister was shielding his former colleague in many instances with respect to AD!. The rural establishment has been very critical of and offended by the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations. I will not go into the alleged motives of people on that Committee. Suffice it to say that that Committee has shown that it can be an aid to government and to the Minister, rather than an impediment. Because the Senate Committee on Finance and Government Operations-the Rae Committee, as it is sometimes called-has been scathing with respect to the former Minister and because the Woodward Royal Commission into the Australian Meat Industry has been scathing in its criticism of the present Minister, a great effort has been made by the Parliament and by the Government to try to deflect that criticism. As I have said, the debates in this House have concerned the political argy-bargy and whether or not heads would roll. That has been concentrated on mainly
by the metropolitan media.
The various reports of the Rae Committee, and the more substantial reports such as the Woodward report which comment directly on statutory corporations, reflect very definitely on the industry itself. The Woodward report contained 17 pages of recommendations which seemed to have been lost in the immediate debate. Thankfully, the Minister delivered a statement to the House last Thursday. I was not here to reply to it. It
showed that the Minister and the Department are getting on with the job with respect to meat inspection. It is quite clear that the previous Minister and the present Minister have not lived up to the standards of ministerial responsibility under the Westminster system. Had they lived up to those standards, both would have been sacked by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). There is no sense in going over the same debate again but the Prime Minister's standards in Opposition are rather different from his standards in this House, particularly with respect to National Party Ministers. The Prime Minister selects his audience and is intellectually dishonest in these things. There are enormous double standards. In the Withers and Moore cases, those Liberal Ministers were ricochets.
Mr GiIes-1 raise a point of order. I submit that the honourable member should not use the w~rds which he has just used in relation to the PrIme Minister. This is an Estimates debate.
T~e DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Dr JenklDs)-1 have been listening. It seems to me that the terms used have been used in general debate and have been let go by various Deputy

Chairmen. I invite the honourable member to return to the estimates of the Department of Primary Industry.
Mr KERIN-I apologise for saying that the Prime Minister is intellectually dishonest. Actually that was a euphemism for something else.
Mr GiIes-Mr Deputy Chairman, I think you should ask the honourable member to withdraw.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. I think it is fair that the honourable member should withdraw. He was given warning by inference and repeated the dose.
Mr KERIN-Mr Deputy Chairman, I withdraw. I was talking about the standards and administration of the Department of Primary Industry and the way in which Ministers have supervised the administration of their departments. I was referring, of course, to the fact that the judiciary was attacked by the Prime Minister with respect to the Woodward Royal Commission into the Australian Meat Industry. He attacked our basic conventions in 1975. I will not go into all of those matters. I simply say that we should look at the fifth report of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations and at the very sensible and sound things that it says about statutory marketing authorities. It is very clear that the problems that the Government has had with respect to the administration of the Department centre on the statutory marketing authorities. Chapter 6 of the Senate Committee's fifth report says that the Committee was very pleased to note that its arguments in favour of increased accountability were being accepted by the Executive Government. The report quotes a statement made by the Department of Primary Industry in its submission. I do not have time to read the whole of chapter 6, its conclusions and the various versions of ministerial responsibility. But the report is very basic, constructive and good work. I urge all honourable members to read it. I will read part of the statement made by the Department of Primary Industry with respect to statutory authorities and the question of accountability. Paragraph 73 states:
Statutory authorities must be accountable to the Parliament and to those over whom they have legislative power to regulate or control. There should therefore be a statutory requirement for audit and examination of their activities and for regular reporting to the Parliament.
Paragraph 74 states:
There are two distinct aspects of statutory authority accountability. Obviously statutory bodies should be able to demonstrate prudent financial practice and management in their utilisation of industry and/or public funds. They should also be accountable for adequate performance of their functions and for exercising their statutory powers responsibly.

2516 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

I could read what the Committee said about section 61 of the Constitution in a paper that it had prepared for its deliberations. The Committee also took up many of the arguments in the Royal Commission into Australian Government Administration. in particular a paper by Dr Emy. to describe ministerial responsibility.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN --Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr GILES (Wakefield) (4.33) Over the last seven years the current Government has introduced a great G1any schemes that are very favourable to the peculiarities of Australian agriculture and the enormous range of climatic conditions with which it has to cope-quite apart from fluctuating wo:ld prices. If we compare Australia, New Zealand the United Kingdom. the United States of America. France, all the other European Economic Community countries and Canada, we see that-this is a matter of grave concern to the rural population-Australia is the only nation that has no death duties. Of course, the same applies to gift duty. Australia, once again, is the only nation of that list of our trading competitors which has an income equalisation deposits scheme. Capital gains tax is a matter of grave concern to farmers and all rural people. Australia and New Zealand are the only two countries on that list that do not have such a tax. Australia is the only country of those nations that I have mentioned that has provision for 100 per cent write-off for water schemes, piping and dams and, let us face it, we are in the middle of a bad drought today. Out of all those countries that I have mentioned, Australia is the only country that has provision for tax averaging.

I doubt whether the farming community of this

country realises the enormitv of those benefits. I have taken pleasure as Chai~man of the Govern-

ment Parties Rural Committee, in watching many

of those schemes fall into shape over the last seven

ye.ars. We can add to them matters such as tax-

atIOn concessions: special depreciation allowances

for new agncultural plant and machinery; special ~eprec~a~l?n On grain, hay and fodder storage; full
eduC~lblhty for capital expenditure on soil con-

servatIOn; improved investment allowance on ~I~nt and equipment; the establishment of the
n~~ry Industry Bank of Australia' improved swt~aebaItIl~taa"~Ido.ndaanirdy pprriocdeuscutsp;paorct osrcphoermateisonforfowr otohl~ drIed fru~t mdustry and the canning fruit industry' and contmued support for superphosphate and ni~

trogenous fertilisers at current levels. We can look

at W

the new floor pn.ce for wool-42 e can look at the I.nI'"tIatIve 0 f the

2c a kI.lo clean. l revo'vmg wool

market support fund which I gather this year will

payout $46m paid in in 1975-76. So the list goes on. We have established the Cocos (Keeling) Islands Animal Quarantine Station. We have established for $121m the Australian National Animal Health Laboratory. There are many provisions that affect the fishing industry too.
I wanted today to set the scene for a package of facilities, authorities and concessional treatment of incredible value to the rural population of Australia. I remind the Committee that only a short nine years ago an infamous document-it was infamous at the time; I guess that many honourable members have forgotten about it now--called the Coombs report, which contained certain recommendations, was published.
Mr Lloyd-What was that report called?
Mr GILES-The Coombs report. It was more or less the bible of the Government that preceded us. I think it is very important that the farming community should recognise the sorts of things that were done then that no doubt would reemerge if the Australian Labor Party were returned to power. The provision of free milk to children was phased out. Where is the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child)? She is in the chamber. Was that phasing-out compassionate? Secondly, the accelerated depreciation allowance for income tax purposes for primary producers was phased out in the 1973-74 Budget. The immediate deductibility for taxation purposes of certain capital expenditure by primary producers was phased out in the 1973-74 Budget. Outright deductions were allowed under this scheme for a wide range of capital expenditures associated with primary production activities, notably the preparing of land, internal fencing, provision of water, storage of feed, clearing, et cetera. Next, the investment allowance which permitted an additional deduction of 20 per cent of the installed cost of new plant and equipment for farmers was phased out in the 1973-74 Budget.
The distance over which rural telephone lines could be installed free was halved. The sales tax exemption on non-alcoholic carbonated beverages was removed. This is the one of all those things for which I have a slight sympathy. In some areas it became a trifle absurd when, in order that people might claim a taxation advantage, fruit juice was denatured until it had no taste and no character at all. What did the Labor Government do in the electorate of Murray? When I visited there huge factory space was lying idle, and it probably still is to this day, because of a complete misunderstanding of the social effects that the Whitlam Government would have on that area of Australia.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2517

The superphosphate bounty was not renewed in 1974. Therefore, the attitude of the Labor Party in the Senate quite recently was utterly understandable. I have even less sympathy for that other party, which three times promised people such as me that it would support the bounty, than I have for the Labor Party. The Labor party's attitude to that matter was forecastable, but the Australian Democrats in the Senate are really quite hopeless. They could not even make up their minds on something as silly as that. They very nearly deprived the farming community of a good many million dollars. This was prevented only by the capacity and sense of this Government to pay back sums of money that were denied at that time. A freight subsidy on petroleum for people who live away from capital cities was totally removed in 1974. How often have we heard people in this chamber try to attack this Government about the difficulties involved in that subsidy? What hypocrisy.
The excise differential between brandy and other spirits was phased out-this was of particularly grave concern to my electorate-in three separate instalments, as I remember it. The Labor Government increased excise on brandy by 180 per cent. It therefore deprived the wine industry at that time-the industry is still in a similar position-of the obvious method of getting rid of grape surpluses in years when they occur.
Section 31A of the Income Tax Assessment Act, which laid down a special basis for valuation of trading stock, was eliminated. Wineries today are still trying to pay off the $22m that was levied on them as a result of that action by the Whitlam Government. One can go on. I have another five pages of examples, but I think I have made quite enough of that point.
I am proud to have worked in close association with two Ministers for Primary Industry. I speak as one who does not belong to the same party as either of them. The Government Parties Rural Committee, of which I am Chairman, has functioned extraordinarily well and, I think, very efficiently. We have had great loyalty expressed at all levels from within both parties. We have been a cohesive team. I would like to think that we have produced over that seven-year period not a rehash of the debacle of the package of Labor policies of earlier years but some semblance of economic sense. I described earlier the peculiarit!es of both climate and overseas price fluctuations that affect the farming community. I am proud to have been part of this effort. I put some of those things on record this afternoon in case I do not get a chance to debate the Estimates again.

Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (4.43)- [ do not want to make too many comments about the Budget Estimates lest I be accused of being uncharitable to the Federal Government. Yet, of course, if I speak the truth in any kind of comment I make on this matter it will appear as though I am being uncharitable. For instance, very many farmers are wondering why the Government made no allowance in the Budget for the drought, the extent of which was actually already fully known by the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). The Bureau of Agricultural Economics had obviously been informing him for many months of the worsening conditions throughout eastern Australia. In New South Wales the drought had been evident for four years; yet this Minister made no real allowance for it in the Budget. Why? There had to be some reason. The reason is obvious. This Budget was not intended to give relief to those people on the land who are suffering the depredations of drought. It was aimed largely at trying to sell a few lollies to the people of Australia by way of an election handout.
About a fortnight after the Budget the Minister made an announcement of drought relief sums aggregating about $356m. The farmers will tell us all just what they will get out of this. If that $356m is all that will be spent there will be very little relief for very many farmers. Not many farmers will gain from, for instance, the scheme to send sheep to Western Australia. That, of course, was a latter-day thought on the part of the Minister. It appears that unless they are sold to the west they will not go.
This is a cruel joke. It is a sleazy gimmick to attack Australian Labor Party governments. Primary producers who are trying to survive, let alone to make an honest living, have had their hopes dashed far too often by people who masquerade as their spokespersons. No wonder they suspect the motives of this callous Minister. No wonder they prefer the Opposition spokesperson on primary industry, the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin). They know full well that he is a fighter for their interests and will speak frankly and honestly. He is not crudely using them for his own cynical purposes as is this discredited Minister. In claiming to represent primary producers the Minister is really using them for his own purposes, and they know that this is the truth. In the editorial of Stock and Land of Thursday, 7 October 1972 it is stated:
The Victorian Minister for Lands, Mr Rod Mackenzie. is quite right to be upset by the Federal Government's ongoing practice of making announcements on how the States should spend money on drought aid without prior consultation.

2518 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The editorial goes on to state:

Statements coming from the federal level about how the State money will be spent before details are worked out are a frustration to farmers and time consuming for puzzled public
servants.

One wonders whether the Minister bothers to
consult his Federal public servants. It indicates how cynical the Federal Government is at this
time of great distress to primary producers and to business people in rural Australia. Many people
believe that farmers are currently getting many
millions of dollars, yet at the moment the fodder subsidy is the only real assistance coming from the
Government. The Minister is playing with figures.
For his own mischievously opportunistic reasons
he is making life more difficult for hard pressed farmers who are already suffering the hardship of
drought.

I wish to make a couple of comments about the

feed wheat price. The feed wheat price affects

farmers already besieged by the most immediate

effects of drought. Because the government sub-

sidy has not been increased who will pay the extra

amount? One can accept that people in the

market-place will try to get more for their prod-

uct, but who will pay the extra now? Those

people who are affected by drought will be forced

to pay more and the Government will, I hope,

ultimately be forced to take up its responsibility

and pay more. It affects other primary producers

as well. One pig producer in my electorate of

Ballarat came to me last week and indicated that

he would now be forced to pay a very much larger

sum per year because of this measure. That

means, of course, that the increase will flow on to

the public. It will affect the public at the time w~en, we hope, the drought will begin to break. It

WIll affect, of course, the price of meat. The public

ww.eil.lhboepefo, r.wceildl

to be

pay more forced to

raencdogtnhieseGiotsverernspmonesnit~

blhty. ThIs producer turns off 19,000 pigs each

year and an extra $16.50 a tonne, the amount of

the recent rise, in the price of feed wheat will add

measurably to the cost of production.

The situa.tion will be the same for egg prod~ce~s. TheIr costs will rise and the cost of eggs wII~ Tlse. The much besieged farmer and the much besle~ed consumer will once again be the victims of thIs G~)Vernment policy. At a time when the economy ~s ~ard pressed and inflation is rising, the opportu~lstJc policy of the Australian Wheat Board mIght appear to some to be irresponsible. The Government's drought assistance scheme should ~ave be~n primed, as I said, many months before It was Instead of now being part of the

post-Budget ad hockery. With reasonable planning, the drought measures could have been included in the Budget. This Minister, had he been concerned, would have sought co-operation instead of crudely attempting to make political capital out of the suffering of those people about whom he tries to have people believe he is concerned. We have become accustomed to a different style of administration by this Minister. His attention is directed less to the need for responsible government and more towards venting his spleen on the Opposition. As a result primary producers suffer and the nation is the ultimate loser. This Minister has presided over the rundown of the primary industry, and it is to be hoped that the people on the land will recognise that at the next election.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (4.53)-The Department of Primary Industry will be required to monitor the position of primary producers and to work out ways and means of improving their lot. The estimate of $124,445,000 for the working of the Department will most certainly be stretched to the limit. Our great primary industries are in dire straits right across Australia at present with the worst drought for 40 .years. In my State of New South Wales practically every Pastures Protection Board area has been declared a drought area. I congratulate the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) for the action he has taken during this drought in providing assistance to primary producers. This assistance is to the extent of $360m. Contrary to what was stated by the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren) that amount is certainly a massive one and in many ways will assist primary producers to provide fodder. This drought will necessitate massive financial assistance from governments and banking institutions.
Our wool, wheat, meat and other agricultural production is being seriously affected. The flow-on to the business sector is starting to show up with service industries being run down and with the resultant unemployment levels increasing in country areas. Our great primary industries are the backbone of Australia, and when they fail we have serious financial difficulties. It is all right to talk about our great resource industries. They are important but the only resource industry that can match up to our wool, wheat or meat industries is the coal industry. The drought will also have a very serious effect on our export income. Right throughout our countryside our service industries, particularly our machinery firms, are feeling the pinch and indeed are experiencing liquidity problems. Consequently they are forced

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2519

to put off staff, thereby creating more unemployment.
International Harvester Australia Ltd, one of the biggest companies in this field in Australia, is in dire financial straits at present, partially on account of the drought and a lack of machinery sales. The Government's drought assistance is timely and necessary. It will bring home to primary producers the need to conserve fodder in good times. That is one benefit of the drought but, the assistance still does not overcome the problem. It should be a lesson to our primary producers to conserve fodder in good times. The Minister at the table has indicated that the Australian Wheat Board will be given authority to import wheat into Australia if it is necessary. Of course, this wheat will have to be processed in order to ensure that Australia is not inflicted with disease,
and that is terribly important.
We are going into the summer season faced
with a lack of water. This is a problem that the rural people have yet to face. Our great dams are down to very low levels. In the Paterson electorate there are two dams, the Glenbawn Dam on the Hunter River and the Keepit Dam on the Namoi River. The water in both those dams is below 10 per cent of capacity. This is a serious situation because it will affect the irrigation of crops and the production of fodder for livestock. Most primary producers will be seriously affected, particularly those relying on irrigation water for crops of all kinds. Australia is the driest country in the world and we should be making provision for increased water storage by the provision of more dams. This year there has been an increase in Federal funds for water storage. The Budget provides $41.7m for national water resources, which is an increase of 27.5 per cent over 1981-82. However, this is not nearly enough to overcome the problem of water storage in this country. The Government's decision in 1980 to allow an immediate write-off of the cost of water storage facilities as a drought relief measure has been a great help. M~ny primary producers have taken advantage of this provision. It is invaluable at present in light of the drought with which we are faced.
Payments in the Budget to rural industries are estimated to total $313m. Owing to the depressed conditions being experienced in the cattle and meat industries the Government has decided to write-off industry debts of $23.5m in respect of
the brucellosis and tuberculosis eradication campaign. This was a matter which concerned primary producers. The Government has acted and its decision has been of great benefit to them. We ~ave been concerned for a long time to have a smgle meat inspection system across Australia. It

has been heartening to ascertain that the New South Wales Government has agreed to negotiate with the Federal Government for a single inspection system under certain conditions. I have no doubt that the Minister at the table is considering
these conditions and discussing them with the State Minister for Agriculture. Tasmania, South Australia and the Northern Territory have single inspection systems; other States have dual inspection systems. Many abattoirs in this country are in dire straits. In New South Wales works have closed down in Moree, Tenterfield, Wollongarra, Guyra, Dubbo, Forbes, and in other places. New South Wales has been overserviced by abattoirs and when a shortage of stock occurs problems soon come to light.
We must look to new markets for the export of meat, and these are limited. With the entry of
Great Britain to the European Economic Community we have lost a valuable market. Should the United States of America market collapse we would have real problems. To give an indication of the loss of Australian exports to the EEC, in 1974 we sold to that market 200 million tonnes of beef and veal. Now our only exports to that market amount to about 5,000 tonnes. It is good to see the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation holding functions in Australia to popularise the sale of beef. Housewives have always supported the Australian beef industry and they purchase in the order of 60,000 tonnes per annum. It is good that this side of the industry is not being neglected. In this Budget a $2.5m grant has been made to the AMLC over the next two years in order to establish a quality control program for meat exports. How important this is. Once again I congratulate the Minister for the part he has played in seeing that quality Australian meat is exported with advantage to this country.
There has been a 68 per cent increase in the Commonwealth contribution to compensation for slaughtering brucellosis and tuberculosis reactors. It is important that we should spend money in this area because brucellosis and tuberculosis cause a problem in the industry. There is no increase in meat export charges. The sum of $1.73m has been allocated for restructuring the meat operations of the Commonwealth Export Inspection Service. Continuing financial commitment to research programs and the development of a system of objective description for carcass meat are items under surveillance. Provision of $100,000 has been made for the purchase of equipment to take care of any outbreak of screw worm fly. Nearly $400m has been invested by the Government and the industry since 1970 to see that disease is eliminated from Australian meat. This is a very

2520 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

important part of the work of the Department of
Primary Industry. In 1981 Australia exported 710,000 tonnes of beef, the lowest level since
1974. The decline in beef and veal exports is
largely due to a reduced import demand in major markets. Australia must embark on an active
meat export sales campaign to protect a most
valuable primary industry from severe competition. The Department of Primary Industry,
headed by the Minister, will certainly take this most important aspect of the industry well and truly in hand, with great results for our country.

Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (5.3)-1

enter this debate to bring to the attention of the

Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) the

administration of the pesticides section of his De-

partment. As a result of my general concern about

the problems confronted by all sections of the

Australian community, particularly many people

living in our regional areas, I was concerned to

examine in some detail the work of the pesticide

section of the Minister's Department. I did this in

order to see to what extent it was keeping abreast

of the current concern-it is the concern not

merely of Australia but of many parts of ad-

vanced industrialised societies--about the prob-

lems of the increasing use of herbicides and pes-

ticides. As a result I caused a question to be asked

of the Minister on J 8 August J982 requesting him

to table in the Parliament the full text of the

speech of the Commonwealth Pesticides Co-

ordinator, Mr Snelson, to the Royal Australian

Chemical Institute in Melbourne in May J979,

and asking, if he would not do so, why not. The

answer I received was that in speaking to the

Royal Australian Chemical Institute seminar Mr

Snelson was making a personal contribution; the

speech was therefore not a Department of Pri-

mary Industry document, and did not necessarily

reflect departmental policy. Accordingly, I was

a.dvised to make my own arrangements about get-

tmg a copy of the speech. That was fair enough.

When I got a copy of the speech I found to my

amazem~n~ that it carried upon it the imprimatur of ~he Mmlster's Department. The document for which he sal~ ?e and his Department can accept

~o. responslblhty clearly carries the label 'Pes-

tiCides SectIOn, Department of Primary Industry

Canberra, April 1979, Document P8358'.

'

I do not know whether the Minister was misled by Mr Snelson or some of his advisers or whether he in turn knew, by virtue of the way in which the
document was presented to the seminar, that it w~s clearly s~en .by his Department as being somethmg for which It accepted responsibility. I rather suspect that the anSWer I got on this occasion was
an attempt by the Minister and the Department

to crawl out from underneath some of the propositions that were being put by Mr Snelson to that seminar. I do not have any objection at all to public servants holding important positions of public responsibility making controversial statements for the purposes of informing the community and engendering public debate. If they do that then I think the Minister has to be prepared to accept that they do that within the framework of his authority. But I believe the Minister and his Department are acting in this way because of Mr Snelson's activities, because he holds a very responsible position. According to his duty statement, his responsibilities are to co-ordinate and to make available not merely to farming communities but also to State governments and other departments the whole area of pesticidal and herbicidal use. In that situation I believe that, whilst he might choose to be controversial-as I have said, I do not object to that-he has to be seen as someone who can objectively advise both Governments and communities on the basis of knowledge and scientific objectivity. I do not believe, on examining Mr Snelson's statements in this area, that they are either scientifically based or objective. I believe there is a clear conflict of interest between the official duty statement of Mr Snelson and his statements and actions in recent years. As I have pointed out, his office is a highly responsible one. He is responsible to see that highly dangerous herbicides, pesticides and other agricultural chemicals are properly governed and monitored and that appropriate safety and occupational health aspects are considered by him.
Of course, Mr Snelson has been employed by the Department of Primary Industry since 1967. He is the first and only Commonwealth Pesticides Co-ordinator and was employed prior to 1967 for 20 years by Geigy (Australia) Pty Ltd, the Australian subsidiary of a firm of chemical manufacturers established in Switzerland. It may well be argued that he is a man with practical, background knowledge and that he brings this knowledge to the benefit of the Department. I believe that any analysis of Mr Snelson's statements shows that he is still what he originally was-a salesman and a magsman for sections of the chemical industry-and that he has not been discharging his very important obligations to the community.
In 1979 he claimed that the public concern about 2,4-0 and 2,4,5-T was a plot generated by the marihuana lobby. This was when the then Victorian Liberal Premier, Mr Hamer, was considering a total ban on those herbicides in October 1978. Mr Snelson flew into that situation uninvited and he was reported in the Melbourne Age

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2521

as being a United Nations expert who defends herbicides. The Age went on to say that Mr Snelson had contacted the then Victorian Minister, Vasey Houghton, and his officials with an offer of help to allay public concern over birth defects in Yarram. These problems, as they arise in a community such as Yarram or any other country community, cause concern. Those concerns have to be dealt with scientifically and objectively. Anybody who believes-as does this man responsible to the Minister-that the very real concern that exists about these problems can simply be dismissed as a herbicide outcry, a plot on behalf of marihuana producers, ought to be the subject of very real concern by the Minister.
In March 1979, Mr Snelson addressed the Royal Australian Chemical Institute in Melbourne-an address which is carrying the notations of the Department. I have indicated why I believe the Minister has tried to move away from what was clearly seen, on the occasion of its publication, as a departmental document. On that occasion Mr Snelson said that there was a 'powerful and influencial minority misrepresenting and misusing scientific data to generate fear and engineer restrictive legislation which is not in the public interest'. He went on to say:
The attack on chemicals is powerful, vicious and well organised.
He did not indicate by whom. He made no reference to his own duty statement which, at part (h) states:
Recommend appropriate Commonwealth and State legislation to bring about uniformity in the registration, regulation, labelling, sale and use of pesticides and related products;
Nor did he mention that there was no Commonwealth legislation for that purpose and that there is still no such legislation. The absence of that legislation was a matter of comment by an all party committee of this House which expressed its concern. Mr Snelson, appearing before that committee, expressed his concern. But it seems that he has two views. When he is before a parliamentary committee and is subject to cross-examination he has to be prudent. That is an occasion for expressing concern. When he is operating at large in the public without that kind of scrutiny then he is quite capable of making some of the outlandish statements that he has made. In November 1951, in a document entitled 'Pesticides-A Review of their Uses, Properties and Hazards', the Commonwealth Department of Health-this is another government department-said that the lack of such legislation was 'a cause for national concern' and that the Commonwealth Depart- ~ent of Health 'will continue to assist in developIng a national awareness of the hazards associated

with the use of the newer pesticides'. In respect of 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D the hazards which should be noted were set out by the World Health Organisation's International Agency for Research on cancer in 1977. They include: Chloracne, liver damage, cardiovascular disorders, urinary tract disorders, respiratory disorders, pancreatic disorders, neurological and psychiatric disorders, vomiting, diarrhoea, hyperthermia and tachycardia. Recent Swedish studies have shown that these chemicals may cause soft tissue carcinomas as a long term effect. Yet Mr Snelson is concernedthese are his words-that:
The involvement and influence of lawyers is increasing. Often their actions appear to disregard need, fact and scientific data and to have little respect for truth, convention or human dignity.
He is concerned to attack the legal profession. He is concerned to attack any group of concerned citizens that has a view contrary to his own. In a recent international symposium he made statements which, I believe, would have to be a cause of concern to the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street). If one looks at the terminology-
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (5.13)-1 thank those honourable members who made a constructive contribution to the debate. I might say that the number of honourable members who made a constructive contribution was fairly limited. As one would expect, the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) made his usual negative speech and made no progress at all in the area of Australian Labor Party policy on agricultural matters. That is all I need to say about his speech. I need say very little also about the speech of the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren) because again his speech was mostly a personal diatribe. I think the farmers of Australia are better judges than the honourable member for Ballarat on these matters.
The honourable member for Ballarat raised one or two matters to which I ought to respond. He talked about sheep going to Western Australia for the purposes of agistment and he claimed that these sheep have to be sold. Of course that is not so. As I understand it four lots of sheep have already gone to Western Australia. I think some of them from Victoria-for the purposes of agistment. The sheep do not have to be sold at all; he has got the story quite wrong. The interesting thing is, of course, that the Victorian Government and the New South Wales Government would not join in subsidising freight to Western Australia to allow sheep to be taken to the feed, nor would they join in a slaughter subsidy. So farmers in

2522 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

those two States are not able to transfer their sheep to a State where there is feed, nor are they able to obtain a slaughter subsidy for killing off starving sheep. I think this typifies the approach taken by the Australian Labor Party and shows its
total lack of understanding of the needs of the
farmers.

In this drought program we have sought to put down the greatest number of options possible for farmers to explore and to use in the best means possible. I have remained fairly flexible in terms
of introduction of new measures to ensure that farmers can take the best of the options available to them. Thus it is we have a fodder subsidy, which the Commonwealth pays. We have offered the States a slaughter subsidy. The two Labor States are refusing to take up that offer. We have offered the States an increase in freight rates and the transfer of sheep to Western Australia where there is plenty of feed. As I understand it, there is room for another half a million or a million sheep. The State Labor governments have refused to take up that offer. That is one of the tragedies of this drought debate. The Commonwealth can but offer; the administration of these matters is for the States.

Referring to the feed wheat price, the honourable member for Ballarat does not seem to understand that the increase in the price of wheat came about because of that fact that New South Wales refused to join in transferring wheat from Queensland by paying its share of the freight subsidy which is a part of the core measures. New South Wales refused to pay the freight subsidy on the transfer of wheat, expecting the wheat growers to pay it. The Australian Wheat Board therefore had no option but to put the price up ra~her than let the wheat growers carry the full pnce. That demonstrates a lack of sympathy by the New South Wales Government on this issue. The honourable member for Ballarat talks about the truth. These are simple truths that need to be stated. They need to be stated and restated so that there is a proper understanding of the issue. As to ~he personal diatribe, if he goes into the farming ~ndustry he will find that farmers are making Judgments different from his.

(MT~hHe ?hlodninogu)rarbaliseedmethmebqeurefsotironMoeflbaoudronceumPeonrtts.

I said, In answer, that it was not an official docu-

ment. He has made the claim that the document

ahparantly does have some official status. I will

choneocukf~thblee

facts of member

the at a

matter and later stage as

inform the to the accu-

racy. ~ advice I got-this was recorded in an

answer 10 Hansard and to the honourable

member-was that it was not an official document. I will check the facts and certainly provide the honourable member with an answer. On the general question which the honourable member raised, I should point out to him that, whilst there is no Commonwealth legislation, this is because of the advice we have that these matters can be controlled only by the States. The fact is that as part of the Australian Agricultural Council there is a co-ordinating committee representative of the States and the Commonwealth which approves any changes to the various herbicides and pesticides that are used. So there is co-ordination of the issue even though there is no Commonwealth legislation.
Finally, because I agreed to finish at quarter past five and it is now 17 minutes past five, I would like to pay a tribute to the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) who spoke today. He is not here to listen but nevertheless a tribute should be paid. He has been chairman of the Government back bench rural committee in my time as Minister for Primary Industry and also for most of the time of my predecessor. He has given the utmost co-operation. We have had some interesting meetings, time and again. He is a frank critic of policy. He is not afraid to put his views to me. He does so every week on a regular basis, along with other members of the committee. I appreciate the work that he has done. I want that recorded.

Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (5.16)-1 have only another five minutes-
Motion (by Mr McLean) put:
That the question be now put.
The Committee divided. (The Chairman-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

59

Noes

42

Majority

17

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield. J. M. Brown, N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan, D. B.

AYES

Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt. R. J. D. Hyde.J. M. Killen. Sir James Lloyd. B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean. R. M. (Teller) McVeigh. D. T. Moore,l. C. Nixon. P. 1. O'Keefe. F. L. Porter,J.R. Robinson, Ian Rocher. A. C.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2523

AYES
Dean. A. G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife. W.e. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles. G. O-H. Good luck. B. J. Groom.R.J. Hall. Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. e.

Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender. J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey. e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. e.

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Blewett. N. Bowen, Lionel Brown. John Brown. Robert Campbell.G. Charles. D. E. Child.J. Cohen. B. Cross. M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling. E. E. Duffy.M.J. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke. R. J. L. Holding. A. e. Howe. S.l. Humphreys. B. e. (Teller) Hurford. e. J. Jenkins. H. A.

Johnson. Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Keating. P. J. Kelly.R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman. R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Maher, M. J. Mildren. J. B. Milton, P. Morris. P. F. Mountford. J. G. Scholes. G. G. D. Scott. J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis, L.G. West,S.l.
Willis.R.

PAIRS

Dobie.J.D.M. Chapman. H. G. P. Viner. R.1. FUll. D. F. Braithwaite, R. A.

Cass,M.H. Everingham. D. N.
Jacobi. R. Morrison. W. L. Young, M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Proposed expenditure agreed to.

Attorney-General's Department
Proposed expenditure, $157,144,000.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (5.25)-1 want to raise a matter on behalf of a person named Rhys Trevor Volkman, who I feel has been the subject of malicious prosecution by' the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) and who has suffered both physically and financially over a period because of a very simple set of circumstances.
Volkman was an officer with the Narcotics Bureau. He gave evidence in camera on 23 June 1978 to the Williams Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs. In the course of that evidence, which he has allowed me to quote, he said that he was concerned about the administrative ineptitude of the ~arcotics Bureau and the great deal of vindictIveness, shortcomings and and improprieties. That evidence was confirmed. In 1979 the Narcotics Bureau had to be disbanded rather urgently

because of a finding by Mr Justice Williams. It was the subject of debate in this chamber.
He gave evidence in June 1978 which, as I said, was subsequently confirmed by way of a finding by Mr Justice Williams. In the course of that evidence he referred to perjury. He referred to an investigation by Mr James Crudden of the Narcotics Bureau leading to what he called certain things relating to Nugan Hand Ltd and narcotics. He mentioned that he had passed on all that information to the appropriate officer-I will not name him-in the Narcotics Bureau. He mentioned that one purpose for using Nugan Hand was to launder money overseas in respect of the sale of cannabis. One way of doing it was by using a Swiss diplomatic courier. Cash was exchanged for diamonds. In the course of this evidence he expressed also a theory that cannabis was being exported in refrigerated containers. He named the people involved. He said that he gave all this information to his superior. He made the point that no action was taken at any time on the information that he gave. I submit that that was subsequently confirmed by the finding of Mr Justice Williams.
Some recent information has come to light about Nugan Hand. On 22 September last the CBS evening news program in the United States of America showed an interview of Mr Neil Evans, a former bank executive officer. The lead-up to the interview stated that the bank was involved in illegal currency transactions, big-time drug operations and the Central Intelligence Agency. Evans, a former bank executive said:
We were to become the paymasters for the CIA around the world. In other words, we were putting ourselves in the position to disperse funds for the CIA to whoever they were directed.
That interview occurred as recently as a few weeks ago. We then come to the evidence which Volkman, who was a pretty strong sort of an officer with a sense of duty, gave on 25 March 1982 to the Corporate Affairs Commission in its investigation of Nugan Hand. In the course of that evidence Volkman referred to the fact that there was an interest in the Narcotics Bureau in the Nugan Hand operation. He made the point that his informant was Mr Andrew Lowe. He said that his information was reported to his headquarters here in Canberra. He mentioned a report dated May 1977. He said that it was 'the biggest thing in respect of drug dealing that Australia had ever seen'. He said:
. . . Nugan Hand was closely linked to intelligence sources and our particular assistant secretary and director . . .

2524 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

He named them in that evidence. He was shown a file from the Narcotics Bureau in the course of his evidence. He said that there were 100 pages missing from that file and only 42 pages left. By way of hearsay he made a point about what he called political interference. He said:
My knowledge of that particular area runs to this that Mr N ugan became agitated on finding out that certain investigations were being carried out
He then said:
Mr Nugan and/or his brother lobbied a particular parliamentarian in the Riverina area, a member of Riverina, a Mr Sullivan, who in turn lobbied the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Anthony. Mr Anthony then wrote to Mr Fife who was the current Minister
He suggested that there be some slow-down, if one may put it that way, because the investigation was upsetting primary producers in the Riverina region. Volkman said:
Mr Fife then verbally instructed or requested Harvey Bates, the assistant secretary of the Narcotics Bureau, which culminated in Mr Brian Bates' directive.
That is a matter of knowledge in this Parliament.
We have that background of this man giving evidence. Then we can look at some of the other evidence that has been given. It is quite substantial. This is a matter that I think would concern anybody. On page 19 of the evidence Volkman talked about a person who is still now employed in the Bureau of Customs who at that stage was receiving $1,000 a week from a drug syndicate. Volkman named him. He made the point that the person left the Narcotics Bureau but has since been re-employed and is in the Bureau of Customs now. He related the point to the fact that it was within the knowledge of certain people that there was a yacht off-shore connected with Mr Murray ~iley who has been sentenced. In the final analySIS Volkman said that he felt that his active involvement in bringing to light and exposing the patent miscarriage of justice in respect of the Nugan. Hand investigations had caused the prosection of him by the Federal Attorney General. There must be a fair amount of weight in that.

In the process of talking about other matters yolk~an went on to say that some rather interest-

lUg thmgs were told to him. He said that he was

told that the Officers in the Narcotics Bureau were

friendly with a fellow named Stallings whom we

also know was a former CIA employee.' As well he ~amed ~meone as being in the Australian Secur-

Ity Intelligence Organisation. He went on to talk

aStbaO~Ul~IfateprerbSoOmnbnearsm, ewdhCicohsgwraeveknwohwo

said that the fly to Alice

Sprlllgs, were Used to bring in narcotics and also to

take out fauna. He mentioned the person as being

the informant Cosgrave, who he now says has been murdered in the United States.
Why is it then with that sort of background that this man had to go through all this ordeal? Once he gave evidence in 1978 it was known that two of the officers who were assisting the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs indicated to the Customs officials that Volkman had given this evidence. In 1979 Volkman-one of the Narcotics Bureau's own officers-was charged with a conspiracy to export fauna. The case came before the court. Magistrate Nash said that there was no prima facie case. Volkman had to spend a lot of money-he did not get any pay in that timedefending himself. The case went on for many days. There were 58 witnesses called by the Attorney-General. The Crown, not being satisfied with the quashing of the case in the committal proceedings, filed an ex officio indictment. The Attorney-General after nine months filed an ex officio indictment. Prior to that he had taken the matter to the New South Wales Supreme Court suggesting that the magistrate had excluded certain evidence. But when the ex officio indictment came up for hearing the case went on for five days. In the course of that case a Minister here made a statement.
Mr N. A. Brown-You indicated in my direction.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-No, one of the Ministers here. I would say that it was done in innoncence but it shows what can happen. The Minister referred to the case in which the man was the subject of a charge. So, the whole trial was aborted after five days. I understand that it has cost the Crown over $1 m to prosecute this man.
When the case was before the Supreme Court judge for listing in December 1981 the judge observed that it was absurd that a matter of this nature should take the time of the Supreme Court as there was no real substance in the matter. Here was a judge at the listing stage saying: 'Why go ahead with it?' There was and ex officio indictment. The man had to face a jury trial and was acquitted and found not guilty. The man, as I said, has been persecuted for two years. The matter has cost him over $90,000s in legal costs. The Crown has spent over $1 m in proceedings against him. The Attorney-General has had a day-to-day briefing on this matter, despite his medical indisposition. Does it not reek of something sinister when an officer has the courage to give evidence about crime and corruption in high places-about drug trafficking-but nothing is done about those matters, and he is persecuted for a period of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2525

years? The matter demands an urgent investigation.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (5.35)-1 wish to speak about a matter that took place in 1979. This matter came to my attention because it was raised in a newspaper article appearing in the weekly newspaper, the National Times. It was a case involving a Mr McInnis who was charged with rape in Western Australia. The reports of that case indicated that ultimately he was convicted in proceedings in which he was legally unrepresented. He thought that he had made arrangements for legal representation but, at the last minute, his counsel withdrew because he was inadequately instructed. Presumably that meant that legal aid had been denied to him in those proceedings. But the proceedings went on without that gentleman being legally represented, even though he wished to be. The matter was the subject of certain appeals. It went to the full court of the High Court of Australia ultimately.
A number of observations were made in that case on the principles governing an accused's right to legal representation in a trial on serious charges. Although each of the justices who sat on Mr Mcinnis's appeal acknowledged the importance of persons accused of a serious crime having the advantage of counsel to assist them before the courts, the Court ruled by a majority of four to one that an accused in Australia does not have the right to present his case by counsel provided at public expense. The Court further found on the facts of the case that the trial judge's refusal to grant an adjournment to allow Mr McInnis to obtain legal representation did not amount to a miscarriage of justice.
I must say that I worried about that case when 1 read it. I have had the Commonwealth's position examined to see whether we can remedy that matter in relation to offences, against Commonwealth laws at least. I would like to think that the matter could also be remedied in relation to State laws. It seems clear to me that for indictable offences against Commonwealth law the Federal Parliament may, by virtue of the power conferred on the Commonwealth parliament under section 77 (iii) of the Constitution, enact legislation requiring that the availability of representation be a prerequisite to trials commencing. The existing Commonwealth law on this matter is contained in s~ction 69 (3) of the Judiciary Act. 1 do not partIcularly wish to quote that section but it provides a. discretion on matters of the provision of legal asSistance. The section contains a requirement that

legal representation is desirable in the interests of justice.
It seems to me that it would be a simple matter to delete from that section the permissive words and to substitute mandatory words. The section could state that the court shall adjourn a matter in proceedings in which the court thinks fit in order to permit a person to be legally represented. It seems to me that only a simple amendment is needed to the sections requiring representation for accused persons. I understand that some 350 indictable offences specifically created by Commonwealth legislation might well be effected by this provision. 1commend to the Acting Attorney General (Mr N. A. Brown) an amendment to the Judiciary Act to ensure that in Commonwealth matters in which indictable offences are involved people are represented.
I think it also behoves the Commonwealth to examine this matter at meetings of Commonwealth and State Attorneys to ensure that in relation to indictable offences in the States legal aid is provided and that proceedings will not go on in serious cases where people have sought representation for one reason or another and have not been given that opportunity. It may well be that the Commonwealth will have to examine its power to require States to offer legal asistance. I understand that we have recently ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. That Covenant has some provisions relating to criminal matters which suggest that there ought to be specific provision for legal representation in such matters. Whilst I am not suggesting that we should compel the States at this stage to make such provision, 1 think it is a matter that could be raised usefully by the Commonwealth Attorney-General with the States attorneysgeneral to see what can be done in a co-operative way. Ultimately, if nothing can be done in a cooperative way, other means might have to be examined. I commend that proposal to the Attorney in this Estimates debate.
Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) (5.41)-1 enter the debate this afternoon to bring certain matters to the attention of the Acting Attorney-General (Mr N. A. Brown). I remind the Minister of a recent media release from the Trade Practices Commission. 1would like the Minister to explain to the House why we are not allocating more funds for the Trade Practices Commission. Hopefully, after I outline to him what 1 think is false advertising, he will allocate more funds so that we can catch more of these rogues who are running around our country today hoodwinking people. The Press release states:

2526 REPRESENTATlVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The Trade Practices Commission today released an updated guideline on real estate advertising. The guideline concentrates on the consumer protection provisions of the Trade Practices Act which are designed to ensure honesty and clarity in real estate advertising and sales conduct;
I refere the Minister to a full-page advertisement which appeared in the Courier-Mail of Saturday, 9 October 1982. I will hand it to the Minister later. The article is headed: 'The Great Barrier Reef Breakthrough'. Under the heading the advertisement shows an artist's impression of Wild Duck Island. The advertisement is subheaded 'Your Own Barrier Reef Island Villa for $125,000'.
Mr Les Johnson-Might be able to buy that.
Mr HUMPHREYS-The advertisement says that there are only 10 available. In the corner of the advertisement is an artist's impression of a map but we see no scale on the map. Wild Duck Island is shown as being close to the coast. Being a Queenslander and knowing a little about the Queensland coast-
Mr Les JohnsonYou should.
Mr HUMPHREYSI should know exactly where Wild Duck Island is.
Mr Ian Cameron-But you don't.
Mr HUMPHREYS- [ know what electorate it is in and [ know that it is not in the honourable member's electorate. I know that it is not far from the coast-only 50 kilometres-and it is 100 kilometres from the Great Barrier Reef. I will quote from the advertisement so that the Minister will know what it says. It states:
Turtle Cay Resort offers the opportunity to Own a Coral Sea Villa on a magnificent beach-studded BARRIER REEF ISLAND.
That is the first time the Barrier Reef is mentioned. Another section of the advertisement states:
You receive your own individual leasehold title to the villa and the land on which it is located this is a unique title offer on the Great Barrier Reef.
Once again the Great Barrier Reef is mentioned. It is referred to again where the article states:
This is an incredible opportunity to own part of the Great Barrier Reef.
Also, if we look closer at the advertisement we see that it says there are freshwater lakes on the island. It says that the island has its own fresh water. The advertisement mentions the sandy cays and all the other things on the island. The advertisement also states:
The waters around Turtle Cay abound with tropical fish includIng barramundi . . .
Investigations made by the Fisheries Department of Queensland indicate that it is too far from the

coast for barramundi. Barramundi apparently like fresh water and the island is too far from the coast to catch barramundi. I started to think to myself that surely this must be false advertising at its greatest. I thought about Wild Duck Island and I remembered a case mentioned in this House involving an incident on Wild Duck Island. I think all honourable members will remember an article appearing in the Courier-Mail headed: 'Brisbane MHR used office in loan bid'. I will not read the whole article.
Mr Armitage-Oh!
Mr HUMPHREYS-The honourable member for Chifiey brought the matter to the attention of the House before. I think at that time it was classed as a mini-Khemlani affair.
Mr Armitage-I called it a mini-Khemlani.
Mr HUMPHREYS-That is right. The Courier-Mail stated:
The loans sought involved $3 million to Pacific Island Paradise (International) Ply Ltd, concerned with Wild Duck Island off the north Queensland coast,
That was a case where one of the Minister's excolleagues was trying to get $3m for this company. I seek leave to table all the documents relating to the companies. The Minister may wish to look through them. I am asking the Minister to get the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs to investigate the advertisement. I would like to find out how many other newspapers in Australia the advertisement appeared in. It seems to be a total hoodwink. The Minister may wish his staff to check the documents. They were obtained from the Companies Office and the Titles Office.
The CHAIRMAN-Is leave granted?
Mr N. A. Brown-I have not seen them. Could I be given a few moments to look at them?
Mr HUMPHREYS-I am just seeking leave from the Minister to table the documents. I hope that the Minister will hold an inquiry to find out whether this is an authentic advertisement. I would like to know-the Minister may be able to tell the House later today-whether the Government will take any action on the people who have inserted what I claim to be a false advertisement. It must have cost many thousands of dollars. I appreciate that the ex-member for Brisbane is no longer associated with the companies, but the Minister will see that the companies have changed hands, I think, five times since 1979. Surely there must be a case for investigating such false advertising.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! A request for leave is before the Committee. Is leave granted for tabling the documents?

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2527

Mr N. A. Brown-Again, I have not seen the documents.
The CHAIRMAN--It places the Chair in an invidious position. I suggest to the honourable member for Griffith and other honourable members that if they have a mind to seek leave of the Committee it would be prudent to confer with the members of the Committee whose leave would be sought prior to the event. The Chair cannot delay unduly the proceedings of the Committee.
Mr HUMPHREYS-Mr Chairman, I point out to the Minister that they are all documents relating to companies. They are all copies of records.
Mr Bradfield-But it is the Queensland department--
Mr HUMPHREYS-I appreciate that the advertisement relates to Queensland, but it could have been a national advertising campaign and that is why I am asking the Minister to inquire into the activities of the companies.
The CHAIRMAN-Is leave granted?
Mr N. A. Brown-I will give leave in respect of those I have read so far, but I do not know what is contained in this great volume of documents.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! That could not constitute leave in any proper sense. If there is no dissentient voice, leave will be granted. If the Minister or any other honourable member has misgivings as to the wisdom of granting leave, I suggest that the proper course is open to him. There being no dissentient voice, leave is granted.
Mr HUMPHREYS-Thank you, Mr Chairman. Now I can get on with what I was saying. An article in the National Times for 17-23 October 1982 says that last year the Trade Practices Commission received 22,000 consumer complaints and took court action in just four cases. It states:
Fettered by ministerial direction and bureaucratic procedures, and significantly slashed by the Lynch razor gang, the Commission is increasingly in danger of becoming a lame duck . .
I would like the Minister to answer that charge too. The Department is charged with being a lame duck. We have an advertisement about Wild Duck Island, and I hope that we will not get too many geese buying estates on Wild Duck Island.
Mr MOORE (Ryan) (5.49)-1 thank the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) for making some time available to me to speak. I want to make a few comments at the end of the debate on the Estimates for the Attorney General's Department in relation to corporate law. For some time. I have been concerned with

the question of proprietary companies within the
structure in Australia and the need for proprietary companies to be looked at in relation to the opportunities they offer for manipulation and the opportunities that are available for operators of proprietary companies to walk away from their responsibilities.
Some time ago I asked a question in the House in relation to $2 companies, and I thought that this might be an occasion to develop it. It is a de-
vice which might well be looked at by the National Companies and Securities Commission to ensure that the minimum subscription on the formation of a proprietary company is raised to something substantial-in other words, of the order of $1 O,OOO-and that this be associated with some rating in relation to the business or assets held by that proprietary company. By doing this we would certainly not be enforcing any great hardship on the small proprietary owner because $10,000 would certainly be a fairly small consideration. On top of that, it would ensure that consumers or the people who deal with these proprietary companies, are given adequate protection and that people do not walk away from their responsibilities or liabilities, as has occurred. For
example, in Germany a rating system is applied to the formation of proprietary companies. It is related to industry structures. I do not advocate that but I do advocate a look at the minimum subscription, and I suggest that some sliding scale be introduced to wrap in the question of assets. On top of that, the use of personal guarantees would be advantageous, I believe, to ensure that the consumer is not touched in these areas.
The other matter I want to raise is that of franchising, which is fairly new to the Australian
scene. In the United States today 30 per cent of all retail outlets are franchise operations. In Australia the figure is approaching 20 per cent, and it is a trend which in my judgment is likely to increase. Today there is no codification of franchising laws. The only operation under which they are held up is that of contract law and false advertising. As a consequence of that and the growth in this area and because of the appeal of franchising to small business in particular, the avenues for misrepresentation are substantial. The effect of contract law is after the event; it is not prior to the event. It is because of this that we need to look at the question of franchising in Australia. It is far better that when we do this the Securities Commission be once again brought into it. It is better for there to be a national approach rather than a State approach.
In days gone by, on the retirement of Dr Pengilley from the Trade Practices Commission,

2528 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the Department and I asked Dr Pengilley to write a report on franchising. That report is with the Department and I urge that it be published. It would show to all concerned the role and extent of franchising and how Dr Pengilley sees the development of such an overall scheme in Australia. The question is not only one of the suitability of the franchisee, which in itself is very much a case of capitalisation, management and marketing; it is also one of a review of the role of the franchisor. In many cases that is not looked at adequately by the people entering into the contract. Some very deceitful practices are carried out in the representation of the product, or in the requirements that are laid upon the franchisee to take out these agreements. At present there is no codification at all covering franchising, and I urge that in terms of the Pengilley report the Securities Commission look at that matter.
Finally, I briefly draw attention to the role of the futures market in Australia. This is an area with which neither a State government nor the Securities Commission has yet come to grips. It has developed in Australia from the greasy wool futures market of years ago to the quite sophisticated operation that it is today, with a high use by both commodity traders and citizens. I believe the accounts and clearance house operation of the futures market is carried out by a highly reputable London-based firm. It is of concern that the high risk margins taken in futures trading are subject to control only by the futures exchange. Whilst I am a supporter of self-regulation, I am increasingly of the view that it is sometimes necessary for an overall view, rather than that of a particular State. I would like to see not the views of New South Wales, but a national approach imposed on the futures market so that in future, should the national futures exchange develop, it will be able to carry out its work in other States on a similar basis. It is a market that will grow. It has national significance and, because of that, it ought to have a national interest. I move:
That the question be now put.
Mr Armitage--Mr Chairman, I wish to bring to the attention of the chamber--
The CHAIRMAN -Order! The question is 'That the question be now put '.
Mr ArmitageI have a case here of the Acting Attorney-General protecting a drug smuggler.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr. Armitage_I believe I should have the right to bnng up such an important matter in this chamber. I am going to bring it up. I will not be

prevented when a drug smuggler is being protected by the Crown law authorities in this country.

The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member for Chifley will resume his seat.

Question put.

The Committee divided.

(The Chairman-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

62

Noes

42

Majority

20

AYES
Adermann, A. 1:.. Anthon), J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J.
Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown, N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, 1. J. Coleman, W. P.
Connolly, D. M. Co ..... an, D. B. Dean. A. G. Drummond, P. H Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom. R. J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M.

Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J, M. Jarman, A. W. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J. C. Nixon, P. l. O'Keefe, F. L Peacock, A. S.
Porter,l. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. \1. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J, Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W, White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, 1. L. Blewett, N Bowen, Lionel
Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. ChIld,J. Cohen, B. Cross,:\1. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Duffy,M.J. Free. R. V. Fry, K. L Hawk.e, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)

Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J.
Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Maher, M. J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris,P.F.
Mountford,l.G. Scholes, G, G. D. Scott, J. L Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis,LG. West,S.J. Willis,R.

Dobie,J.D.M. Chapman, H. G. P.

PAIRS

Cass,M.H. Everingham, D. N.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2529

PAIRS

Viner. R.1. Jull. D. F. Braithwaite. R. A.

Jacobi, R. Morrison. W. L.
Young.M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Proposed expenditure agreed to.

Sitting suspended from 6.4 to 8 p.m.

Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Proposed expenditure, $116,083,000.

Department of Aboriginal Affairs
Proposed expenditure, $144,037,000.

Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (8.0)-Before speaking on the main topic of my remarks I would like to congratulate the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) on the decision he took in the Pochi case yesterday. To me it is quite obvious that a person who has been here for 20-odd years and who had applied for naturalisation, for Australian citizenship, and was denied
that citizenship only as a result of a departmental mistake, clerical or otherwise, is for all practical purposes an Australian. I think it is fair enough that the High Court of Australia gave the judgment which it did. It seemed reasonable on legal grounds, but I think the person concerned was dealt with by the law in the way in which any other Australian should be dealt with. It is pleasing to see that the Minister showed some humanity.
A large proportion of the electorate which I represent is within the Fairfield City Council area. The Fairfield City Council area has one of the highest migrant populations in Australia. At the last census of the order of 30 per cent of all the residents of the Fairfield City Council area were born in non-English speaking countries. This is a very high proportion, especially if we add to it the Australian born children of those people. Lately a very high proportion of migrants coming to New South Wales has moved into that area. For the last three years of the order of 15 per cent of all migrants coming into New South Wales have moved into the Fairfield City Council area. This large influx of migrants, a large proportion of Whom are Indo-Chinese refugees, into part of the electorate has created some difficulties. I must pay tribute to the local council, the State Government and, for that matter, the Commonwealth Government, and especially to the local newspapers and the media generally for not playing up the racial problems which have arisen. I think it is obvious to all of us that there are people in the community Who want to play up friction on the basis of racial background. Friction exists in all communities. I think it is very counter-productive from Australia's point of view if racial friction is played

up. As I have said, I pay tribute to everybody concerned for not playing up the friction in that area.
We have had many waves of migrants into the general area. One of the original waves consisted of Italians and they still represent the largest proportion of the non-English speaking migrants in the area. Since then we have had many Maltese migrants; Spanish speaking migrants, many of them from South America; and refugees from both kinds of dictatorship, from the Left and from the Right. When somebody comes in from Chile we do not know whether he is a refugee from Allende or from Pinochet. We have welcomed them all. They have integrated into the community and we are pleased to have them. As I have said, the biggest influx into the area lately has been that of the Indo-Chinese. In turn they are being overshadowed now by refugees who were in many ways the original refugees from Eastern Europe. We still have a fairly large Russian community in the area and now we are receiving large numbers of Poles.
While overseas three and a half weeks ago I took the opportunity to go to a refugee camp at a place called Traiskirchen, which is some thirty kilometres outside Vienna. I spent the day there with our immigration officers. Austria has been the first haven for refugees from Eastern Europe for a long time. There has been much pressure on the Austrian people and on the Austrian Government. I think the so-called free world should pay tribute to the Austrians for what they have done. About nine months ago there were 32,000 registered refugees in Austria-mainly Poles. A number of countries have taken quite a significant number of these refugees. Australia has taken over 5,000 during the last year, Canada and the United States of America have taken similar numbers, and many others have gone to other countries. The number is now down to something of the order of 12,000.
People in Europe are concerned that there may be more large scale problems developing in Eastern Europe and that large numbers of new refugees may try to leave Eastern Europe. People who should know claim that economic conditions at present are extremely bad not only in Poland but also in Romania and Czechoslovakia. It is quite likely that a situation such as the one in Poland will develop in those other two countries-Czechoslovakia has a common border with Austria and large numbers of people may try to leave that country and cross into Austria. Undoubtedly, Australia will again be called upon to be a permanent refuge for those people.

2530 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

One problem that has arisen, as all of us know, is that of the definition of 'refugee' and whether it only includes people whose lives are in actual danger or also people who suffer from more generalised repression, people who cannot, as we say, cop living under a dictatorship any more. That is a difficult decision which our immigration officers try to make. The officers I saw in action near Vienna certainly seemed to be concerned Australians trying to help refugees on the one hand and trying to promote this country's interests on the other hand. I pay tribute to them.
I should like to do something which I have done many times before-that is, criticise most Australian politicians for their attitudes to so-called ethnics. There is a belief amongst most of what I call Anglo-Australian politicians that there is some magical godfather in the migrant community who can deliver the votes of Italians, Greeks, Lebanese, Maltese or whatever. They go to different clubs and they think that if they are endorsed by the secretary, the president or whoever it is, he can deliver the votes of all the members of the Marconi Club or the APIA Club or whatever it is. They cannot get votes in this way any more than if they go to a Returned Services League club or a rugby league club. People vote I think it is an extremely good thing-for other reasons.
I think it is racist and paternalistic for Australian politicians to believe that they can get votes in that way. They are convinced by what I call professional ethnics. By that I do not mean that they are professionals who are also ethnics, though in some cases the two correspond, but profeSSIOnal ethnics who make their living out of an ~~hnic community. They try to maintain their posItIOn .by making sure that the people learn as little English as possible so that they can sell them newspape.rs, radio advertising, travel services, legal serVices, medical services and whatever else i~ going. They try to keep those people as a particular ethnic community. Members of this chamber are Obviously aware of the fact that I came from a non-English speaking country when I was a~out 13 years old. I still feel strongly that the most. Important thing for migrants is to learn English. T~e .only way they will get a fair share of ~he cake-It IS a fairly large cake in Australia-is ~f they, for practical purposes, become assimilated IOto the community.
The CHAIRMAN--Orderl The honourable member's time has expired. .
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (8.10)-1 commend the remarks of the honourable member for

Prospect (Dr Klugman). I have also had the opportunity of seeing the Traiskirchen refugee camp in Austria. I very much endorse the honourable member's remarks and I have written some comments of my own on that location. He commended the role of the Austrian Government in assisting to overcome some very difficult problems. One of the fascinating observations I made when I was at Traiskirchen was the extent to which people not only from eastern European countries but also from countries in surprising parts of the world found their way to Austria for refuge. The camp has people from such surprising placesas--
Dr Klugman-Uganda.
Mr RUDDOCK-It has people from Uganda and Eritrea. I think I met people from Ethiopia. There were also people from Afghanistan. People who were worried about persecution in their own countries were seeking a place of refuge. I think it is disappointing that they have to go to such a remote place for them to find sanctuary. I want to comment on the fact that the estimates for the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and the Department of Aboriginal Affairs have been grouped together for discussion. I do not believe it is appropriate that those estimates be discussed simultaneously. I do not believe one could establish any causal link between the immigration and Aboriginals. Aboriginals, of course, are our indigenous inhabitants who were here long before the immigrant races that occupy Australia. That includes, of course, those of European or Anglo Saxon stock who are here in more substantial numbers. I think it is quite foolish to debate these estimates together. I have an interest in both matters and I want to speak on the estimates of both departments. Certainly, a contribution of five minutes on each of them can in no way be adequate. I commend to the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) that on future occasions these estimates be separated because there is no link whatever between them. The suggestion that there is a link is quite inappropriate and it should not be continued.
Like the honourable member for Prospect, I too am pleased with the involvement in the western suburbs of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) last week. I know that he was in the electorate of the honorable member for Prospect attending a citizenship ceremony at Fairfield. He had the opportunity of seeing a number of other locations in that part of the western suburbs. On Saturday, of course, he was in the electorates of Parramatta and Dundas, and, I think, in the electorate of Reid. He saw a number of other significant locations in the west.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2531

He had the opportunity of meeting a large number of Lebanese people at a function held in
my electorate of Dundas. He had the opportunity of seeing what I regard as one of the most important initiatives of this Government, that is the decentralised office of his Department which is situated in the city of Parramatta. It is a very important office. It ensures that the services of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs are available to a large number of immigrant people in the western suburbs of Sydney and that their particular interests such as sponsorship of families seeking family reunion and citizenship applications can be considered. One might be surprised that the Minister should go to an office on Saturday morning but he had the opportunity to see in that office a large number of interviews being conducted of people seeking Australian citizenship.
I welcome the Minister's involvement in the western suburbs of Sydney, his interest in that area and his willingness to see those places. I commend to the Minister the officers of his Department, particularly those at the Parramatta office, led so ably as they are by Mr Don Hegarty, the Regional Director. I regard that office as being so important that I think it could very well be expanded and its role enhanced by the addition of further functions from the more centralised office in the city of Sydney. I certainly hope that the Minister will recognise that need and act upon this request. I indicate also to the Minister that the Migrant Resource Centre was a very worthwhile initiative of this Government. Of course, it occupies premises adjacent to the offices of his Department in Parramatta.
I take this opportunity to comment on the estimates for the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, and the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Mr Wilson) is with us this evening. I indicate my concern at the recent protests that have been mounted in London and New York to draw to attention, and presumably bring international pressure to bear on Australia in relation to, the question of Aboriginal land rights. I certainly have a strong personal support for the Government's program, particularly in the Northern Territory, in relation to Aboriginal land rights. I believe it is very appropriate that we recognise the changes in land use in Australia which have displaced many Aboriginals and the way in which our dominant culture has had an effect upon Aboriginal people, their desires and aspirations. I certainly recognise that many Aboriginals have been left on the fringe of Australian society because we have not given enough attention to these sorts of matters in the past.

Nevertheless, I think it needs to be recognised that significant programs have been put in place to assist Aboriginal people. The estimates in this Budget include a sum of $271m allocated for special Aboriginal programs. These programs are available to assist a total of 160,000 Aboriginal people out of the 15 million people in this country. It needs to be recognised that Aboriginal people, as a result of those programs which are specifically provided for them, benefit to the extent of $1,700 each, if we put it in money terms. Some $8.5m has been allocated for 30 community-based medical services; $75m for 18 special legal services run by Aboriginals and employing special advisers to assist Aboriginals in relation to matters involving the courts; and an amount of $51.4m has been allocated to the Aboriginal Development Commission. All of these programs are important and no doubt will bring long term benefits to Australian Aboriginal people over a period. I do not expect that as a result of those programs there will be rapid improvements in health, education or the standard of living of Aboriginals generally, but I think it needs to be recognised that there will be a gradual improvement as a result of programs of that sort. If we are prepared to pursue the question of Aboriginal land rights throughout the other States of Australia with the degree of enthusiasm with which the Commonwealth has pursued it in the Northern Territory I believe that there will be other benefits that can be given to Aboriginal people.
It needs to be understood that land ownership and not government programs alone is still seen as the way to provide Aborigines with the spiritual, social and physical base necessary to equip them to choose their own lifestyle and, by their own initiative, to improve their standard of living and aid in maintaining their unique identity in this country. I have mentioned the Australian Government's initiative in the Northern Territory. If land rights were hastened in other States so that those States exercised their principal role and, where they have land available, made it available, I believe that these sorts of benefits would arise. A great deal of support has been given by the Commonwealth to Queensland in encouraging it to change its approach, and we have seen some advances there. I have said on previous occasions that if the Queensland Government adopted the same approach as the Commonwealth Government in relation to land rights then we would probably not have the criticisms made of Queensland which are made frequently. So often attention is focused on

2532 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Queensland without recognising that there are problems in other States.
I want to refer to my Own State of New South Wales in particular in relation to these matters. In New South Wales there has been a lot of rhetoric on the question of Aboriginal land rights, but little action, and that disappoints me enormously. I noted in the Press reports today-I want to draw it to the attention of honourable members--that there also appears to be a lack of consultation with AboriginaJ people. There is a report that the New South Wales Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Mr Walker, has refused to meet senior Aboriginal representatives to discuss impending land rights legislation in that State. The National Aboriginal Conference representative, Mr Ted Simpson, mentioned that the Minister was refusing to consult in relation to prospective legislation with the New South Wales Aboriginal Advisory Coul1cil, the New South Wales Aboriginal Lands Trust and the State Branch of the NAC.
The CHAIRMAN - Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LEO MeLEAY (Grayndler) (8.22)-1 appreciate the chance to join in the debate on the estimates of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs this evening. My electorate of Grayndler has a very high concentration of people who are new settlers to Australia, as that area of Sydney has had over a period of years. While the present Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) follows in the tradition of a previous Minister of being a person who has a very good heart, there are certain deficiencies in the Government's immigration polICY whIch make it difficult for a Minister, with the best of intent, to carry out the functions properly.
I first address myself to the question of family reunion. The Government purports to have a polICY In favour of family reunion. As many honourable members r.ealise what the policy is and what occurs In praclJce are significantly different. The Australian community's concept of family reunion as opposed to the concept of family reunion of many people from the Middle East in particular IS somewhat dIfferent. The difficulty faced by people who are Australian citizens or who have per~anent residence in Australia, 'in sponsoring theIr aged parents to come to Australia is becoming even more acute. There are specific holdups in dealmg wIth mIgrants from the Middle East and Leban~n in particular which are causing great hardshIp to many of my constituents. There seems to be a bottle-neck of sorts in the embassy in Damascus which causes those people to be put to great hardship. The Government's policy of not

reopening the embassy in Beirut leaves a lot to be desired. Whilst the Government could properly say that it was looking to the safety of Australia's representatives in Beirut during the civil war in Lebanon, when one considers that a number of other diplomatic posts have been kept open in Beirut, it is obvious that Australia, which has one of the largest populations of Lebanese-born people in the world-over 200,000 people in Australia come from Lebanon-should have been a bit more careful about closing that post. Great hardship is caused to many people in getting to Damascus and great danger is caused to many people getting to Damascus from Beirut. I hope when the Government is considering these estimates that the Minister will give some thought to approaching the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) to reopen the Australian post in Beirut as soon as possible.
I hope the Minister will take account of the problems that are being caused to many migrants with regard to the implementation of the family reunion policy. It is a policy which was looked forward to by many people of overseas origin who are now Australian citizens. It is a policy that, unfortunately, they have found lacking in its implementation.
I do not think one can mention the question of the Lebanese community in Australia without paying attention to the fact that the Government has been unwilling to grant refugee status to people from Lebanon. That hinges on a legal interpretation of what 'refugee status' is and it hinges on some determination of who are refugees in relation to United Nations agreements. When one looks at the other groups of people who are allowed special status to come to Australia, it is rather wrong I feel that the Lebanese in Australia have not been given that special status. We welcome people whom we consider to be political refugees from South Africa to Australia. We welcome people whom we consider to be political refugees from Russia to Australia. We welcome to Australia people whom we consider to be political refugees from Poland. If one is willing to welcome those groups to Australia, I think the Government should extend refugee status to people who wish to come to Australia from Lebanon. Even the Government by its own decision has made a quite significant donation to restore war-torn Lebanon and has extended tax deductibility to donation for that purpose. Whilst we recognise that the war is still going on in parts of the country, we do not extend refugee status to its people. I consider that most unfair and very wrong.
I mention in the debate this evening also the matter of the adult mi rant education service. I

Appropriation Bill (Na. 1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2533

know that my colleague the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon), if time permits, would like to join in on this matter as well. That service is run by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. There is an office of that service in Belmore in my electorate. It does an excellent job. A number of teachers there who are hard-working-indeed overworked-and who provide an exceptionally excellent service to the people of my electorate are finding themselves put at an industrial disadvantage compared with other people teaching in New South Wales and even compared with other people who are members of the Commonwealth Teaching Service. In a letter to me, a number of people who teach in that centre at Belmore summed up the situation quite succinctly, I believe. In their letter, they wrote:
Were any other area of full-time education to be staffed by such a high proportion of casual teachers working under these conditions.-
By that they mean the part time and temporary employment-
there would be a public outcry. Our public is unable to cry out, and the conclusion is inescapable that what would be viewed as intolerable in any other area of education is considered good enough for migrants.
I do not believe that it is good enough for migrants that most of the teachers in the adult migrant education service should be casual teachers. I do not consider that it is good enough that they should be paid less than other teachers. I hope that the Minister will resolve the disagreements that he has with many of the States about employing those teachers full time.
Finally, because we have only 10 minutes in each contribution to this debate, I raise a matter that has caused me some considerable concern over the weekend. I refer to the report in the Sydney Sunday Telegraph which related to statements that are alleged to have been made by Canon Stanley Kurrle, the headmaster of the King's School at Parramatta. It was suggested in the Sunday Telegraph that Canon Kurrle made a number of assertions about migrants not being brought to Australia in a time of recession. Indeed, it is suggested in that article that he said that there should be assistance to repatriate those people.
I find it disturbing that a person who purports to be a christian would make those types of remarks. I think that, if Canon Kurrle did make those remarks, he should look into his own heart. He should consider that nearly 2,000 years ago Christ himself was a refugee. Christ left his own land and went to Egypt. His family fled the intolerable conditions in its own homeland. But would

Canon Kurrle have set his face against Christ if he had lived in Egypt at that time? Would he have suggested that he should return? I would hope not. When Canon Kurrle came to Australia, no doubt as a migrant, no one suggested to him that he should return.
I think that all of us as Australians should put aside these incredible racist approaches that are starting to surface in our community at present. We should realise that to live in a country such as this we are one of the most fortunate people in the world and that we as a people have a moral obligation to provide assistance to the less fortunate in the world. To provide shelter to the less fortunate is one of the more moral ways of providing assistance. I hope that we will continue in this country to have a bipartisan immigration policy that gives succour to the needy from other lands as well as assistance to the poor in Australia. I think the types of remarks that have been attributed to Canon Kurrle are repulsive; the types of remarks that are attributed to other people who would see a difference in people because of their cultural background are repulsive. I think those people should look into their own hearts and consider where they really stand as opposed to considering their own moral values. It is unfortunate that we do not have sufficient time to continue this debate. I ask the Minister to take account of the matters that I have raised here this evening.
Mr Ruddock-Mr Chairman, I raise a point of order. I ask whether honourable members have to vouch for the accuracy of articles from which they quote. I was at that function at the King's School and I do not recall remarks of the sort that were mentioned in that newspaper article. I would like to know whether the honourable member has checked the accuracy of the article.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! There is no point of order.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (8.31)-At the outset-I notice that the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) is still in the chamber--I would like to do something unusual. I am not endeavouring to harm his career as an Australian Labor Party politican but I would like to express the view that he would probably be one of the most honest politicians on both sides of this chamber whom I have had the privilege to see in some 16 years in this place. When I refer to honesty I refer to his honesty in terms of his denouncement of regimes across the globe of an extreme nature on both sides of the political spectrum. Unfortunately, some members of the Opposition find it difficult to recognise that the

2534 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Left can ever do anything wrong, no matter how Left or communist it may be. On occasions some members of this side of the House also find it difficult to accept that even right wing regimes can be just as ruthless and oppressive in their approach. The honourable member for Prospect has a very balanced view on this subject though he is probably regarded by members of his side as being rather quaint. That is sufficient reference to the honourable member for Prospect.
I would like to refer briefly to the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) and his appeal that Australia completely open its doors to everybody who wishes to come through our doors. I refer to his statement that Australia is inhumane and that a canon at some school in Sydney needed to reflect on his christian standards because over the weekend he had suggested that some brake should be applied to the number of people admitted to this country. If that be unchristian in the eyes of the honourable member for Grayndler I suppose that in his eyes I will be unchristian. But the fact of life is that in these times of high unemployment tight discretion has to be exercised in terms of who is admitted to this country.
Labor politicians amuse me. In this place and at a particular gathering they will beat the drum saying that we should open our doors and let in thousands or even millions more people. Yet they will face a gathering such as the screaming, raging crowd that was outside this place today and say that the Government should provide more jobs. They cannot have it both ways. Either they are conscious of the need for jobs for fellow Australians or they will open the doors. If honourable members opposite were to examine the number of unfortunates throughout the world and count the number of people who would like to come to this country they would find these people would number absolutely trillions. Most people in the world go to bed at night with an empty stomach. They labour from sun-up until dark to fill their stomachs while Labor politicians in this place advocate a 35-hour week. They advocate higher wage levels which have the effect of destroying this country's economy.
~r Leo McLeay-- Mr Chairman, I raise a pomt of order. I draw your attention to the Standmg Order about relevance. I do not think this is a 35-hour week debate.
The CHAIRMAN--There is no point of order, on the practice of the chamber.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-One cannot help ~u~ hold the ~iew, when one listens to Labor politIcIans speak m terms of simply opening the doors and letting in hundreds of thousands of extra

people and when one contemplates the number of people who come to us as members of parliament, including the honourable member for Grayndler, pleading for assistance to bring in their relations, that the Labor Party is playing two standards. Labor Party members come into this place day after day saying what a run-down country this is and how inept the Government is, yet they are doing their best to open the doors. Many migrants go to them. If the country is so badly off Labor Party members must choose between saying that the Liberals are inept and posing the question: 'Why are you so desperate to get your relations to Australia; don't you like them?' I leave that with honourable members. The Opposition cannot have it both ways. It is either concerned about the policy of the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) in trying to introduce systems of selective intakes to ensure that we admit people who have skills of which we have shortages or who have immediate relations who can provide them with an occupation or concerned about a scheme which simply brings migrants here to add to the already worrying number of unemployed in this country.
I have spent the first five minutes of the 10 minutes allocated to me referring to the portfolio of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. I wish to devote the remaining five minutes to Aboriginal Affairs, which is the other half of the subject matter of this debate. I refer to the recent Commonwealth Games and to the protests in Queensland by Aboriginal people who came from all over the country to join Aboriginals in Queensland to express a view on what the Queensland Government should be doing in relation to land rights. I do not believe the situation is as clear-cut as many advocates from both sides would like to portray it. If one wanders through the ranks of the population of Queensland unfortunately-I repeat, unfortunately-one discovers a somewhat limited sympathy for the cause that is being espoused by a number of non-Aboriginal supporters as well as the Aboriginals themselves.
I say to the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Mr Wilson), who is sitting on the front bench, that instead of being preoccupied with what can be done for Aboriginal people perhaps he should direct some attention to trying to understand why there seems to be a lack of sympathy-I would not describe it as resistance-by a sizable percentage of the population in Queensland. It may well be time that consideration was given to examining the definition of an Aboriginal. The Minister well knows that anybody who claims to be Aboriginal, who claims to associate with Aboriginals or is

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2535

regarded by Aboriginals as being Aboriginal is accepted, in terms of the existing definition, as being Aboriginal. The honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) made reference to the $271m being spent to assist 160,000 people. I have expressed the view that that money is not all going to the right people. A view has been expressed to me by Aboriginal people that people coming to Australia from some of the Pacific Islands also receive grants under Aboriginal programs. I do not know whether the fault is in the definition of Aboriginal or in the implementation of the programs. But I suggest to the Minister that he should be more forceful or insist that a more forceful approach be adopted in determining who comes under the umbrella of eligibility for assistance under an Aboriginal program. I remind the Minister that under title 25 of the United States code, section 479, sub-chapter 'Protection of Indians and the Conservation of Resources', the definition of an American Indian is:
An Indian, all persons of Indian descent (from legislation which talks about land possessions of the Indians) who are members of any recognised Indian tribe now under federal jurisdiction and all persons who are descendants and such members who were, on June I, 1934, residing within the present boundaries of any Indian reservation, and shall further include all other persons of half or more Indian blood.
I stress 'of half or more Indian blood'. To continue:
For the purposes of the legislation Eskimos and other aboriginal people of Alaska shall be considered Indians.
I just ask the Minister whether the time may have arrived to tighten up to ensure that the assistance given is truly given to the right people.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr Morris-Mr Chairman--
The CHAIRMAN-Does the honourable member for Shortland seek to make a personal explanation on the score of being misrepresented?
Mr Morris-Yes, Mr Chairman.
Mr Donald Cameron-I didn't even refer to the honourable member for Shortland. How can he?
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member for Fadden will remain silent. The Chair will determine whether the personal explanation is valid. I call the honourable member for Shortland.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-The previous speaker, the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron), in the course of his remarks, said that the Australian Labor Party had advocated the opening up of immigration to thou- ~'mds, millions and even zillions of people; in

other words, it advocated throwing open the gates of free immigration to Australia. I make the point that I, as a member of the Australian Labor Party, have not so advocated, nor has any member of my party so advocated. I ask him to correct his remarks.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member takes a point on a collective reflection, if it can be described as such. The honourable member for Fadden has not committed offence against the Standing Orders in his remarks.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (8.41)-1 enter this debate, first of all, with a protest on my behalf and on behalf of my colleagues who represent electorates with very large ethnic populations. We find ourselves confronted with a range of problems with which we have to deal. Yet we are confined by this Government to debating in the 50 minutes allocated to the estimates-
Mr Leo McLeay-Ten minutes was taken up by the lunatic from Queensland.
Mr HOLDING-Apart from the time taken up by Government speakers, it is typical of the attitude of this Government that it not only limits the amount of time for debate on these sorts of important issues in this Parliament but also says: 'Who will we lump together? We will lump the ethnics and the Aboriginals together because they are not white Anglo-Saxon protestants and they do not vote for the Liberal Party'. So it puts them all in one big bag and it gets some of the less contemplative members of the Government to spout the kind of idiocy that we have just heard from the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron). Let me deal with some of these naive and novel Queensland attitudes. As you are well aware, Mr Chairman, in 1967 the Commonwealth obtained constitutional power to deal with Aboriginal affairs. I would be the first to say that real progress has been made as a result of Commonwealth initiatives and legislation since that time. Many genuine efforts have been made both by the Whitlam Government and indeed by the Government opposite.
But there is one area in which the Government opposite and the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Mr Wilson), in my view, stand condemned; that is, the Government cannot exercise its constitutional power unequally between different sections of its citizens. This Parliament has passed legislation to confer land rights upon this county's Aboriginal citizens. That was the will of this Parliament. This Parliament has said: 'If you are an Aboriginal citizen of the Northern Territory you can have land rights, you can obtain title to your land, you can obtain the freedom that goes with

2536 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

the possession of that title in your use of it and you can determine who can go on to the land and who shall stay off it'. What kind of sltua~lOn are we producing in Australia, and what kmd of constitutional Juthonty does the Comm.onwealth have, when the Government says: 'That IS all nght for Aboriginals in the Northern Terntory but, by virtue of the attitude of the Queensland State Government. we will not confer those nghts upon our Aboriginal citizens in Queensland'? In ot~er words, the Commonwealth Governm~nt has saId: 'There will be one law for Abongmals m the Northern Territory and, although the Commonwealth has the constitutional power and the responsibility, we '"ill not exercise .that power and we will abrogate our responslbliltles when we come face to face with the attitude of the BJelkePetersen Government '.
It is not just on this matter that the Bjel~e Petersen Government has some novel or quamt obsessive view. In fairness to that Government, what has to be said is that it has a thoroughly integrated racist at! itude in which it. believes genuinely and sincereiy, and I concede Its genuineness and sincerity. l'vlr Bjelke-Peterson has said: 'The intention of the Queensland Government is to integrate Aborigines'. He wants them all to be like him. Heaven forbid' The average Australian would not find that a very palatable prospect. I cannot blame any Aboriginal in Australia if he says: 'God help me, I do not want to be like the Premier of Queensland'. As a result of that attitude, the Queensland Government has said time and again, not merely to this Minister but also to other Ministers, that its policy is not a policy of self-determination, it is a policy of paternalism and of integration.
There will be no land rights in Queensland for Aboriginal citizens so long-as the Bjelke-Petersen Government is in power. The Government of Queensland has made that perfectly clear. I must say that I think it has been honest and forthright in its attitude, even though I do not agree with it. Confronted with that attitude what view does the Commonwealth take in te[m~ of exercising its responsibility, its constitutional role? On every single occasion, when confronted with this attitude of the Queensland Government the Federal Fraser Government has backed otT: It will not take 011 the Bjelke-Petersen Government. BjelkePetersen is quite candid about that. I will quote from the Courier-Mail of 3 November 1981 when he said:
. there wouldn't be a Federal Government there if it did.
He said that the Federal Government would cease to exist.

Dr Theophanous - Ha, ha!
Mr HOLDING-I can only quote him, That might be an incorrect view of his authority and of the power of the coaliti~n Gover~ment, bu.t that is his view. I put it to thIS CommIttee that ~f .any government has a constitutional responslblllty and authority which it refuses ~o use, ?y negotiation or any other way, then ultlmat~ly .lt~ power and its authority are continually dlm1l11Sheddiminished to the point where its policies are subverted and undermined. That is precisely what is occurring and has occurred in the negotiations between the Commonwealth Government and the Queensland Government. It is .all very.well for the Minister to try to solve thIS posItIon by expressions of good intention, by saying: 'Well, of course, they have not got land nghts but they have deeds of trust'.
What has happened is that this Mini~ter proclaimed what he regarded as an appropnate settlement-it would be an appropnate settlement for a spineless Minister-within a matter of a week of the Commonwealth Games being opened. The Minister said publicly, and it was said on his behalf in the Senate, that a thoroughly satisfactory arrangement had been reached in terms of the rights of the Aboriginal people ~f Queensland to determine wh~ c~)Uld, go on .to theIr land. Within a week of the Mlmster s makmg that statement, there was an application by the ~bor iginal people of Doom~dgee. for a .Iand ngh.ts claim to allow a Federal Judge lOto theIr reserve m order to hear their claim. The permits were issued by the Doomadgee Council, but the Q~eensland Minister for Aboriginal and Island Affairs, aware of the fact that some 70 per cent of the Nicholas River claimants live in Queensland, refused to allow a Federal judge to go into Queenslan~ for the purposes of hearing an Aboriginal land nghts claim.
Mr Donald Cameron-Come on, Clyde. You are a Victorian.
Mr HOLDING-I thought I might educate the honourable member. I realise that that is an impossible task, but I am a man of considerable charity. Obviously the honourable member opposite thinks that it is perfectly proper for Aboriginals in the Doomadgee Reserve to b~ forced to walk some 100 kilometres over very dIfficult terrain in order to have a land rights claim heard because the Queensland Government says: 'It .~ight be true that we had discussions with the Mlmster but when it comes to determining who shall exercise authority as to who goes on. to res.erves in Queensland that authority I.les wl.th t.he Queensland Government'. That IS the SItuatIOn

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2537

that has arisen. It is a situation which makes a laughing stock of this Minister and this Government. I do not feel deeply about that, but I feel deeply when I see the constitutional authority of the Commonwealth being eroded and a laughing stock being made of this Parliament and of the wishes of this Parliament as expressed in land rights legislation. It is time that the Minister acted on this matter.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (8.51 )-Unlike the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), I will not waste the time of the Committee by getting stuck into irrelevancies. We are dealing with the estimates of various Government departments. The honourable member spent 10 minutes talking about problems in Queensland which have no direct relationship to the estimates. This Government has proven that it puts its money where its mouth is when it comes to Aboriginal affairs.
Mr Bourchier-The Aboriginal from Burke.
Mr TAMBLING-The Government has put up estimates of which the Aboriginal people who live in my electorate of the Northern Territory can be proud. They can be proud of the amount of money that actually flows. The estimates of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs which were administered in the Northern Territory last year and which will be administered this year will exceed $20m. The Aboriginal Development Commission spent $13m of the $50m which was allocated to it last year in the Northern Territory. The money was put into areas that concerned Aboriginal people and reflected their wishes, and involved the issues surrounding self determination. Instead of wasting time arguing about the constitutional relevancy of what BjelkePetersen might do and what the Federal Government should do, I would argue that the honourable for Melbourne Ports ought to go back and look at what Mr Bryant and Mr Whitlam said about concurrent relationships between the Federal Government and the State governments regarding Aboriginal affairs. Shared responsibilities must be taken on by both Federal and State governments. Those responsibilities are being fulfilled by this Federal Government.
I wish to deal with some issues, as reflected in the estimates, which I would like the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Mr Wilson) to look at. For example, the funding for Aboriginal agencies often requires Aboriginal people and communities to deal with up to 16 various government

agencies. They include departments of the Federal Government, the Northern Territory Government and statutory corporations. Sixteen agencies is too many a number for any group of people to have to be involved with. Many Aboriginal communities are confounded by the many public servants who turn up and try to screw them down regarding estimates. By the same token, the Aboriginal people are able to express their independence very remarkably when one looks at groups such as the Northern Land Council and the Central Land Council and at how they are now administering and facing up to various financial complexities. In the next few years we will see very good financial rewards flowing through those land councils from mining royalties. The Aboriginal people themselves, their boards of directors, if you like, will have control of those funds-where they will go and how they will mix in and complement the money that is made available through this Budget.
I wish to talk for a moment about the Aboriginal Development Commission. It is very interesting to see the new rules that the Commission is developing regarding the funding of enterprises in Aboriginal communities. The Commission is being forced to address the real issues of economics as well as the social priorities of those communities. This is what is important. Aboriginal people are making decisions through statutory corporations in relation to the money that is appropriated to them. None of it is easy. The job is very difficult but at least they are fronting up to it and coming up with many new and innovative ideas for the pastoral industry, the tourist industry and Aboriginal housing.
An issue of priority that I think still needs to be addressed by this Government and by the Northern Territory Government relates particularly to the provision of services in Aboriginal fringe camps. It is hoped that later this week the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs will bring down its report on fringe camps. That will highlight many of these issues. There are many more problems still to be addressed relating to environmental health, health issues generally and so many other areas that impinge on those few Aboriginals in Australia-only about 20,000-who are forced to live in fringe camps. Those 20,000 Aboriginals are often falsely painted into the corner and their lifestyle is taken to be an indication of how the rest of the Aboriginals live. The other 120,000 Aboriginals around Australia are fronting up to major decisions with regard to self-management. When I spoke in the House of Representatives last Thursday, I challenged the

2538 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No, 1)

Government to look at the future direction of Aboriginal funding. Television and education policies will have a phenomenal impact on Aboriginal communities in the future. Now is when we should be looking at those issues.

Dr Theophanous--Mr Chairman, 1 raise a point of order. I did not wish to interrupt the speech of the honourable member for the Northern Territory. During the honourable member's speech, the honourable member for Bendigo referred to me as the 'Aboriginal member for Burke'. I do not mind being identified with the
Aboriginal people-

The CHAIRMAN. Order!

Dr Theophanous -But this IS a further example-

The CHAIRMANOrder!

Dr Theophanous-Of racist comments coming--

The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.

Dr Theophanous-From the honourable
member for Bendigo which he repeats every time-

The CHAIRMAN -Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.

Dr Theophanous chamber.

get up to speak in this

The CHAIRMAN - I warn the honourable member for Burke.

Mr ScottPull him into gear.

The CHAIRMAN. I warn the honourable member for Hindmarsh. The honourable member for Burke took a point of order on the basis, 1 deduce, that a personal reflection had been made against him. If he seeks a withdrawal of that reflection-if indeed he regards it as such-I invite the honourable member who so offended to withdraw.

Mr Bourchier-I withdraw, Mr Chairman.

Mr MAHER (Lowe) (8.57)-1 am delighted tomght to have the opportunity to--

Motion (by Mr McLean) put:

That the question be now put.

The Committee divided.

Ayes

61

Noes

44

Majority

17

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.

AYES

Hunt, R. J. D Hyde. J M.

AYES
Baume. M. E Birney. R. J. Bourchicr, J. W Bradfield, J. M Brov.n. N. A. Burr, \1. A. Cadman, A.G Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron. Ian Carltnll,J. J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. \1 Cowan, D. B Dean. A. G Drummond, P. H. Ed\\-arcts. H. R Falconer, P. D. Fife, IV C. Fi~her. P. S. (Teller) Giles,G.O'H Good luck, B. J. Groom, R.J Hall. Steele Harris. G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. HO\\lard, J. W.

Kalter. R. C. Killen. Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher. S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore. J. C. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe F. L Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson. Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender.!. M. Street. A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Blewett, R. J. Bowen. I.ionel Brown. John
Brown, Robert Campbell.G. Charles. D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duify, M.J Free, R. V. Fry,K.L Hawke, R. J. L Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C J. Jenkins. H. A.

Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating. P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. !\1cLea)" Leo McMahon. Les Maher, M. J. Mildren, J. B Milton. P. Morris. P. F. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis,LG. West,S.J. Willis,R.

Dobie, J. D. M. Chapman, H. G. P. Viner, R.1. Jull,D. F. Braithwaite, R. A.

PAIRS

Cass,M.H. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi. R. Morrison, W. L. Young, M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Proposed expenditures agreed to,

Progress reported.

CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION (MANAGEMENT OF ORGANIZATIONS)
AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Macphee, and read a first time.

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2539

Second Reading
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations) (9.5)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill relates to two important areas of the affairs of federally registered organisations of employers and employees. The first area concerns the fitness for office of officers of those organisations or of individuals who aspire to office. The second area involves the use of the financial resources of such organisations to make loans, grants or donations. These provisions take account of and develop recommendations made in the report by the Royal Commission into the Activities of the Australian Building Construction Employees and Builders Labourers Federationthe Winneke report. The Royal Commission was established in 1981 and reported to the Commonwealth and Victorian governments in May of this year. The report of the royal commission identified serious shortcomings in the affairs of the Federation and in the conduct of certain of its officers, about which I do not propose to speak now.
I need only inform honourable members that these matters, which have been widely reported and achieved considerable notoriety, led the Royal Commission to make certain recommendations as to action to be taken by the Commonwealth and Victorian governments. One recommendation was for the Conciliation and Arbitration Act to be amended to disqualify an officer of an organisation who was convicted of an indictable offence involving an abuse of that office, from holding that or any office in the organisation, and for that person to remain ineligible for such office or offices for a period of five years. Another recommendation was made for an amendment to the Act to provide that the funds of any registered organisation, or any branch, should not be applied in the granting of loans to any officer or member of the organisation or branch unless the terms and conditions upon which the loan is to be granted have been fully disclosed to and approved by the membership of the organisation or branch in general meeting. Both of these recommendations highlight the need for the honest administration of registered organisations. These bodies play a vital role in Australian society. It is plainly against the interests of the community and the members of registered organisations if their administration is not competent and honest. The Government does not doubt that by far the majority of registered organisations are honestly run, and not only the Royal Commission into the Builders Labourers Federation but also that into the Federated Ship

Painters and Dockers Union has shown that there is an urgent requirement for legislation to combat corruption in the management of registered organisations.
In framing this Bill, the Government has had regard to the long standing prohibition in the uniform companies Acts on certain persons managing corporations. Similarly, the requirements in that legislation about loans to directors of companies and certain other individuals have been noted by the Government. While the Government does not consider that a close comparison can be drawn between companies and registered organisations, nonetheless the community and the members of these bodies are entitled to expect an equally high standard of integrity to be applied for those who are entrusted with the management of their affairs. Indeed, the Royal Commission into the Activities of the Builders Labourers Federation in making its recommendation concerning disqualification also drew attention to the standards required of company directors in this regard.
So, as I have said, this Bill contains provisions based on those contained in the co-operative companies legislation which disqualify certain persons from being involved in the management of a corporation. I would, in this regard, draw the attention of the House particularly to sections 227 and 562 of the Companies Act 1981. The policy in relation to these companies provisions is under consideration in the context of the planned exposure draft of the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1983. It is hoped the the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities will later this year agree to this exposure draft being made available for public comment. The Attorney-General (Senator Durack) has directed his Department to ensure that when the public comments on the exposure draft are being examined, consideration is given to the question whether the companies provisions need any amendment so that, as far as possible, they cover the same range of offences as those set out in proposed sub-section 132F (I) contained in this Bill and to the question whether any other adjustments would be desirable to the companies legislation to bring it into line with the relevant provisions of this Bill. I should also inform honourable members that this present legislation has been the subject of detailed discussion with the members of the National Labour Consultative Council and takes account of their most helpful observations.
Let me outline the provisons of this Bill for honourable members. The Bill will disqualify a

2540 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

person from holding office or being eligible to become a candidate for election or to be elected or appointed to an office within any organisation unless a period of five years has elapsed since he was convicted of an offence of a specified type or released from prison for the conviction as set out in clause 4 of the Bill by a proposed new section 132F. The categories of offences are:
(i) an offence involving fraud and dishonesty punishable on conviction by imprisonment for a period of not less than three months;
(ii) specific and serious offences against the Conciliation and Arbitration Act and Regulations:
(iii) an offence in connection with the formation, registration or management of an association or organisation other than those covered by (ii) above: and
(iv) any other offence involving the intentional or reckless use of violence towards another person or the intentional or reckless causing of death or injury to another person or the intentional or reckless damaging or destruction of property.
The first three of these categories are derived from the Companies Act. The fourth arises from our consideration of what Royal Commissioner Costigan had to say in his various reports.
The Government recognises, of course, that there is a wide range of activities which will come within the scope of these categories. There have to be Opportunities for convicted persons holding or seeking office in organisations to have what they have done measured against the holding of or standing for office. Accordingly, the Bill provides an office holder or a candidate for election or appointment to any office who has been convicted of one of the classes of offence I have referred to with the right to seek leave from the Federal Court of Australia to continue to hold office or to be eligible for election or appointment. If the Court grants the application, the applicant will not be disqualified under the legislation. Where the Court refuses the application, the disqualificatIOn wIll continue to operate but it may, if the Court thinks fit, be reduced to a period less than five y~ars. There is provision in the Bill to enable the disqualification provisions to be enforced in the Court on application by the organisation, a member of the organisation or the Industrial RelatIOns Bureau.
The Bill will permit certain financial assistance to some individuals concerned in leave and enforcement proceedings before the Court. The Bill

will not apply to existing office holders who committed an offence before the date on which the Act comes into operation. It will apply to all office holders who commit a prescribed offence after the Act comes into operation unless within 28 days after being so convicted the office holder seeks the leave of the Court to continue in office. All persons who have been convicted of a class of offence such as I have referred to, whether before or after the commencement of the Act and who wish to become a candidate for election to an office within any organisation, or to be elected or appointed to an office within any organisation, will come within the scope of the Bill unless a period of five years has elapsed since that conviction. Such a person will be able to seek the leave of the Court to become a candidate for election or appointment to office. Where the leave of the Court is sought, the Court will be empowered to:
Grant the person leave to continue in office, to become a candidate for election or be appointed to office as the case may be; or
Refuse leave to that person to continue in office or to become a candidate for election or be appointed to office as the case may be; and
If the Court thinks fit, specify a period of less than five years during which the person concerned may not seek election or be appointed to or hold office.
Criteria to guide the Court in dealing with cases before it are set out in clause 4 of the Bill by a proposed new section 132E. They are modelled on pronouncement by the courts in this country when they have been called upon to deal with similar types of cases arising from the operation of companies legislation.
I turn now to what the Bill contains about the making of loans, grants and donations by organisations. There are already detailed provisions in the Act and the regulations designed to give persons having a genuine interest access to certain information about decisions taken by organsiations to make loans, grants and donations. However in light of what the report of Mr Winneke, Q.c., brought forth, the Government has decided that these provisions do not go quite far enough. And, as I have said, we have taken note of and developed a recommendation which Royal Commissioner Winneke made on this subject. The upshot is that, by the provisions of the Bill, all loans, grants or donations of $1 ,000 or more will have to be approved by the committee of management of an organisation or branch, as appropriate.
Moreover the Bill requires that the rules of organisations provide for the committee of management concerned to satisfy itself before it makes a

Conciliation and Arbitration Bill

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2541

loan, grant or donation that it is in accordance with the rules and, in the case of a loan, that, in the circumstances, any security is adequate and repayment arrangements are satisfactory. Consistent with the provisions in the companies legislation, the requirements relating to loans, grants or donations will not include anything done by the organisation to provide a person with funds to meet expenditure incurred or to be incurred for the purposes of the organisation or the purpose of enabling him to perform properly his duties as an officer of the organisation.
Details of all loans, grants or donations of $1,000 or more will have to be filed annually with the Industrial Registrar along with the other financial returns an organisation is required to file. However, an organisation will be able to file these details of loans, grants or donations separately. Consistent with norms of privacy, when an organisation certifies that a loan, grant or donation has been made to relieve a member or a dependant of a member from severe financial hardship it will not be necessary for the organisation to include in material it filed with the Registrar the name and address of the member or dependant. Finally, details of all loans, grants or donations filed with the Registrar will be available for imspection by a member of the organisation.
This is responsible and reasonable legislation. It is legislation which, I believe, the community
expects. It is legislation which any self-respecting organisation will welcome. Organisations run competently and honestly have nothing to fear from it. It will protect a high standard of administration in organisations. I want to emphasise that the legislation does not single out the trade union movement for attention. The Bill applies equally to organisations of employers registered under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act.
It is unfortunate to say the least that the behaviour of some notorious trade union officials may have done a grave disservice to the reputations for honest administration enjoyed by so many other officals of organisations in this country. However, the members of organisations registered under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act are entitled to have protection against untoward activities that might be engaged in by officials. At the same time, as I have pointed out to the House, there are safeguards in the Bill to protect the individual officials of organisations. The Bill is certainly not intended as a reflection on the probity of the great majority of hard-working officials of employer and union bodies in this country. Such officials should not see it as an adverse reflection upon them any more than the great majority of company directors should see similar provisions applying to them as

reflecting upon their integrity. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hawke) adjourned.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Department of Industry and Commerce
Proposed expenditure, $164,168,000.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (9.22)-The Department of Industry and Commerce is a key department of government in the implementation of policies to increase the level of economic activity in our country and thus to provide jobs for all who want them. I am glad to see that the new Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock) is at the table to hear the words of wisdom and experience that I shall be able to offer him in this estimates debate. In the last month the consequences of Fraser Government economic policies have been brought into sharp focus. I refer, of course, to events earlier today, when the understandably angry steelworkers and miners visited this House calling for jobs. I refer also to the Opposition's censure motion of the Government in relation to its economic policies. These events are but the tip of a much bigger iceberg of economic catastrophe, unemployment and economic decline.
I want to illustrate just how serious the present situation is. As I have said, this economic department of state-the Department of Industry and Commerce-is an important department in tackling these problems. There were 384 miners sacked in the Woollongong district; 190 workers employed by Associated Pulp and Paper Mills Ltd at Burnie were sacked and 100 more are threatened; 350 workers of Australian Paper Manufacturers Ltd of Geeveston have lost their jobs; 1,700 workers are to be sacked by the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd at Newcastle and Port Kembla; 250 workers by Borg-Warner (Australia) Ltd in Sydney and a similar number in Albury; and 400 workers in the Ford Motor Co. will lose their jobs. I have been abroad representing this Parliament at the annual conference of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. These are just a few of the details from Press clippings that were put on my desk on my return. The list appears to be virtually endless. I could have gone on quoting from the bunch of Press clippings that were given to me. They span every Australian industry, every region and every occupation. No industry or job in Australia is safe at this time.

2542 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

We in the Australian Labor Party are deeply concerned and angry about the deterioration and decline of Australia's industries. We are deter-
mined, once we have swept this moribund Government from office to do something about it. We believe that our prices and incomes agreement with the trade ullion movement will allow us to pursue a more expansionary economic strategythat is, a strategy which is expansionary in the fiscal area and also when it comes to money supply targets. We believe also that that policy will be non-inflationary. But in addition to this macro-economic policy we shall be pursuing in government an industrial strategy which aims at the speediest possible regeneration of Australia's declining industrial base. This is another area in which this important Department of Industry and Commerce and its estimates are so relevant. Macro-economic policies that more expansionary policy I mentioned, built on that prices and incomes policy we believe are a key to short term growth. But in the medium to longer term, it is the structure and performance of the underlying industrial base that determines whether the growth can be sustained. Building on the lessons from overseas, we believe that a central focus for industrial regeneration is essential. The Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry, MITI, plays this role in Japan and we in the Australian Labor Party believe that we must adapt our existing governmental mechanisms, in particular as they relate to the Department of Industry and Commerce, much further in this direction.
Modern Japan is a world leader in areas of industrial production such as video cassette recorders, facsimile copiers, microwave ovens, minicomputers, semi conductors, fibre optics, robots, numencally controlled machine tools motor vehicles, farm machinery, stereo compo'nents, televIsion sets and so on. But Japanese success is not based on any unique abilities of the Japanese. Nor IS It based on devious or dishonest tactics pursued by Japanese governments or management, although there may be some non-tariff barriers that perhaps I should mention under that particular h~adlI1g: But for the most part, the production of thiS equipment is not based on any devious or dishonest tactics pursued by Japanese government or m.anagement although, as in every economy, ~e will find elements of this.
What ~as been called the art uf Japanese management IS nothing more and nothing less than a powerful set of natIOnal industry policies originatm~ from the MITI body. In Japan business industnal and economic strategies evolve together and ~e expressly designed to complement each other.
e all remember the period as late as the 1950s

when Japanese goods were regarded generally as cheap and shoddy. But since that time they have progessed through a number of important stages of development. From cheap, unskilled and labour intensive activities have developed the highly sophisticated and skill intensive products and industies that Japan has today. The Japanese have continually restructured and diversified as trends in the world economy have shifted. The Japanese home-based industry policy is to accelerate market forces and MITI has used tariff and non-tariff barriers to promote growth. By contrast, our emphasis in Australia has been not on managing growth but on managing contraction.
The secret of Japanese success is really no secret at all. Japan has used long term finance for industries which it believes have good long term growth prospects. It has expert public servants who are continually devising tax incentives, export finance and subsidised research and development programs for industries. Its public servants are expert because there has been a commendable constant interchange of personnel between the public and the private sectors. But equally important is that MIT! industrial groups, associations and the large general trading companies are engaged continually in gathering detailed market information which, in turn, is also shared with the banking system and other government ministries. This is the real secret of the so called Japanese miraclea vast network of interlocking private and public bodies is continually involved in a process of information gathering and strategic planning. This is the miracle that I, on behalf of the Australian Labor Party, want to see achieved in Australia by converting our Australian Department of Industry and Commerce into a body such as the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry.
To develop this point further, the lessons for our Department of Industry and Commerce are clear. We must construct in Australia an equally comprehensive process of information gathering and distribution. This process must rest on detailed consultation with the corporate sector, with State governments and with trade unions and there must be provision for special development assistance based in turn on the strategic planning which the infrastructure and consultation framework make possible. We in the Labor Party envisage a much larger and more active role for the Department of Industry and Commerce in our strategic planning process. I add that, as all experience has shown, only the most committed free market ideologue would have any problems in perceiving the benefits which such a revised

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2543

role would bring for the Department of Industry and Commerce.
We believe that the Department should become much more actively involved in links with key companies economy-wide to implement agreed industry plans. We believe that the Department should liaise closely with the other central Government departments to ensure consistency across the wide spectrum of Government demand and supply-side activity. We in the Labor Party are concerned~indeed I am more than just concerned~with the efficiency of existing industry. We are equally concerned that Australia is missing out on a wide range of industrial growth opportunities. We shall, therefore, ensure that the Department of Industry and Commerce plays a central role in the identification of viable growth opportunities for new and existing Australian industries.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Ian Robinson)~Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra) (9.32)--1t is true, as the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) has said, that the Department of Industry and Commerce has a very heavy responsibility in these times. It is true that since the downturn in business activity manufacturing has been going through a very rugged period, both from the point of view of employees, with greater job uncertainty and unemployment, and from the point of view of ownership and management in terms of reduced profitability. It is true also that one is bound to keep in mind the demonstration we witnessed here this afternoon.
The current situation, the significant increase in unemployment, especially in manufacturing, is a very serious one. The Labor Opposition has no monopoly of concern about that. However, it is unreal and simply not true to charge, as the Labor Party does, that it is all the Government's fault, as if by some simple change in, or with different, Government policies the situation would be different and unemployment would be greatly reduced or would go away. That is simply not the case.
I will have a word to say about the macroaspects of it in a moment. For the rest, what the honourable member for Adelaide was really saying was that we need more planning, more controls, more bureaucracy. I take it that that is what he really meant by his references to the Japanese Ministry of International Trade and Industry. It links in with arguments he has frequently made for an industries development commission and an Australian automotive industry authority, and his

colleagues have mentioned a hydrocarbon corporation and the like. I do not think that is any road to a solution of our difficulties.
The basic causes of the general situation, which have been much debated here today, are not difficult to state. Firstly, there is the sluggish real total demand stemming largely from the world recession as that has impacted on our exports and on the resources investment process. Major development projects have been slowed, postponed or even abandoned. There is also the prolonged drought and other factors. There is, then, that sluggish total demand together with, secondly, an alarming deterioration of Australia's international competitive position associated with continuing relatively high inflation, as yesterday's figure underlined, and the upsurge in costs with the excessive unreal increases that have occurred in wage rates, along with shorter working hours. This deterioration affects our capacity to export and more especially leads to a higher level of imports. I use the words 'more especially' in looking at this in the context of the manufacturing industry.
We have a twofold effect of the virtual nogrowth situation in total real demand stemming largely from overseas factors and, because of increased import penetration, a lower share for Australian industry in that total demand. Of course the Labor Party would address the first component of the problem~the sluggish aggregate real demand~by a large expansion of deficit financed government spending. That is not an option beyond the extent to which the Government has already gone, namely an effective 3.6 per cent increase~a very significant increase in real terms in government spending in the Budget, already enlarged with drought relief and other measures. I say that further expansion is not an option because the current inflation rate in Australia and continuing unrealistic wage expectations are far too high to permit any such further government stimulus without accelerating or perpetuating inflation to the longer term detriment of everybody.
The continuing push for higher wages and shorter hours by a large section of the labour force in all these circumstances is utter madness. But at the same time it is not denied, as I will go on to illustrate in a moment in the case of steel, that management also has a responsibility in respect of the only viable route out of our difficulties, and that is cost control. I stress that, because tied in with the cyclical difficulties to which I have just been referring there are also long term structural difficulties complicating the situation. The Australian manufacturing sector is not alone in facing

2544 REPRESENTAT1VES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

problems. Manufacturing industry in most of the advanced countries in Europe and North America have been experiencing difficulties-witness the recent collapse of AEG Telefunken in West Germany, the problems of International Harvester,
and so on. So manufacturing industries world wide face immense structural problems such as, for example, the steel industry to which I am led
to refer in the light of events here today.

In the steel industry, with the world recession,
there is a world wide excess production capacity
of the order of 200 million tonnes--at least there was a few months ago-but with the acceleration
in plant closures world wide that figure is pretty
rapidly being cut down. That represented about 30 per cent of the total Western crude steel capacity of the order of 670 million tonnes, while production has expanded in countries such as the Republic of Korea, and steel making facilities in
the developed countries have fallen even further behind technologically. The Broken Hill Propri~tary Co. Ltd in Australia is inevitably caught
up In all this. With massive subsidies being paid to steel makers overseas while home markets are heavily protected-other than the United States
of America, but that is now changing-the Australian industry, with a mere eight million tonne
total capacity, is extremely vulnerable to the fun-
nelling of imports into so relatively small a market.

Recognising this the Government has moved to impose tariff quotas on imports at their 1981-82 level. There may be some debate as to whether that or a lesser quantum of imports should have been set-in the light of the fact that the 1981-82 levels were historically high, and we face the
prospect of a flat if not a falling level of demand for ~teel. But that is a. holdin¥ operation pending receipt of the IndustrIes ASSistance Commission report on long-term assistance. It should be noted that there have been other Budget provisions of assistance to this industry. First there is the provision announc~d on 19 July for a three-year depreciation perIod for new investment which applies not only to steel but also to other i~dustries-where the write-off period was preViously five 'yea~s-and ~econdly the permitting of tax consolIdatIOn which will allow this depreciation benefit to be offset against oil revenues from Bass Strait.

I affirm that this Government does wish to see a

strong and viable steel industry in Australia as the

key component, the foundation, of Australia's

smuasntaUI.nfascutucrhinagn

bI.ansdeu. sAtryu.stTrahleia

should natural

be able to protection

and resources which have always fostered steel

making in Australia still apply, even against some

of the newly emergent producers such as South Korea and Brazil which, although benefiting from low labour costs, inevitably face high energy costs and transporting costs to Australia. What really is necessary is the vision, energy and drive on both sides of industry to carry through the technological modernisation and restructuring, and even relocation, which is essential to bring the industry, particularly basic iron and steel, up to date. An industry advisory council has been established to assist in the process, but let us have no illusions; the situation is enormously difficult and complex. The point I make in that connection is that modernisation is almost bound to involve a decline in employment in the industry-I mean in the long term, as distinct from the distressing cyclical reduction in employment currently taking place <md imposing enormous strains and hardships, whil:h
the Government well recognises, on the famiiIes and economies of the steel-making regions. We have to face this long term employment problem in this as in other industries-for example, in the car industry. It is not reasonable, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has reaffirmed today, to demand a 'guarantee' from the BHP company in respect of employment in return for assistance.

What then needs to be said is that with restored economic growth in Australia the employment that may be lost in these spheres will be taken up in others. While we are currently experiencing a
downturn in activity do not lose sight of the factthe Labor Party is only too anxious for it to be lost to sight-that over the three years to the end of December last the total number of jobs increased by some 400,000. It will do that again as we get the fundamentals right and in place, to take advantage of world economic recovery as it gathers pace. What is equally true is this: if the steel industry and other industries--I have referred to the motor industry-do not change, adapt, keep up with modern technology, then we can be sure that in the long term there will be even fewer jobs in the manufacturing area and lower standards of living for Australians.

Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.42)-Mr Deputy Chairman---

Motion (by Mr McLean) put:

That the question be now put.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Hon. Ian Robinson)

Ayes

61

Noes

43

Majority

18

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2545

AYES
Adermann. A.E. Anthony,1. D. Baume, M. E. Bime). R. J. Bourchier, J. W.
Bradfield. J. M. Brown. N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron. Ian Cariton,J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean. A. G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife. W. C. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles.G.O'H. Good luck. B. J. Groom.R.J. Hall. Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. C. Hodgman, W. M.

Howard,J. W. Hunt. R. J. D. Hyde. J. M. Kauer, R. C. Killen, Sir James
Lloyd. B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. McLean. R. M. (Teller) McVeigh. D. T. Macphee. I. M. Moore,J. C. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,1. R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair, I. McC.
Spender. J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White. P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. l. Blewetl, N
Bowen. Lionel Brown. John Brown. Robert Campbell.G. Child.J. Cohen. B. Cross. M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. DalAo'kins. J. S. Duffy. M.J. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke. R. J. l.. Holding. A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Hurford. C. J. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson. Les (Teller)

Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly. R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman. R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les
Maher. M.J. Mildren. J. B. Milton, P. Morris,P. F. Mountford. J. G.
Scholes. G. G. D. Scot!. J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren. T. Wallis. L.G. West.S.J. Wiliis.R.

PAIRS

Dobie. J. D. M. Chapman. H. G. P. Viner.R.1. Jull. D. F. Braithwaite. R. A.

Cass.M.H. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi. R. Morrison, W. L.
Young. M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put:

That the proposed expenditure agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Hon. Ian Robinson)

Ayes

61

Noes

43

Majority

18

AYES
Adermann, AE. Anthony. J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield. J. M. Brown, N. A.
Bungey. M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife. W. C. Fisher. P. S. (Teller)
Giles. G. O-H.
Good luck. B. J. Groom, R. J. Hall. Steele Harris, G. McD.
Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. C. HOdgman. W. M.

Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.
Hyde. J. M. Katter. R. C. Killen, Sir James
Lloyd. B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean. R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee. I. M. Moore.J.c. l\iixon, P. J. O-Keefe. F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R.
Rocher. A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair, I. McC.
Spender. J. M. Street, A. A Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White. P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell.G. Child.J. Cohen. B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy.M.J. Free, R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke. R. J. L. Holding. A. C. Howe. B. L. Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)

Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J.
Kelly. R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Maher, M. J. Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes. G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous. A. C. Uren, T. Wallis. L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Dobie.J.D.M. Chapman. H. G. P. Viner,R.1.
JulI. D. F. Braithwaite, R. A.

Cass,M.H. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi, R. Morrison. W. L. Young, M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Motion (by Mr Scholes) put:

That progress be reported.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Han. Ian Robinson)

Ayes

42

Noes

61

Majority

19

2546 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

AVeS
Armitage. J I BIe\\,etL N Bowen. L!llnel Bro\\'n. John Brown, Rohert Camrbc1L (; Child. J Cohen. B Cross. M.O Cunningham, B. T Darlmg. F E Dawkins, J S Duffy.M.J. free, R. V. hi". K L H;wke. R J. L Holding. A C Howe, B. l Humphrey,>, B. C (Teller) Hurrord. C. J. Jenkin~, H A.
NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony. J. D Baume. M. E Birney. R J Bourchier. J. \\ Bradfield, J. M. Brown,~. A Bunge]. M. II Burr. M. A. Cadman,A. G Cameron. Don~.tld Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,]. J Coleman. W. P Connolly, D. M Cowan, D. B. Dean. A. G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D hfe.W.C Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giies,G O'H. Good luck.. B. J Groom.R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G McD Hicks. N.J. Hodges.J. C Hodgman. W. M.

Johnson. Les (Teller) Jones. Barry Jones. Charles Kelly. R.J. Kent. L. Kerin. J. C. Klugman. R. E. McLeay. Leo McMahon. Les Maher. M. J. Miidren. J. B. Milton. P. Morris. P. F. Mountford. J. G Scholes. G. G. D. Scott. J l. Theophanous. A. C. Uren. T. Wallis.L G Wesl,S . .I. Willis.R.
Howard. J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde, J. M. Katler. R. C Killen. Sir James Lloyd. B. Lusher. S. A. MacKeller. M. J R. MacKenzie. A. J. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh. D. T. Macphee, J. M. Moore.J.e Nixon, P. J. O-Keefe. F. L. Peacock. A. S. Porter,J. R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury. M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair. I. McC. Spender. J. M. Street. A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson. D. S. Tuckey. C. W. White. P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. C.

Cas.,>,M. H.
Everingham. D. :'\J hcoht. R. Mornson, W. L. Young. M. J.

PAIRS

Dobie. J D. M. Chapman. H. G. P. Viner. R.1. Jull, D. F.
Braith'Waite. R. A.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Consideration interrupted.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Ian RObinson)-Order! It being 10 p.m., I shall report progress.

Progress reported.

ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar)-lt being past 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.

Sir James Killen-Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 require the question to be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (10.2)-1 think it is important that before the Bill is reported to the House certain aspects of these appropriations and estimates which have not been properly and fully debated should be brought to the attention of the Committee. I am seriously concerned that we are about to pass and recommend the passage of an Appropriation Bill which leaves unanswered a number of matters affecting the hopes and aspirations of many thousands of Australians. 1 refer specifically to those people who, this Budget indicates, will not have employment at the end of the year and those many thousands of others to whom no consideration or reference has been made in this Budget or the statements which are attached to it. This Bill is the financial management statement of the Government for the next 12 months. Every provincial city and major town in Australia has significant and serious problems, most of which are tied directly to the failure of the Government's policies in industry, in particular manufacturing industries.
I represent an area which has a very great manufacturing base such as that in Wollongong and Newcastle. People of those cities were here today expressing their anger at the failure of the Government to look after the interests of Australians first. In my electorate most of the industries, as in other provincial cities, are bound up with the success or failure of the Australian manufacturing industry base. It has been gradually downgraded over a number of years first by government encouragement to remove the significant skills of design, testing and manufacturing of initiative products. We now have basic industries under threat. In the next two weeks it is highly likely-almost certain-that the remaining 680 of the original 2,400 employees still employed at International Harvester Australia Ltd, Geelong, will lose their jobs. The Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock) less than two weeks ago, shortly after taking office, in a response to representations made by me and many others, advised that the Government would do everything possible to assist their smooth passage to unemployment benefits. That is what this

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 2547

Government has to offer. That is what is left of an industry of 2,400 people. This year the Government actually reduced assistance to sections of that industry. The Dandenong section of the truck manufacturing industry will be down to, I understand, something like 200 employees within a month. And the Government sits passively by and tells us that it is happy to give every possible assistance, through the Commonwealth Employment Service, to people to register for jobs and apply for unemployment benefit.
Let us get the matter clear. In the Geelong area, which I believe is representative of every provincial city in Australia, some 40 per cent of the junior girls are seeking work, as are in excess of 30 per cent of the junior males. They have no prospects, receive no assistance and benefit from no initiative taken by this Government. The Government says that it is evil to try to do something about providing these people with jobs. Apparently they must make the sacrifices caused by the incompetence, lies and absolute contempt with which this Government treats Australians. We have the Prime Minister running around the country telling us that we must give more jobs to overseas people.
I gave an undertaking not to speak for longer than five minutes, but this is a matter that should be debated properly and at extreme length by this Parliament. However, that will not happen because the Government is scared stiff and wants to close the Parliament down as quickly as it can. The one thing that the Government does not want is the Parliament to operate and its policies to be exposed. In the 1975 election campaign the Liberal Party made certain promises, which I have read. Everyone of them has been repudiated. The price that we are paying for having a government of incompetents remain in office could be witnessed here today. It is the price that is paid by those who have not come to Canberra because they could not afford it. It is the price paid as a result of people being regulated to a state of destitution by a government which protects tax dodgers and does not give a damn about honest Australians.
Remainder of Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Sir James Killen)~by leave~read a third time.
NEW BUSINESS AFTER 11 P.M.
Motion (by Sir James Killen)~by leave~ agreed to:

That Standing Order 103, 11 o'clock rule. be suspended for this sitting.

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.2) 1982-83 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 17 August, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

In Committee

The Bill.

Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (10.6)~ Mr Deputy Chairman~

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the question be now put.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman~Hon. Ian Robinson)

Ayes

61

Noes

42

Majority

19

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield. J. M. Brown, N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian
Cariton.J.J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean, A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M.

Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Kalter, R. C. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. 1. McLean, R. M. (Teller) McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,l.R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. l. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert
Campbell,G. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T.

NOES

Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Maher, M.J.

2548 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.2)

NOleS
Darling. E. f OJWkln~, J. S. Dutf),M.J. Free. R. V Fry, K. L. Hawke, R J I Holding. A. C. Howe, B i .. Humphreys, B. C (T c'ller) Jenkm~. H. A John~on. Le~ (feller)

Mlldren. J. B. Milton. P. Morris,P. F. Mountford. J. G Scholes. G. G. 0 Scott. J. L. Theophanous. A. C Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.l. Willis,R.

Doblc.l. D. M Chapman. H (j P Viner. R. L Jull, D F Braithwaite. R. A

PAIRS

Cass,M. H. Everingham, D. !'.', Jacobi. R. Morrison, W. L. Young. M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,
Original question resolved in the affirmative,
Bill agreed to,
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted,
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton--Leader of the House)~ I seek leave of the House to move the third reading forthwith,
Leave not granted

Suspension of Standing Orders Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-~~Leader of the House) (IO,16)~1 move pursuant to contingent notice:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the remaining stages being passed without delay,

!here will be no discussion of a matter of public Importance tomorrow or Thursday,
Mr ScottYou nasty old man, Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member for Hindmarsh will resume his seat.
, Mr ScottWhat a nasty, childish old man he
IS.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The h,onourable member for Hindmarsh will remain stoIl,ent. The question is that the motion be agreed

~r HOlding_ I raise a point of order on the

motton, Mr Deputy Speaker. The statement made

by the Minister is little better than an abuse of the

rules of the House and a threat to the Opposition

~~~hmlecnhtI.dWo nhoatt

believe is in the interest of has occurred here today,

the sir,

Paris a

MI~g~ace ~o this Parliament and a disgrace to the
, mister m charge of the House. If he cannot run It, he should get out of it.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Melbourne Ports will resume his seat. There is no point of order.
Dr Tbeopbanous-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. There are five people listed to speak on the Appropriation Bill (No, 2), including a speaker from the other side, and we have had no speeches whatsoever.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. The matter he raised is one for disputation not with the Chair.
Mr Armitage-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I ask your guidance. Never before have we seen the spectacle of the Clerk of the House standing beside the Leader of the House telling him what he should do,
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr Armitage-Is it in accordance with Standing Orders for the Clerk to be standing beside the Leader of the House telling him what to do?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Chifiey will resume his seat.
Mr Armitage-It has never happened before.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Chifiey will resume his seat. There is no point of order.
Mr Scott-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. The people on this side of the House tonight have been intimidated, We have been threatened that tomorrow the business that we try to bring on will not be brought on. The childish manner of this Minister for nothing--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~Order! The honourable member for Hindmarsh-
Mr Scott-We were elected just the same as other members--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Hindmarsh will resume his seat.
Mr Scott-We have been told that we will not be allowed to--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Hindmarsh. There is no point of order.
Mr Morris-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I seek your clarification regarding a contingent notice of motion which appears on the Notice Paper. The notice states:
Contingent on any report being received from a committee or any report being adopted: Mr Sinclair to move-That so

Appropriation Bill (No.2)

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2549

much of the standing orders be suspended as would prevent the remaining stages being passed without delay.

The notice makes no reference to the present Leader of the House. I ask whether it is in order to accept the motion moved earlier by the Leader of the House.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-It is in order for another Minister to act as the Minister acted.

Question put:

That the motion (Sir James Killen's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

62

Noes

43

Majority

19

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bouchier. J. W. Bradfield. J. M. Brown. N. A. Burr. M. A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron. Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron. Ian Cariton,J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean. A. G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles. G. O-H. Good luck. B. J. Groom, R.J. Hall. Steele Harris. G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges. J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Hunt. R. J. D. Hyde.J. M. Kalter, R. C. Killen, Sir James Lloyd, B. Lusher. S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R.
MacKenzie. A. J. McLean. R. M. (Teller) McVeigh.D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P. e. Moore,J. C. Nixon. P. J. O'Keefe. F. L. Peacock. A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson, Ian
Rocher. A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair. I. McC. Spender. J. M. Street. A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown. John Brown. Robert Campbell.G. Child.J. Cohen, B. Cross. M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy.M.J. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding. A. e. Howe. B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford. e. J. Jenkins. H. A.

Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating. P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent, R.J. Kerin.J.C. Klugman. R. E. McLeay. Leo McMahon, Les Maher, M. J. Mildren, J. B. Milton.P. Morris. P. F. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren. T. Wallis. L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

NOES

Johnson, Les (Teller)

PAIRS

Dobie, J. D. M. Chapman. H. G. P. Viner, R.1. Jull, D. F. Braithwaite, R. A.

Cass,M.H. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi, R. Morrison. W. L. Young, M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Third Reading

Bill (on motion by Sir James Killen) read a third time.

APPROPRIAnON (PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS) BILL 1982-83
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 17 August, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (IO.27)-A number of points need to be raised about this important Bill. We have had very little opportunity to discuss so many items of the' Budget. This Bill, which refers to the operation of the Parliament itself, is, I believe, a matter of the very greatest importance. The total amount appropriated for 1982-83 is $30,208,000, representing an increase of almost $5m on the amount appropriated in 1981-82. I make the point that unlike the Parliament of Westminster it is still necessary in Australia for the Presiding Officers-you, Mr Speaker, and the President of the Senate-to go cap in hand to the Treasury, a department of state, to seek approval for practical purposes of an executive arm of government for the amount that may be spent in the service of the Parliament itself. That raises the fundamental question as to who is the master within our system-whether the decisions are really made by the Parliament itself over its own autonomy, its own destiny and the way in which it conducts its affairs, or whether we are essentially subordinate to the diligent clerks, the over-mighty subjects in the Treasury, who essentially determine the shape of overall Budget policy for the Commonwealth.
I think we have to ask very seriously whether the Commonwealth Parliament ought not to strike out for itself in the way in which the British Parliament has done in recent years. In the United Kingdom, as you are well aware, Mr Speaker, a parliamentary commission has been set up for some years, presided over by the Speaker and including in its membership nominees of the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition and certain other senior members of parliament. The parliamentary commission determines the overall

2550 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

quantum of the vote, subject, of course, to the consideration of certain political realities. It then submits to the Government the amount that is determined. It is the practice to accept the figure recommended. That figure then becomes part of the Budget. But the determination as to whether one is to get X million pounds or X plus 10 per cent million pounds is not a decision that is made in the Exchequer in Great Britain; it is made by the parliamentary commission itself. Of course, if an absurdly high amount were suggested no doubt negotiations would have to take place with the Cabinet as to how far it was prepared to go. Again that would be a political decision; it would not essentially be a bureaucratic decision.
The parliamentary vote then appears in the Budget as a one-line appropriation, not as we find it in this Bill, as something that extends over a number of pages where the various divisions are set out one by one from the Senate, Advance to the President of the Senate, House of Representatives, Advance to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Parliamentary Reporting Staff, Parliamentary Library, Joint House Department, and Joint Advance to the President and the Speaker. In Britain there is a one-line appropriation as, say, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation in Australia
under the Department of Science and Technology gets a one-line appropriation, and as the Australian Broadcasting Commission gets a one-line appropriation. It means that there is a certain amount of autonomy within the CSIRO and within the Australian Broadcasting Commission to determine how that money in the one-line appropriation is to be spent.
It seems ironic that you, Mr Speaker, do not enjoy and your august office does not enjoy, the power of determination that is enjoyed by the heads of some statutory corporations inside Australia. So there is the one-line appropriation and the parliamentary commission then has an
opportunity to vary as it sees fit the amounts to be spent within the overall limits of the appropriation for the particular departmentsfor Hansard, the Library, the refreshment rooms and the rest. I think there is a great deal to be said for adopting this method here. I am sure that the incoming Labor Government--whenever the election is held-will give serious consideration to this matter, but it is something that ought to have been considered a long time ago.
I know there are a number of people inside the organisation--l have reason to suspect that you, Mr Speaker, are one-who would like this power to be given to the Parliament. It is about time that the Parliament stood up for its own rights within

this organisation. We take for granted that the really effective decisions are taken by the bureaucracy. The situation that we see in the television program, Yes Minister, is, I suspect, uncomfortably close to the truth. I see even the cynical and battle-scarred visage of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) breaks into what I take it is a smile, and he concedes that that is correct.
Mr Cohen-It is like sulphuric acid, that smile.
Mr BARRY JONES-Yes, it is rather. I hasten to point out that I will not speak for the full half hour unless there are very strong representations. I wish to express concern about the very long standing vacancy for the office of Parliamentary Librarian left, of course, since Mr Harold Weir retired a good many months ago. Mr Speaker, as you well know the appointment is made by the Presiding Officers. It is not an appointment by the Executive Government; it is made by the Presiding Officers-yourself and the President of the Senate. This matter is something that we have discussed at various times and it is something in which the parliamentary Library Committee has no role, formal or informal. I must say I expressed some concern, as I have expressed it in the Committee-the view that I have taken and that a number of my colleagues in the Opposition have taken is no secret-that the parliamentary Library Committee ought to have specific terms of reference and a set of riding instructions about what we can and cannot do. I believe we ought to have been involved to some extent in the process leading to the appointment of the Parliamentary Librarian. I expressed concern that one of the reasons, I think, that there has been such a long delay in the appointment of a Parliamentary Librarian has been that there is no common view held as to the precise factors we are looking for in a Parliamentary Librarian.
Dr KlugmanHe should be able to read.
Mr BARRY JONES-That is one view. But there is another view which says that, as we move more and more into an information society, formal literacy in the technical and historical sense may no longer be relevant. As I say we cannot be quite certain what the questions are because they have never really been canvassed before the Library Committee. In the year 1982, we are looking for a Parliamentary Librarian who will be supervising the operations of the Parliamentary Library as we go into the new and permanent Parliament House in 1988.
What are you really looking for in a Parliamentary Librarian, Mr Speaker? Do you want a Parliamentary Librarian who is essentially a book

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2551

man whose tradition is in librarianship, who has had a record perhaps in one of the great State libraries in Australia or overseas, or do you want somebody whose training is not specifically in the traditional book culture-librarianship as we know it. You might want somebody whose expertise is in information systems, whose expertise
may be in electronic automatic data processing, for example. I do not put that by way of recommendation but 1 simply say that obviously it is one of the alternatives open. It may be that what you really want, at this stage, Mr Speaker, is somebody who is a great organiser, somebody who knows a lot about moving into new buildings or somebody who is an expert on staff relations because there have been some problems about staff relations in recent years. It may be that what you really want is somebody who has a background in management training or a background in personnel training rather than somebody trained in librarianship. The point is that what we are precisely looking for now in a Parliamentary Li-
brarian is not a subject that has been canvassed with the Library Committee. There has been no discussion about it. It is taken for granted.
Mr Speaker, you would be in a very strong position to tell us whether it is correct that there has been a split decision between the Presiding Officers-that you, Mr Speaker, have taken a particular view as to the kind of expertise that is required in the Parliamentary Librarian and that Mr President has taken another view. The result is that, because there is this apparent difference of opinion where it has not been possible to finalise the appointment of the Parliamentary Librarian, there has been a long delay. 1suggest that the long delay is causing some harm to the way in which the organisation is run. It does not do anything to encourage morale within the institution. 1 hope that a determination will be made at an early date. 1 hope, Mr Speaker, that the Library Committee will be taken into your confidence.
I find it a matter of some regret that the view is taken that although it is commonplace for people on parliamentary standing committees not to act on a partisan line-our parliamentary committees very rarely divide along party lines-they may divide along other kinds of lines relating to the particular temperament and experience of the members on the committees. We do not very often divide along the sorts of party lines that we divide on here in this chamber or in another place. 1 think that, perhaps, there was a fear that, if the members of the Library Committee were brought into the discussions about how the Parliamentary Librarian was to be appointed, we would suddenly begin to act in a partisan way and would

attempt to push a particular line. 1 do not believe that that is true. I think that, if that fear was held, there was really no basis for it.
The final point I make is to express concern that the report of the inquiry carried out by the Sydney firm, Urwick International Pty Ltd, on the organisation of the Parliamentary Library and its operations is still something which has not been presented to the members of the Library Committee. 1 understand that representatives of the Clerks have had the opportunity to read the report and that the bureaucracy within Parliament House itself has had the opportunity to examine the report. But members of the Library Committee and members of the Parliament generally have not had a chance to read Urwick's report about our own Parliamentary Library, the organisation which, more than anything else, is able to provide us in a comprehensive way with the kinds of material that we need to keep this institution running. Information is the currency, the capital, on which this organisation runs. If we are deprived of access to information the whole parliamentary institution is at risk. Of the three points that I have made, Mr Speaker, 1 am sure that you agree with at least one. I hope to think that my advocacy might have brought you around to the other two as well.
Mr SPEAKER-I interpose to make a suggestion. While the Bill is at the second reading stage it is not possible for me to answer issues that may be raised. If, on the other hand, the motion for the second reading were passed-I do not know whether there is opposition to the second reading-and the Bill went before the Committee 1 could come into the chamber, participate in the debate and answer queries. This is the first time a Bill of this type has been before the House. 1 suggest that it may suit the convenience of all members to give the Bill a second reading at this stage and go into Committee. Those speakers who wish to speak on the Bill could speak during the Committee stage. If that were acceptable, it would give me a chance to participate.
Mr Armitage-Is there an undertaking that there will not be a gag?
Mr SPEAKER-There is no undertaking at all. If the honourable member wishes to pursue that point I will not pursue my point.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo) (lO.43)-1 hope Mr Speaker comes back into the chamber now

2552 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

that he has offered to do so, so that we can address our remarks to him and he can answer the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones)
and the matter I wish to raise. (Quorum formed). I thank the honourable member for Chiftey (Mr Armitage) for calling a quorum so that honour-
able members can listen to this magnificent speech. I am glad also that Mr Speaker had time to change his robes and come into the chamber because the matter I wish to raise, I think on behalf of the Opposition Whip as well as myself, is addressed to him. I refer to the need for this chamber to have closed circuit television for the Whip's offices similar to that supplied to the other place. The other place has successfully acquired
closed circuit television which provides the opportunity for Whips at all times to monitor what is
happening in the chamber. r did raise this matter
with the Speaker by letter but I know how busy he is and obviously he has not had time to reply.

The CHAIRMAN. Order! Honourable members will subdue their level of conversation.

Mr BOURCHIER-- Thank you, Mr Chairman; they do not realise the pearls of wisdom that
I am dropping. If Mr Speaker could see his way
clear to provide the Whips and Deputy Whips of
both sides with a system similar to that acquired
and enjoyed by the Whips of the Senate, I am sure it would add to the manner in which the business of this chamber is conducted.

Mr Les Johnson--It would help me, too.

Mr BOURCHIER-The Whip of the Oppo-

sition signifies his support. I have spoken to him

about this and he is quite sincere in his support.

We both ask the chamber to support this request

and we call on Mr Speaker to provide this equip-

ment from Parliament's appropriation. If the

other House has it then we should definitely have

it, although I raise this matter not for that reason

alone. The purchase of this equipment would

make it much easier for the Whips to monitor the

proceedings of the House at all times and to make

members available so that we do not have prob-

lems with quorums, divisions and so on. Through

you, Mr Chairman, I ask Mr Speaker to give this

matter serious consideration. I trust that when we

trheitsurenqutiopmtheisntcwhialml bbeeir~sntaelxletd.week

or

whenever '

Mr MAHER (Lowe) (10.47)-1 comment on t~e Appr~priation (Parliamentary Departments) Blil essentially to draw attention to the difficulties
of honourable members in this Parliament in having urgent secretarial work dealt with. Prior to my election to the Federal Parliament I served for
eight years in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly. One of the reasons I left the New South

Wales Parliament and contested a Federal seat was my belief that the secretarial facilities for members in Canberra would be excellent. My experience has not been up to that expectation. Members of the Australian Labor Party in the New South Wales Parliament, both in opposition and in government, were served by excellent secretarial facilities. In the national Parliament they are a disgrace. On non-sitting days in New South Wales a pool of four competent secretaries was available at all times to assist Labor members. In this Parliament one secretary is available. She is overworked as she has to serve a much greater number of members. As a new member, I receive a great quantity of representations, particularly as the Lowe by-election attracted a certain amount of publicity. I experienced difficulty in having urgent work of the most important nature-such as urgent electoral work-attended to in this Parliament. The secretaries at Parliament House have been most helpful but they are grossly overworked.
This policy of the Government essentially affects the Opposition because it is a Labor Opposition that generates work. The tradition is that Labor members work harder, they receive the representations and they bring in the work. I have experienced difficulties particularly when there is a public holiday on a Monday in New South Wales and I have to bring all my work from my Saturday interviews to this House.
Mr Ian RobinsonHa, ha!
Mr MAHER-Honourable members on the other side can laugh but they never see constituents. That refers particularly to the honourable member for Cowper (Mr Ian Robinson). He would not know what his constituents look like. I have a very big electorate with a large number of constituents who cannot write in English. They must come and tell me their problems. I know members of the Government despise and have great contempt for ethnic people but I have in my electorate many people who cannot write to me in English.
Those people have to come and tell me their problems on a Saturday morning when I interview or on a Monday at my office. If the Monday is a public holiday it is a disaster for me because I cannot get to my office. I have to bring my work to Canberra and try to dictate my correspondence and send it back to my electorate on tapes because the secretaries in Parliament House are just too busy. I corresponded with the Speaker on 23 June-I tried to see him but he was too busy as it was the end of the session-and eventually on 7

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2553

September he replied that he could do nothing
about the matter.
I am very disappointed in this matter. I believe that the Government has a deliberate policy of
starving the Parliament of funds to hurt Labor Party members in this chamber who wish to make urgent representations to Ministers. I know that we can send telegrams but this is a most wasteful and extravagant procedure. Ministers tend tolose telegrams. For some reason telegrams get delivered to their offices but never get put on their files-they are lost. The secretaries in Parliament House are competent but they are grossly overworked. They have appalling accommodation with five or six secretaries in one room. There is no confidentiality or privacy. There is a total indifference to their problems by the Government
and Government members.
I was most concerned to read in Clancy's column in the National Times on 6 June, criticism of Labor members. That column stated that a particular lobby group wrote to every member of parliament and only three Labor members replied. This is a disgrace. Members are unable to reply to important surveys such as this. The only people to whom we can reply are our constituents. If we receive second class mail we just have to leave it aside. This is a disgrace. This is the national Parliament. We should be able to reply to constituents or to any group seeking support or lobbying Parliament. We are representing the people of the nation. We are trying to set standards for the nation. Yet we cannot even get an urgent letter typed in Parliament House. I have been waiting to raise this matter for some time. It might be very amusing for honourable members on the Government side, who, with one or two exceptions, never write letters, never see constituents and do no electoral work at all.
I am raising this matter because ofletters I have received and because I have heard tonight that my electorate is generating more work for the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) than any other electorate. That is so. My electorate has a very big concentration of people with problems. Ministers do not want criticism or representations. They are frightened of letters from ordinary Australians. They do not want to encourage correspondence from all over Australia to members of parliament. This is a gross scandal of the most serious type. Enshrined in the Bill of Rights were certain standards for members of Parliament. We have the right to free speech and all sorts of very ancient rights which are being restrained by this Government. This Government does not care two hoots about the rights of members. The most basic right we have is the

right to reply to urgent representations. We in this chamber cannot do that. I accuse the Government and all those responsible of stopping us from replying to urgent letters. If a secretary in any government department is away she is immediately replaced. The Government says that we can get someone in our electorate office. If we are lucky we can get someone for a week if we give enough notice. But what is the use of that when we are in Canberra? How can I use a secretary in my electorate at Burwood if I am trying to dictate letters in Canberra?
This matter has concerned me greatly. I believe we have not had a fair go. This Government is a disgrace. It is stifling criticism and it is doing everything possible to stop members of Parliament doing anything in the way of sending on representations and chasing up Ministers. It really-
Mr Fisher-Why don't you bring your secretary to Canberra?
Mr MAHER-One can hear from the way in which honourable members opposite are jabbering that they do not like any criticism in something as basic as this. Ministers do not want members of parliament to make representations to any of them. The State Parliament in New South Wales is a model of perfection. The State Government of New South Wales is a great government which has made many facilities available for members of parliament. What is wrong with this Parliament is that all the staff of the Ministers are housed in Parliament House. They should be housed somewhere else and should not be jammed into this building. There is plenty of room in this building for adequate secretarial assistance if the staff of the Ministers were taken out and put in some executive suite somewhere else. That is one of the problems I wanted to put before the House today.
I want to mention also the staff of the Parliamentary Library. They have impressed me, as they have impressed other speakers, with their dedication and service to members. But, as other speakers have said, the Library is starved of funds. There seems to be a deliberate policy of keeping it understaffed so that the Labor members of this House will not be able to get any assistance with research. The research officers in the Library work very hard. Every request I have submitted to them has been met, but they cannot meet requests quickly. It takes them a few days, perhaps a week, to dig out material of a rather esoteric nature and they are overworked.
There is insufficient funding for the Parliamentary Library. I am appalled at the way this

2554 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

Government is treating the Library. The Government is starving it of funds. It is running a deliberate policy of stopping honourable members from making representations. It is stopping Opposition members from having access to research facilities. I have such an electorate load that, instead of having a research assistant, I have to employ two electorate secretaries. They are flat out all the time. I have a third girl in the office, an Aboriginal trainee. My two electorate secretaries are extremely busy and I have to do my own research or rely upon the Library.

I think it is a disgrace that a nation such as this can waste money on building a new Parliament
House, can waste money on building a second
runway at Sydney Airport and can waste money on all sorts of extravagant schemes all over the
world, such as establishing embassies, organising
Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meetings, pursuing projects that the Prime Minis-
ter (Mr Malcolm Fraser) or any other Minister thinks up, and ministerial trips overseas, but we
cannot get secretarial assistance to write a letter
to the Leader of the House, to Mr Speaker or to a Minister. We cannot get a secretary here to do any sort o~ urgent work. The girls are very cooperative and they try hard. The Serjeant-at-
Arms made his secretary available to assist me to get through my work load when I was newly
elected. I was appalled at the total contempt of
the Government for members of Parliament who are trying to get urgent and important electorate work rep~ied to. I hope that the Australian people who are IIstenmg to this debate tonight can understand some of the problems that the Opposition
members have to face in this chamber. We are fac-
ing a government which has lost touch with the
Australia.n people and which is trying to stop criticism of Itself by cutting down the facilities of honourable members.

The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley) (10.57)-1 wish to

raise briefly a few matters. They are quite serious

ma~ters regarding the Parliament and the insti-

~u~lon of parliament. First of all, 1 should like to
r flng up the question of the new permanent Par-

~a:~nt House. The honourable m~mber for

\es (Mr Les Johnson), who IS slttmg behind

me, as mentioned time and again that the way

c~~ts a:~ ~scalating in this project they will reach

a. eas ,000m. I am afraid I have to agree with

ohifm.11 of:h

It'IhmeefhacaSt dibsetehnad-, otnhee

greatest sweetheart deal in respect of the building

bunUId'IdeeresrntseawnIdaabtnohuarpteetrrhsmeragenetehw nast PhbaaerteelnivaeomrneIynthtoeHnyeouw2s4ea-.nhTto.huerI

stoppage or stop work meeting so far. There have not been any major disruptions. Of course, there would not have been any major disruptions because, as 1said, it is the greatest sweetheart deal of all time.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is forever saying that private industry should not enter into sweetheart deals with the trade union movement. He has said that time and again, and so has the rest of the Ministry. But when it comes to the new and permanent Parliament House it is a different thing. In that case we can enter into a really first class sweetheart deal. 1 think it is magnificent that there has been so little industrial disturbance on the site, but we know why. It is because of that sweetheart deal.
Secondly, I should like to refer to the changing of Standing Orders. Mr Speaker, who is sitting in the chamber tonight, would remember when the Standing Orders were changed so that honourable members could read a full speech and not rely on using copious notes. I really think that that change in Standing Orders was a retrograde step so far as the Parliament is concerned. I think that we no longer have the same cut and thrust in debate. Our speakers are not put in a position where they must train themselves to be able to speak off the cuff. Instead of that, they can come into the House and read a speech. For that reason, we are not getting the great parliamentarians that we have had in the past. I mention just a few-Eddie Ward, a former member for East Sydney and a former Minister; Fred Daly, a former member for Grayndler and a former Minister. I mention the former Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam. I bring in also former members and members of the Government; Sir Robert Menzies was a former Prime Minister, and Sir James Killen is Leader of the House. I also mention the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), Les Haylen the former member for Parkes, the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson)---
Mr Barry Jones-Clyde Cameron.
Mr ARMITAGE---The honourable member is quite right; Clyde Cameron should be mentioned, as should Sir John McEwen, a former Deputy Prime Minister; Reg Pollard, a former Minister for Agriculture in the Chifley Government; and Kim Beazley, a former Minister for Education. I am sorry if I missed out some but I have picked out those who come to my mind. 1 would never suggest the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron), who is sitting over there, would be called a fine parliamentarian. He is one of the muck-rakers of this place. All these people of course operated under a system where they had

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2555

to learn to speak-that is to say, train themselves to speak in this House off the cuff and not from a written speech. I believe that the change in the Standing Orders has been to the detriment of this Parliament. I think it has meant that the standard of debate and the capacity for the cut and thrust of debate has been greatly reduced.
I also draw the attention of the House to another aspect which I think has done a great deal of damage-that is, the increase in the power of the Executive and the bureaucracy over the years. Once again this has meant that the relevancy-I cannot put it any other way-of this Parliament is being steadily eroded. After all, if we are going to speak of Australia being a democracy, it is the elected representatives who should rule this country, who should make the fundamental decisions. But more and more it is becoming-I am talking here of what has happened under honourable members from both sides when in government-a question of the power of the Executive and the power of the bureaucracy. That bureaucracy today is in itself virtually directing the Executive and the Parliament is virtually utterly irrelevant so far as decision making is concerned. Unless this tendency is arrested, the future of democracy in Australia is definitely in doubt.
Finally, I refer to the need for constitutional reform. Once again we come to the question of a democracy. If the events of 1975 occur again where a government elected with a popular majority in the House of Representatives, the seat of government, can be defeated-it is elected once every three years, whereas the Senate is elected once in six years and over half the Senate has not been elected at the last election-and if the situation exists where the Senate can withdraw the power to govern in this House, in the House of Representatives, the seat of government, the chamber where the Prime Minister comes from, then without a doubt democracy is dead in this country. That is the sort of situation with a growing world recession-tonight on PM one hears of it as a depression-where one will find that this generation will not cop it the same way they did during the Great Depression. If those sorts of activities and actions are undertaken we are asking for bloodshed in this country.
Mr TuckeyDon't talk like that.
Mr ARMITAGE-I am not suggesting that. I am making the point that what is happening today and what we saw here today was most unfortunate. The facts are that those people who are put out of work in another depression will not cop it

the same as they did in the last Depression. Accordingly, there could be very serious consequences for the Constitution of this country. This is a situation which arose in 1975. As dramatic and damaging as it was, the Government refuses to take any action to correct the situation. For example, it refuses to take any action to ensure that the Senate is elected at the same time as the House of Representatives or that there is a fixed date for elections. The United States of America and local government have fixed terms, but apparently it must not be so for this Parliament. These very important reforms of the Constitution must occur to protect democracy in this country. That is what we all want. We want this Parliament to work. We want this Parliament to be relevant. Until action is taken on these issues the standards of this Parliament, its relevance and its future could be in jeopardy.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (11.6)--1 address my remarks to a very important institution of this Parliament-the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Public Works. In fact the comments apply to all the committees set up by the Parliament. We recently had what could be described only as an exhibition. The Public Works Committee spent many hours and many thousands of dollars of taxpayers' mon~y making inquiries and finding out the views of Adelaide residents on the introduction of wide-bodied aircraft at the Adelaide Airport and on the proposed international airport. I am on record as saying, and I say it again-I make no apologies-that the Chairman, who is not a member of the party that I represent, was democratic in every sense of the word in trying to find out the views of the people.
He was paid by this Parliament to conduct a public inquiry, to take evidence on the views of the people in that particular area on the possible problems with the introduction of wide-bodied aircraft, which are noisier and of course more of them will be flying to Adelaide, and the proposed international airport. That exercise was the greatest frustration of democracy that I and many of my constituents have experienced. The Chairman, the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey), and the other members of the Committee worked very hard. They went around the electorate during their lunch breaks. I think the public should know that parliamentarians do not have the long lunches that they are accused of having from time to time. The Chairman, with a number of the members, went around to see the problems. Both he and his Committee-bear in mind that the Committee had a majority of

2556 REPRESENT ATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

Government members-brought down a recommendation that the terminal of the international airport be located, say, half a kilometre from the original site that was chosen. The reason for that was that the noise of the engines would be further away from residents; it would face seaward where there were no houses.
The question of executive government has been raised time and again. On this occasion the members of this Committee, the majority of whom were Government members, brought down a recommendation that the terminal site be moved to alongside the domestic terminal. For some reason or other maybe when we are in government we will be able to look at the files to see who told whom what-the Committee recommended that the site be relocated. The Executive, the Cabinet, upsets most back benchers, even those on the Government side. It said no, it would stay where it was proposed originally. If Cabinet had a reason for that it should have told the people who live in that area. Certainly I, as the member representing them, had a right to know the reason.
We went through another exercise. This is what disturbs me. I address my point to what honourable members may call the Speaker in suspense or the Minister who will be, who I hope will reply to these questions. We destroy democracy when we do this sort of thing. We said that we would have public hearings, and they were advertised. The cost of the advertisements can be ascertained and the number of newspapers in which they were published. Members of the public were invited to put submissions on the subject and the committee listened to the submissions, which ran to several thousands of pages. Several days of hearings were involved and several thousands of dollars of expenses. The Committee brought down a recommendation, which was wiped out. Of course, I have referred before to the fact that this side of the chamber endeavoured-in fact, we had five divisions that night-to give the Chairman of the Public Works Committee, a Liberal Party member, the right to speak to that report on Adelaide Airport.
I do not want to rub salt into an old wound. We can try to Score points, but I am talking about d.emocracy, about people's rights, especially the nghts of those on the end of the runway, who have to cop the brunt of it. All those people wanted :-vas a ~air go. We pride ourselves that we believe In a fair go. The people of Hindmarsh, particularly those from Thebarton and Cowandilla
m~d~ their submissions. They were good sub~
missions; Government members should take their time and read them. Those submissions were

tested by the Committee, and anyone who knows Senator Martyr knows that he gives witnesses a bad time. The Committee brought down a recommendation and it was thrown out the window.
I was elected, in just the same way as the right honourable member for Wannon (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the right honourable member for Bruce (Sir Billy Snedden), and so on were elected. We are all entitled to put our particular point of view.
Mr Donald Cameron-How long are you going on? You've had a fair go.
Mr SCOTT-Do not be a twit all your life. If we really believe in democracy, if we believe in the parliamentary system that raises these committees of the Parliament to deal with various issues and spends taxpayers' money to try to get the views of the public, what do we expect if we then throw those views back in their faces after they have been ascertained by the committee and recommendations brought down? If the Government continues to do that then it will get more of what it saw today. That is not a threat. I am quite sure that Mr Speaker knows that I am not making a threat. I am just saying that it is what the Government will get if it persists in ignoring the voice of the people. The Committee invites people to make submissions. They make submissions; the Committee looks at them and says: 'This is good. We will do it this way, we will do it that way'. The airport proposal was not going to cost the Government any more money. It was well costed by the Public Works Committee. Then the Executive-I think this really is the kernel of the problem we all have--made a determination for its own reason. I might accept the reason, but I want to know what it is. The Executive did not give a reason. It just said: 'No, we are going to put the international airport where we have said it is to go'. How can people in a democratic society accept that?
Fortunately, some of the other recommendations of the Committee have been adopted-for instance, those on noise pollution and the various other problems that people who live near airports have, people in Country Party areas, people in Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide. We do not have to be sectarian about it. People who live close to airports have problems, and their problems will be looked at by another parliamentary committee, a joint committee. The Government will have the majority of members on that committeee. How will those people in my electorate feel about putting submissions, knowing how they were treated previously? I made a speech in this chamber on that previous occasion in which I implied that if those people were prepared to make a

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2557

protest, to march--I do not know whether 1 said that they should march on to the airport or the runway-I would support them. Government members should get it into their thick skulls that this is what brings about militancy. The Government is ignoring the voice of the people. One asks them for their views. They give their views. Then some people ignore them and do not say why.
All of us, on both sides, constantly complain that government is run by the bureaucracy, by the public servants. It might be a coalition between the public servants, the departmental heads and the front bench of the Government-the Executive. All of us had better get together and make sure that this kind of system works, because it is the only one that is worthwhile and in which people are asked to put their views and those views are listened to and acted upon. On this occasion it was not going to cost any more money.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (11.15)-1 am glad that the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) referred in passing to the activities outside this chamber today because 1 wanted to raise the question of the need for adequate funding for damage done to the House itself, quite apart from the institution of Parliament, by procedures such as those which occurred today. It has been said that this sort of damage resulted from a few indiscreet people who were not really representing the thrust of the gathering. 1 should like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that the organiser of the rally, Mr Bob Williams, of the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union, is reported in Monday's edition of the Illawarra Mercury to have said this:
We might have to rattle a few doors at Parliament House.
Mr Bob Williams has not at this stage denied that statement in the lllawarra Mercury.
Mr Robert Brown-What are you implying by that?
Mr BAUME-What 1 am implying is very direct. He threatened that they would have to rattle a few doors, and they did so. 1 am suggesting not only that. 1 now quote what Mr Bob Kelly is reported as saying in the Illawarra Mercury:
It might be necessary to storm Parliament House.
Mr Coleman-And they did.
Mr BAUME-And they did, as my honourable friend mentions. Those two statements by these two leaders of this assault on the Parliament clearly demonstrate that this was premeditated and prearranged. It was incited by the leaders of this rally, and it certainly was not an incident that was unrelated to the determined policies of that leadership. That leadership has no interest in the

parliamentary democratic principles that guide this House. That leadership is committed to overthrowing this style of parliamentary democracy. What happened out there was not isolated. It was not something done on the spur of the moment. It was premeditated and was forecast by the leaders of that rally. It is absolutely vital for this House to recognise that there are serious threats to the whole structure of Parliament, the whole institution, by people who seek to destroy it. I suggest that it might be as well to recognise this serious problem. People who seek to destroy the democratic process are the people who, in a
premeditated way, arranged for the doors of this Parliament to be pushed aside.
Sir BILLY SNEDDEN (Bruce) (11.19)-1 decided to speak now and to get your call, Mr Chairman, because 1 did not want to be left in a position in which political debates were going on on the Estimates and the matters to which I wished to refer that were raised in the interests of the Parliament were left unanswered. The speech of the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) was made in the second reading debate but 1 shall deal with it as though it were made in committee. The honourable member for Lalor has not fully understood, with respect, as we may say, the implications of the statement that 1 made earlier today. He indicated that it would be necessary for the Presiding Officers to go cap in hand to the Executive. That is not so. A fundamental element of the arrangements that we have made is that the Presiding Officers will determine the amount of the estimates. Those estimates will go to the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) and the Leader of the Government in the Senate (Senator Sir John Carrick). The Presiding Officers and those two gentlemen will discuss the matters. They will then be agreed.
In fact, I am free to say that the last estimates put forward to those gentlemen were approved as requested by the Presiding Officers. At that time the two gentlemen indicated that there was some need for restraint and asked whether it was possible to have some restraint. 1 examined the estimates, found that there was some area in which 1 could pull back a little, and 1did. But there was no cap in ha\ld, I assure the honourable gentleman of that. Indeed, as he himself pointed out, there is a very considerable increase in the amount of funds of $4.7m. That was on a base of $25m to almost $30m now. 1 must say that in all those years when the estimates were being determined by officers of the Parliament in negotiation with officers of the Treasury, the officers of the Treasury simply had too much power for the officers of the Parliament. For many years the Parliament suffered thereby.

2558 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

As I indicated in the statement [ made today, the first action I took as Speaker was to issue an order that no officers of the Parliament were to discuss estimates with any officer of the Executive departments. That was to be done only by the Presiding Officers. That is what has happened since, and that is what has enabled us to achieve what was contained in the statement and this elevation of the amount of money.
The honourable member for Lalor also mentioned the House of Commons Commission. I must say to him that the system we have now arranged is, in my judgment, a superior system to that of the Commons Commission because the Commons Commission inevitably did become on many occasions an issue between the parties. That was inevitable and is the fact. I had conversations with members of the Commons who were involved in the matter and they feel that their high hopes for the Commons Commission have not been achieved. I must say also to the honourable member that the Senate-the Senate alone and not the joint departments of the House-has basically adopted a committee system which is, in a manner, similar to that of the Commission. That was not favoured by me because I think there are grounds for political controversy, log-rolling or whatever. I think what is necessary is to give to a person who must be trusted--that is, the Presiding Officer-the right to make the determinations on behalf of the Parliament. I hope that I shall always make them free of any bias, as objectively as possible and in the interests of the Parliament overall.
I refer to the one-line appropriation which the honourable gentleman compared with, for example, that for the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. The CSIRO one-line appropriation is a matter which has occasioned very great difficulty to the Parliament, both this House and the Senate. The reason for that is that the Parliament has not felt that it h~s been able to get behind the one-line appropriation and find out exactly what the money has been spent on and why, whereas with the Parliamen.t itself and its own appropriations the Parliament-the members and senators---are in control, because the Presiding Officer is their servant and they can ask any question they like. As the honourable gentleman would know, I have created a departure from normal practice which I am sure he appreciates because he has used it ma~y times, and that is, the right to ask what is basically a question on notice in relation to parliamentary departments. I do my best to answer fully and firmly any question that is asked.

The one-line appropriation we then have is the proper use of a one-line appropriation. It separates into only two categories-that is, recurrent expenses and capital expenses. Within the capital expenses we have complete freedom to move expenditure around as we wish to meet contingencies. The same applies with the recurrent expenses. So, we have in fact a one-line appropriation. We could not have a single-line appropriation for all five departments because of the manner in which they are structured. I have no responsibility for the Department of the Senate which is quite separate from the Department of the House of Representatives. Likewise, the President has no responsibility for the House of Representatives. The Joint House Department also has to be treated separately. I would like the Joint House Department, the Library and Hansard to make up a single department--a support and information department. But that is a matter for the future. I would like the honourable gentleman to understand that I am extremely pleased with the arrangements that we have reached with the executive departments and I think that a step forward has been taken in respect of the role of Parliament in its position as one of the three branches of the tripartition of power.
The honourable gentleman mentioned the Parliamentary Librarian. I will not go further into that matter. The fact is that the President and I have not made an appointment. There are certain reasons for that which I will not go into at this stage because of the privacy of the matter. It is true that I see the Parliamentary Library no longer as a mere library; I see it as opening out into a massive information centre, an intellectual resource centre, for members of parliament. I see a situation evolving in which each member of parliament can ask his own questions on his own visual display unit and get the answers back. This will happen without any doubt. In the planning for the new Parliament House, there is provision--
Mr Barry Jones-We will not need to come here any more.
Sir BILLY SNEDDENYes, we will. I hope that we will never change the practice of this House in respect of divisions and quorums which enables the Opposition always to force a role for itself and to put its point of view.
The Urwick report was a private report commissioned by the Presiding Officers for their own information in respect of the ministerial and Public Service Board role that they play in connection with the three joint parliamentary departments. I

Appropriation (Parliamentary Depts) Bill

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2559

regard that report as private. Whilst there is nothing in it which I would not be willing to have seen, I think it would be a very wrong principle for a private report commissioned for the purpose of assisting the Presiding Officers to make decisions on structure and personnel to be made public.
The honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier) raised points about the provision of closed circuit television for the Whips and Deputy
Whips. I see considerable merit in that proposal and I will certainly look at the matter. If ever I have encountered a person who can push his cause, the honourable member for Lowe (Mr Maher) certainly can. I must say to the honourable gentleman that we have very serious space problems in this House. His solution is to move out ministerial staff. The fact is that it has become common practice in the Parliament over 50 years that Ministers and their staff are located in the House. This practice has become so much a part of our system that the accommodation arrangements in the new Parliament House are based on that precept. However, I do not think we can turn back the clock or have such traumatic reform. I do not think agreement could be reached with everybody on this matter. Therefore, we are in the position of having to make do with the space that
we have in this Parliament until such time as we move into the new Parliament. This will happen in 1988 which is not so long away. However, we have space in East Block which we are using and that arrangement will ease many of the burdens. However, it is necessary to understand that for the time being we are limited in space.
I know that the honourable gentleman has problems in respect of secretarial assistance. I know that he would like more help. However, some honourable members have very serious accommodation difficulties, especially those who have to bring staff to Canberra. I know, for instance, that the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) was sharing a room with three members of his staff-as a shadow Minister he is entitled to an extra staff member in addition to the two he already has. My memory is that four of them were in one small room. It is indeed a very serious problem.
I will do what I can to assist the honourable gentleman but he must understand this point: The staff that an honourable member has is determined by the Remuneration Tribunal. That determination is two staff members. It is not within my power-nor would I wish to subvert the decision of the Remuneration Tribunal--to provide de facto extra staff in Canberra. If I could do so then I would make representations to the Tribunal. I

assure the honourable member that I have already done so. Now that extra accommodation is available I feel that members could have a staff member in Canberra located in accommodation that can be made available in the other block. I think that that ought to be done. I have made that representation to the Tribunal. So far it has not accepted it. I think that it was argued against but it is inevitable and it ought to come about. Although the honourable gentleman pitched his contribution in a political vein I will ignore that aspect. I think what is important is that every honourable member ought to be able to answer the needs of his constituents, which is, of course, the main thrust of what the honourable gentleman said.
The honourable member for Chilley (Mr Armitage) disappointed me. I cannot recall a single occasion when he has done that before. On this occasion he disappointed me because he mentioned that the cost of the new Parliament House had escalated. The fact is that we cannot continue in this chamber and in this Parliament House. The environment is totally unsuitable. We will so hobble ourselves as a parliament and members that we will not be able to discharge our duties in the interests of the Australian people. Therefore we must have a new Parliament House. If it is to last for centuries-I hope the parliamentary system will last for centuries-we ought to have our minds in the far distance. When the Parliament House venture was agreed to it was totally agreed to by all honourable members of the House. One of the things that impressed me most about the project was that some of the most vigorous advocates for it were the people who will never benefit from it because they simply will not be there. So one cannot say that selfishness exists. Indeed there is very considerable altruism by people who are willing to accept criticism for their decision knowing they are in the interests of parliamentary democracy generally. As to the price of the new Parliament House, I can tell honourable members that costs, in static terms, including revision of plans et cetera, have risen only 2 per cent. Scarcely a public structure has ever been built that has been held to such tight rein--
Mr Barry Jones-Except the pyramids.
Sir BILLY SNEDDEN-They had advantages. Members of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Permanent Parliament House will know of the tightness of the strictures that we have maintained in relation to changes in the Parliament House. I suggest that the honourable member for Chilley, who has given distinguished service-now in its twilight-should not allow

2560 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Bank Accounts Debits Tax Bill

himself to depart from his usual high standards of care in these things.
1must say to the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott), with all the goodwill that I can muster, that the issues which he raised relate to a clash of political decision. They are not a matter for the intrusion of the Speaker. However, I will have his speech closely examined to see whether my initial judgment was wrong. If it was I will communicate with him. 1do not wish to comment further on what the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) said. He made his point. 1 should indicate that 1 will not speak again. The speeches which follow will be closely examined in Hansard and 1 will communicate concerning them directly with the honourable members involved.
The CHAIRMAN. I am sure that honourable members and the Committee would wish lY'e to compliment the right honourable member for Bruce upon his admirable behaviour in Committee.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (11.36)-1 want to speak tonight on the question of the Joint House Committee.
Motion (by Mr McLean) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Bill agreed to.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.

Third Reading Bill (on motion by Sir James KiIlen)-by leave-read a third time.

BANK ACCOUNT DEBITS TAX BILL 1982

Second Reading

Debate resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of

the House)-Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 seek your in-

dulge~ce to suggest that there be a general debate

covermg this Bill the Bank Account Debits Tax

Administration B'ill 1982 and the Administrative

Decisions (judicial Review) Amendment Bill

1.982, ~ they are related measures. Separate ques-

ttIhOencsowniclllu, soifoncooufrtshe~

be put on debate.

each

of

the

Bills

at

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Is it the ":ish of the House to have a general debate covermg these three measures? There being no

objection, I will allow that course to be followed. (Quorum formed).
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (11.40)-The Government's handling of this House today has been abysmal. Today the Government ran away from a debate on the economy and now it has brought on at 20 minutes to 12 tax Bills which it doubtless finds somewhat embarrassing and which it is trying to sneak through when there is not much public attention on what is happening in this place. We find this kind of behaviour, to say the least, highly unsatisfactory. If the Government continues to play this sort of game, it will get a pretty tough response from the Opposition for the rest of this week. The Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) has already thrown around threats about not allowing matters of public importance from the Opposition this week. If he continues to play that sort of game, he will have a pretty rough time for the rest of this session. If he wants a more accommodating approach from the Opposition, the Government ought to be much more amenable to reasonable and decent proposals which are raised by the Opposition in a proper way and which ought to be properly responded to by the Government.
The Bills now before the House are quite important measures. They seek to impose a new tax on debits to cheque accounts kept with the banks. The debits to attract the tax will be those where cheques are drawn on a cheque account, where there are periodical transfer payments such as mortgage payments and where there are charges of interest and bank fees to a cheque account. Because the tax applies on debits to cheque accounts, it will apply mainly in the trading bank area, but not solely. Other banks with cheque drawing facilities, such as savings banks which offer limited chequing facilities, will also be sl,lbject to the tax-or at least their customers will. The basic point to bear in mind in regard to this tax is that it is intended to apply not to the banks as such but to their customers. The Government has bent over backwards to ensure that the banks are not obliged to bear this tax. Thus, the principal Bill gives the banks a statutory right to recover the tax from their customers. The banks will levy the tax on each customer's account periodically, pay the tax to the Australian Taxation Office and then seek to recover the tax from their customers. As I see it, the statutory right is not necessary to enable the banks to do this. As we understand it, it is being provided simply to give the banks an argument to use against their customers if they object to being levied by the bank to make up for the tax which is being paid to the Taxation Office.

Bank Accounts Debits Tax Bill

26 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2561

The Government's desperation to assure the banks that they will not have to bear any of the tax is exemplified by a further provision that, if a bank cannot for some reason recover from the customer the tax on his or her debit that it has paid to the Taxation Office, the bank can recover such tax from the Taxation Office. This shows the enormous extent to which the Government is going to ensure that the banks will not have to bear any of the tax. If they cannot recover any of the tax from their customers, they can recover it from the Taxation Office. The Government is making sure that one way or another the banks will not have to pay any of the tax themselves, despite the fact that they have been highly profitable of late.
The fact that it is a tax on bank customers rather than on the banks is a reasonably important point because of the fact that some non-bank financial institutions such as credit unions and building societies are important customers of banks and so will be substantially affected by this legislation. Indeed, they will be more adversely affected by it than the banks. For this reason and for a number of other reasons the Opposition is concerned by this legislation and views it with disfavour. However, we will not oppose it. The tax will supposedly provide an additional $80m revenue this financial year-that is, if it starts from I January 1983, which now seems to be reasonably doubtful-and will provide $200m in a full year. It is a substantive measure the consequences of which this Government will have to live with. We will, however, move a second reading amendment. I now move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that the tax proposed by the Bill is inequitable, discriminatory, inflationary and counterproductive because-
(I) it is proportionately greater on small bank debits and will therefore bear more heavily on less affluent persons,
(2) it discriminates unfairly between financial institutions by bearing more heavily on customers of some nonbank financial institutions than those of savings or trading banks,
(3) it will add to costs of all businesses and will thereby add to inflation, and
(4) it will promote the cash economy and the consequent spread of tax evasion by discouraging the use of cheques.
I want to elaborate on those points. Firstly, in regard to the point about inequity, for reasons that are not explained by the Government the rate of tax proposed will be levied in a way that will ensure that its impact will be much heavier on small value debits than on larger amounts. This is

because the tax has been structured in this way. The rate of tax is IOc on debits up to $99; from $100 to $499 it is 25c; from $500 to $4,999 it is 50c and for $5,000 and above it is $1.
The proportionate impact of that tax is much greater on small debits than it is on large debits, as is shown by the percentages for the various levels that I have just mentioned and the tax that applies. The IOc tax on a $1 debit represents an impact of 10 per cent; on $99 it is 0.1 per cent; on $100 it is 0.25 per cent; on $4,999 it is 0.01 per cent; on $5,000 it is 0.01 per cent. On $1 O,OOO-to take an amount in excess of $5,000-it is 0.01 per cent. Of course, for a much larger amount it would be a much smaller proportionate impact.
It is quite clear from just the range from $1 to $10,000 of debit that the proportionate impact decreases from 10 per cent to 0.01 per cent. So quite a substantial range of impact proportionately is imposed by this tax and it is clearly much heavier on small debits. In that situation it is reasonable to conclude that those small debits would be likely to form a larger proportion of transactions for the less affluent section of the community than they would for the more affluent section, so less affluent people will be affected more heavily than more affluent people and businesses whose payments would be generally of larger amounts. The fact that it has this inequitable impact is nothing unusual coming from this Government. It is not noted for its concern with equity. I note that this fits in with the general pattern of this Government's application of taxation in this country.
Secondly, in regard to the charge that it discriminates unfairly between financial institutions, honourable senators will doubtless have received submissions from credit unions and building societies regarding this matter. There is some justification in their protest as we see it. Those nonbank financial institutions are concerned that being in competition with the banks it is unfair that they should have the tax applied to various transactions of theirs when it will not apply to some similar bank transactions. They are particularly concerned that the savings banks will still be able to make available to their customers bank cheques which are payable to a third party without attracting the tax, whereas the credit unions and building societies, which provide limited cheque facilities for their customers, will be levied for the tax when the non-bank financial institution draws on its bank account to make a cheque payable to a nominated third party on behalf of its depositor. Of course, there are millions of such transactions each year by credit unions and building societies drawing cheques on a bank

2562 REPRESENTATIVES 26 October 1982

Bank Accounts Debits Tax Bill

on behalf of their customer for a nominated third party. Each of thm:e cheques will attract the tax.
With all these cheques attracting the tax this will mean increased charges to the customers of the credit unions and building societies unless those institutions are prepared to carry the cost of that tax, which is highly unlikely because the cost will be substantial. As I understand it, the credit unions have estimated that the impact on themthat is, the amount of tax which they will be levied on the cheques that they draw on behalf of their depositorswill be in the range of $5m to $7.5m. This will add to their costs of operation, increasing them by 4t per cent to 6t per cent. These are not insubstantial amounts. Certainly, I think that it is beyond the capacity of those institutions to carry sums of anything like that order; so they will have to increase their charges, pass on the costs to their CUSlOJ~lers.
That total cost that I have mentioned would include not only the tax on cheques where a customer withdraws funds. Also, the credit unions' operating expenses, when paid by cheque, would attract the tax. So if credit unions seek to meet their operating expenses they will have to draw bank cheu LIes in the main and that will add further to 'their costs. But savings banks will not have such taxes imposed on them. There will be no tax on their payments for operating expenses and no tax on debits to non-cheque accounts held in savings banks, which represent the overwhelming number of savings bank accounts, when customers withdraw funds through a bank cheque either by periodic payment or by one-off payment to a nominated third party. I understand that there is a bank charge of 50c for a bank cheque whereas generally building societies and credit unions provide their cheque facilities free of charge. The net result, however, is clearly to disadvantage credit unions and building societies somewhat compared with savings banks. While debits to most savings bank accounts will not attract the tax, many debits to the accounts of the credit unions and the building societies are now to be taxed.
Thirdly, in regard to the inflationary impact of thIs tax, it will clearlv add to the costs of conducting business by incr~asing the costs of cheques. Most businesses will thereby be affected. Just w?at per~entage of the $200m per annum which wIll. be raIsed by this lax will in fact be borne by busll1esses we are not in a position to say-the Governme.nt has not given us any estimate of that -but It would certainly be a substantial proportion. There is, of COurse the added cost of the banks passing on to their' customers, which inclUde businesses, the costs of the banks themselves

raising the tax-that is, levying the tax and passing it on to the Australian Taxation Office. So there will be further charges in that respect. The inflationary impact of all this will not be enormous but it will certainly be positive. It will add to the inflation rate to some degree. Every little step along the way which the Government makes by such measures adds to the difficulty of getting the inflation rate down and ensures that it remains high, as we have discussed earlier today.
In relation to the fourth point about promoting the cash economy, this is, I believe, a quite serious point and one which I think the Government probably overlooked in introducing this tax. Quite clearly, the increase in the cost of cheques will add a discouragement to the use of cheque accounts. Those cheque accounts are already subject to various bank charges. Let me just indicate the kinds of charges which apply at present. They vary from bank to bank. Let us take the Westpac Banking Corporation which is Australia's largest private bank. It has a quarterly base fee of $4 for a cheque account -and an activity fee of 14c per cheque after the first 30 cheques in a quarter. For an active account quite a substantial cost applies after 30 cheques. There is also a collection fee for each deposit. Therefore, at Westpac one pays 12c per cheque after the first 30 cheques which are deposited to one's account. Stamp duty of tOc per cheque applies in New South Wales. Of course, stamp duty applies in all States except Victoria where the position is to be changed very shortly to a financial receipts tax. Taking the case of Westpac and the other banks, a similar situation applies in that there is a set charge per quarter; there is a substantial activity charge-14c a cheque after the first 30-and a stamp duty as well.
Significant charges already apply to cheques. This tax will add considerably to the cost. of operating cheque accounts by putting an additional charge on each cheque depending on its size. Quite clearly, as various people have commented in the Press, this will discourage the use of cheques. It is difficult-indeed, it is impossible-to say to what extent it will have that effect but it will undeniably do so and thereby encourage more resorts to cash transactions. For instance, businessmen who may previously have made a number of small payments by individual cheques will have a substantial incentive to draw cash where possible, paying tax on one withdrawal from their cheque account, and then make a number of individual payments in cash. There will be tax on the one debit, but because it will be a much smaller proportion than the tax which would apply to a whole series of smaller cheques

Bank Accounts Debits Tax Bill

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2563

will be an encouragement to the businessman to draw cash and then payout in cash instead of drawing a number of smaller cheques. With that system being encouraged there will obviously be more cash payments and there will therefore be an extension of the cash economy, with its associated avenues for tax evasion.
As though we did not have enough problems in this country with tax avoidance and evasion already, we are by this measure encouraging the extension of the cash economy and thereby encouraging the spread oftax evasion. It is obviously very difficult to trace transactions when they are in cash and there are great avenues for the nondeclaration of income. The cash economy is already enormous. The Reserve Bank of Australia has estimated that it represents about 10 per cent of our gross domestic product. On that basis it has been estimated by various people that tax evasion is running at over $3,000m a year. If we take action which adds to that it is clearly a retrograde step to say the least. It is also curious that this step is being taken in the context of a Budget which quite clearly recognised that there was a problem with the cash economy and indicated the intention to do something about it later on. Budget Paper No. I, at page 239, contains the following statement:
A tax deduction at source system is to be applied as from I July 1983 to payments for labour and services not subject to PA YE deductions in industries where evasion of tax on such payments is known to be significant. A White Paper on the proposal provides further details.
As far as I am aware there is as yet no such White Paper, so we do not know exactly what the Government has in mind there. But clearly it is saying that in industries such as the building industry and others where we know that the cash economy and tax evasion are fairly widespread, the Government is trying to introduce a pay-asyou-earn system to do something about it. If the Government does that we will certainly support it but it is ironic to say the least that in a Budget which announces that intention there is also announced a measure which will have the completely opposite effect of encouraging the extension of the cash economy and the greater extension of tax evasion.
Finally, I wish to make one other point. The introduction of this tax means that the Government is interfering-perhaps trespassing is a better word-in an area of tax that has hitherto been regarded as a State taxing area. As I mentioned previously, State stamp duty applies to bank cheques and this has been regarded as an area for which the States have had the taxing rights. The Federal Government, in trespassing into that

area, has done so, as I understand it, without any consultation with the State governments as to its intentions. Certainly, it has had no consultation with the Labor State governments and although it may have had consultation with others I think it is probably true that it did not. I think it is rather deleterious to Federal State financial relations for the Federal Government to trespass on what is and has always been a State taxing area without talking to the States in any way about its intention so to do. The Government has simply announced its intention and said: 'Cop that. We are going to start taxing in this area, which you have always thought was your preserve'. It does not do much to help Federal-State financial relations in this country. For all of those reasons the Opposition does not oppose this measure but certainly expresses great reservations about the desirability of introducing it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Scholes-I second the amendment.
Wednesday, 27 October 1982
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo) (12.0 a.m.)--I should like to draw the attention of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) to a matter that I think is of concern to credit unions and other organisations in this country who will be affected by the Bill. Savings banks are to be exempted from the charge imposed by the Bank Accounts Debit Tax Bill, and it seems to me that that is unfair to those other organisations which are not given the same privilege. I realise that savings banks generally issue bank cheques drawn on their customers' savings accounts. Nevertheless, many of those cheques are issued. The alternative, if one does not have a savings account at a bank, is to have a savings account at another organisation, usually a credit union or perhaps a building society. Building societies and credit unions will be subject to the charge in relation to their cheques but savings banks will not. I find that to be an anomaly, and I ask the Treasurer to take note of the matter. Perhaps at some time in the future, if not tonight, he will bring in an amendment to ensure uniformity in regard to the way in which the charge is distributed.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (12.1 a.m.)-I shall deal briefly with the matters raised by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) and the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier). I should like to take issue with the claim by the honourable member for Gellibrand that because the rate in percentage

2564 REPRESENTATIVES 26 and 27 October 1982

Bank Accounts Debits Tax Bill

terms appears as it does in regard to small transactions that automatically means that the less well off in the community will be affected more by this legislation. The fact of the matter is that there are an infinite variety and number of bank transactions. Something like 20 million bank debits go through the trading bank system in Australia every day. It does not automatically follow that the small cheques are necessarily the cheques of the less well off. Indeed, some of the very largest organisations in Australia issue very small cheques. I do not think the argument the honourable member advanced is quite as compelling as he suggested.
The honourable member raised the question of the cash economy. I would be concerned about anything which gave a spur to the cash economy. I frankly think that objection to this measure has been given more prominence and has been promoted more than in substance it deserves. I do not say that just of the remarks of the honourable member for Gellibrand because others have expressed this view to me. I think the advantages and the security of using cheques are still sufficiently overwhelming not to have the result that the honourable member suggested, and I think this part of the tax has been greatly exaggerated. We are, after all, talking about the introduction of a tax which, in respect of something like 20 million transactions a day, will collect $200m a year. It is not being introduced at a high rate. The great generality of people do not issue a large number of cheques over a period of a month. Is it seriously being suggested that the introduction of this tax will result in a massive drift towards the cash economy? I think that is an exaggeration. If that is the case, I assume that that criticism would be applied in like measure to the taxes introduced by the governments in New South Wales and Victoria, which apply not only to the turnover of banks but also to the turnover of other financial institutions.
Mr Willis-Receipts, actually.
Mr HOWARD-Receipts, I am sorry. I quietly say that I think that comment has been exaggerated. I say to both honourable gentlemen who participated in this debate that I have had in the last few days, and only in the last few days, some very widespread representations on behalf of credit unions and also on behalf of some building s~cieties. Let me make two or three things clear. FIrSt, the tax does not apply to the debits to customers accounts with building societies or with credit unions. In the same way, it does not apply to debits to customers accounts at savings banks.
Mr WillisWe didn't say it did.

Mr HOWARD-I am not saying that you did. I am saying these things because I think some of the criticisms that have been made in respect of the Bill so far as it affects credit unions and building societies has perhaps been misplaced. In that respect savings banks, building societies and credit unions are put on the same footing. If one goes into a credit union and makes a withdrawal of $100 one does not pay the transaction tax. The credit union in turn, because it is a customer of the bank, presumably would deal with the transactions in such a way that every time an individual customer drew something out of a credit union there would not be a separate debit raised with the credit union's bank for each of the transactions; they would obviously be accumulated. So, I think the argument that the credit unions and the permanent building societies will be put at a significant disadvantage will be seen, when it is examined more closely, as not a very strong argument.
We have to bear in mind, of course, that the savings banks in this country, although they operate separately, are all part and parcel and are subsidiaries of the trading banks of this country. In talking about comparability of treatment, the banks would probably argue that they have to carry the administrative burden and the cost burden of collecting this tax, although in respect of individual transactions it is passed on to their customers, but the credit unions and the building societies which are more and more providing facilities analogous to those provided by the trading banks and indeed by the savings banks are freed altogether from any obligation to collect this tax. I think one can make a powerful argument from the banks point of view that may be they have not been treated generously vis-a-vis the credit unions and the building societies.
The other point I make is that until now~1 agree that there has been the beginnings of a change in this trend, and it is a change that the Government will watch very carefully-the credit unions could be seen to have been more in competition in the provision of cheque facilities with the trading banks. Indeed, at the same time, the comment applies in respect of the permanent building societies facility of paying customers accounts by their own cheques. I think it can fairly be argued that that facility is more in competition with the facility provided by the trading banks rather than the savings banks. In more recent times there has been greater resort by the savings banks towards the payments of customers accounts and so forth by the issue of bank cheques. Customers have increasingly used that

Bank Accounts Debits Tax Bill

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2565

facility, I understand. It is obviously a trend that has to be kept in mind.
I point out to the House, of course, that if the tax were to be imposed on bank cheques we would have to discriminate amongst different classes of bank cheques. There are really three classes of bank cheques--a bank cheque purchased on a normal account, a bank cheque issued by the bank itself in respect of its own transactions and a bank cheque purchased across the counter. It would add, of course, a very significant complexity to the legislation if we sought to disciminate amongst those classes. If we introduced a tax on bank cheques one would have to discriminate amongst them, otherwise a bank cheque purchased against an ordinary current account would, in fact, be taxed twice. What happens in practice is that if a cheque is issued on an ordinary trading account it creates a debit in the account which is liable for tax. A further tax on the bank cheque itself would mean in that particular transaction two incidences of the tax. I have, however, arranged to see on Thursday representatives of the credit union movement. The Government will listen very carefully to those representations. I think it is apparent from the remarks that I have made that at this stage the Government does not share all the concerns that have been expressed. I will want to listen to the credit union representatives and to any building society submissions that are put on the matter.
At the very least I say to the House now that the operation of the legislation will be watched very carefully. We would not want, because of changed circumstances and usages, the building societies and the credit unions to be at any significant disadvantage. I think if one examines the whole gamut of the legislation, particularly the fact that the trading banks will have the responsibility of collecting the tax--a responsibility that, in their mind, means that they are at a distinct disadvantage compared with building societies and credit unions--it is worth my while saying that in the discussions I have had with the banks on this subject they have complained to me that this tax discriminates against them in favour of the credit unions and building societies. It would perhaps complete the picture if I were to note that the credit unions and building societies are putting the opposite point of view. I will move an amendment during the Committee stage but I will not say anything on it at this point. I thank the honourable member for Gellibrand for the offer of Opposition support on this measure.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-- Treasurer) (12.12 a.m.)--I move:
Clause 4, page I, line 13, omit 'I January 1983', substitute 'a date to be fixed by Proclamation '.
When the Government's decision to introduce a tax on debits to cheque accounts was announced in the Budget. I indicated that the tax would apply from 1 January 1983. Since then it has been put to the Government that there would be serious difficulties for some of the banks, on which primary responsibility for payment of the tax is to fall, in having in place by that date the necessary systems to cope with their administrative functions in relation to the tax. The writing and testing of the necessary computer programs is, of course, a major task. In addition, some banks have been under particular strain in relation to recent bank mergers and also because of the imposition of a number of State taxes.
The Government accepts that there may be a valid case for allowing more time for banks to prepare for the commencement of the tax. It is therefore proposed to delete the present commencement date of I January 1983. By this amendment the tax will commence to apply from a date to be fixed by proclamation. The Government will, of course, in its discussion with the banks seek the earliest possible date for the commencement of the tax, consistent with practical convenience. I have had discussions with the chief executives of the banks regarding this matter and I am satisfied, as is the Reserve Bank of Australia on separate inquiry, that the difficulties are of a purely practical kind. They result from the very large number of debits which are involved and the fact that it is a stepped rate tax. If it were a flat rate tax in respect of all transactions, there would not be the same difficulty; but I think that a change of that nature would have undesirable regressive features. Naturally, we will be seeking from the banks ,he earliest possible implementation date. This change will provide a flexibility that did not exist under the Bill as originally presented.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (12.16 a.m.)--The Opposition does not appose this amendment. I simply note that the Government is expecting to get $80m in this year's Budget from the operation of this tax. If the tax is now to operate from some time after 1 January, presumably the Government will raise somewhat less than $80m-- something like $13m less for every month that the Government fails to get the tax into operation after I January. It would be interesting to know

2566 REPRESENTATlVES 26 and 27 October 1982 Bank Account Tax Administration Bill

whether the Treasurer has any idea whether the delay before the Act is proclaimed will involve one or two months or even three months.
Amendment agreed to.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with an amendment; report--by leave- -adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard)-by leaveread a third time.
BANK ACCOUNT DEBITS TAX ADMINISTRATION BILL 1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (12.19 a.m.)- by leave-I move:
(I) Clause 3. page 2, after the definition of 'Commissioner', insert the following definition:
, "company" means a body corporate, a partnership or any other unincorporated association or body of persons;'
(2) Clause 6, page 7, line 9, omit 'of 6 months commencing on I January 1983', substitute 'commencing on the date fixed by Proclamation under paragraph 4 (a) of the Bank, Account, Debits, Tax Act 1982 and ending on 30 June 1983'.
(3) Clause 12, page 10, after sub-clause (I), insert the following sub-clause:
'( IA) Sub-section (I) does not apply in relation to a taxable debit made before the date fixed by Proclamation under paragraph 4 (a) of the Bank, Account, Debits, Tax Act 1982.'.
The purpose of the first of the proposed amendments is to remedy a technical deficiency in the Bill which, in some places, refers to a company without also saying, as was intended, that the term ?as the meaning which the amendment will give It. An example is the definition of resident of Australia in sub-clause 3 (2) of the Bill used in associated anti-avoidance measures against misuse of Overseas bank accounts. The problem will be met by incorporating in the list of definitions contained in clause 3 a definition of 'company'. The definition requires references to a company to. be read, except where a contrary intention is eVIdent, as including references not only to a body Co~porate but also to a partnership or to any other unmcorporated association or body of persons.

The other two amendments relate to the Government's decision regarding the commencement date of the new tax on debits to cheque accounts. The first of these proposes to amend clause 6 so that the requirement on the Commissioner of Taxation to report annually to the Parliament on the working of the new legislation will in the first instance apply for the part of the 1982-83 financial year commencing on the date on which the tax comes into effect, that is, on proclamation. By the third amendment, by which a new sub-clause will be inserted in clause 12, the banks responsible for paying the new tax will be relieved of any obligation to lodge returns and pay tax in respect of any period prior to the day proclaimed. I commend the amendments to the Committee.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (12.22 a.m.)-The Opposition does not oppose these amendments.
Amendments agreed to.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard)-by leaveread a third time.
ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS (JUDICIAL REVIEW) AMENDMENT
BILL 1982
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time.
ADJOURNMENT
Demonstration at Whyalla-Mr A. McAdam-Capital Territory Health Commission-Demonstration at Parliament
House-Mr K. Derley
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr WALLIS (Grey) (12.24 a.m.)-Tonight I wish to raise a matter that I feel should be aired. Last Friday there was a demonstration at Whyalla during which unionists were arrested. Honourable

Adjournment

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2567

members should hear what led up to this issue. An announcement was made a few weeks ago that the Prime Minister (Mf Malcolm Fraser) was to visit WhyalIa. Just after that announcement was made there was also an announcement by the Broken HilI Proprietary Co. Ltd in WhyalIa that 340 jobs were to go as BHP would cut shift work. Of course, this caused quite a bit of concern in WhyalIa. As a result, and in view of the announcement that the Prime Minister was to visit
WhyalIa, the Trades and Labour Council in that city approached me to see whether some talks with the Prime Minister could be arranged with the Prime Minister's office. On Wednesday, 20 October, I was informed that it was not possible for Mr Fraser to meet the representative of the Trades and Labour Council in WhyalIa because of lack of time but that the visit was to take place on Friday, 22 October, on which day Mr Fraser turned up in Whyalla. About 200 people were at the airport to protest at the grave economic situation existing in WhyalIa and also to enable the Secretary of the Trades and Labour Council of that city to present a letter to the Prime Minister. The police were there in full strength. I understand that the star force from Adelaide was on duty. When the Secretary of the Trades and Labour Council endeavoured to move forward to present a letter to the Prime Minister, he was
stopped. When he tried to push past the police they grabbed him. He was apprehended and placed in a police car which took him away.

Many of the people at Whyalla were highly incensed at what the police had done and efforts
were made to block the police car. In the course of
what happened after that other trade unionists were arrested. This whole situation need not have
arisen in a city which had just been informed of
loss of jobs, et cetera, had the Prime Minister been
prepared to allow 10 minutes or a quarter of an
hour of his time to meet the trade union officials in that town. If he had done that I am sure the situation would not have arisen. The crowd was highly
incensed and as a result there were some altercations. In the few minutes I have left I should
like to refer to the letter which the Secretary of
the Trades and Labour Council at Whyalla endeavoured to present to the Prime Minister. The letter states:

The Prime Minister, The Hon. M. Fraser.

21 st October 1982

Prime Minister,

Through the Trades and Labour Council of Whyalla, we
wish to make the following submissions on behalf of steel workers, workers in associated industries, and the citizens of Whyalla.

That your Government take immediate action in calling on BHP. to declare a moratorium on further cutbacks in its workforce.
That assistance be given to the Australian Steel Industry through Federal Government intervention, which would be no less favourable than their counterparts in other steel producing countries.
That immediate measures be undertaken to halt the imports of steel products which can be produced in Australia.
That Government funds be made available to create labour intensive industries into the Whyalla region, as an alternative to the Steel Industry.
The above submissions are made to you as a genuine attempt to halt a repetition of the closure of the Whyalla Shipyards in 1978, at which time 1,800 jobs were lost to the City of Whyalla.
The present trend regarding job opportunities for people in, and also those about to enter the workforce in Whyalla, is to say the least, grim!
We have recently lost the manufacturing industry of Northern Engineering, which at its peak production, employed 140 workers!
Titan Manufacturing (BHP.) is due to cease operations towards the end of November 1982, which at its peak employed in excess of 60 people.
If the present trend continues, the City of Whyalla will stagnate and eventually deteriorate, which would be a shocking indictment of a Government that assisted in bringing people from all parts of Australia as well as the world, to work for a shipbuilding and Steel Industry; one that no longer exists and the other that has reduced its workforce by in excess of 1,100.
lt should be pointed out to you Prime Minister that at the completion of the Stony Point project, less than 60 people will be employed and of these 20 would be staff positions.
We are hopeful that you as Prime Minister will now intervene and take the above submissions into serious consideration.
Yours faithfully,
D. ELKINS,
SECRETARY T.L.c. WHYALLA
That is the letter which the police would not allow Mr Elkins, secretary of the Whyalla Trades and Labour Council, to present to the Prime Minister. Had they done so, the problems that resulted because of the refusal of the police to allow that letter to be presented to the Prime Minister would have been obviated.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (12.28 a.m.)~1 want to refer again to the sacking by the Age of the Melbourne journalist Anthony McAdam, which I discussed last week. This matter was also the subject of my personal explanation this morning in answer to the editor's note in the Age last Friday in which he dismissed the suggestion that the McAdam sacking looked like a leftist political operation. I remind the House that the Age for some time suppressed discussion of this matter in

2568 REPRESENTATIVES 26 and 27 October 1982

Adjournment

its columns. When Mr Terry lane, of the Australian Broadcasting Commission, was removed from one program, the Age was indignant that the ABC would not discuss the matter on air and it opened its columns to the discussion. But not in this case.
In his editor's note last Friday, the editor of the Age said that he had received threeonly threeletters saying: that McAdam had been sacked for political reasons. He did not say that two of the three letters between them were signed by 14 writers, all prominent academics and people well known in public life. The editor's note of last Friday stuck to the idea that the sacking was due to an economy drive, despite the fact that there can be no economy when one freelance writer is replaced immediately as radio critic by another, as McAdam was, in this case, replaced by Mr Barry Hill. One can see plainly that Mr Hill is politically more acceptable to the left than Mr McAdam. Where is the economy in this?
There are some other aspects in which the House may be interested and which I naturally could not mention in my personal explanation this morning because it would have meant debating the issue, which would have breached the Standing Orders in a personal explanation. McAdam's troubles began some 18 months ago when he began occasionally to criticise the so-called community radio stations 3CR and 3RRR for their Palestine liberation Organisation and Irish Republican Army terrorist propaganda and some Australian Broadcasting Commission programs for leftist propaganda in general. It was then that there began the various forms of harassment designed, I believe, to insult, drive out and ultimately silence McAdam, a conservative media critic who could not pass the leftist ideological tests.
The harassment took a number of forms. One was the repeated pUblication by the editor of the Green Guide of letters which went beyond the rough and tumble to become simply insulting to McAdam. He was called a racist, a sexist, a mercenary, an Australian Security Intelligence Organisation man, an apologist for imperialism and an apologist for apartheid, and his work was described as professionally incompetent and no~onously inaccurate. I might add that the apartheid 1I1sult was particularly hurtful since McAda:n had been, in earlier years, arrested in RhodeSia for his attacks on racism and had to escape from that country at night into Botswana.
~cAd~m was not permitted by the Green GUide editor to correct misstateme~ts of facts in

these letters before or in most cases after publication, contrary to what the editor implies is Age policy in his editor's note of last Friday. When someone is being defamed in this way week after week after week he must begin to feel that the editors are trying, however crudely, to tell him where they want him to go.
Next McAdam was then censored. The assistant editor of the Age wrote to him in July 1982 instructing him not to express his political opinions in his columns in future, a restriction not imposed on leftist writers and one which was in any case impossible to observe if there was to be a sensible judgment of programs concerning PlO or IRA terrorists.
I should also mention a letter which McAdam received from the editor in September asking him to comment on reports that the editor had received that he, McAdam, had at a public meeting attacked members of the Age staff. I cannot know what was in the editor's mind but McAdam, reasonably enough, in my view, drew from the aggressive and disdainful tone of the letter the implication that if the reports were true the Age would dispense with his services. McAdam says he felt it was a threatening letter. As it turned out, the reports were easily shown to be false and ridiculous and nothing more was heard about the matter. However, in October McAdam was sacked. That is the end of the story except that the central figure, the editor of the Green Guide, has now been promoted to Deputy Chief of Staff and McAdam has been replaced in the Green Guide by a journalist of pronounced left wing views, an admirer of Noam Chomsky. I repeat that the whole thing looks to be a leftist operation to get McAdam. It ill becomes the editor of the Age to dismiss this understanding of events as scurrilous conspiracy mongering, and to pretend everything is to be explained by an economy drive. Age readers used to expect better than that.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (12.33 a.m.)- Tonight I want to raise a matter of grave concern in relation to very serious failures in personnel management practices of the Capital Territory Health Commission. In October last year I asked the then Minister for Health the following question on notice:
Is it the practice of the Capital Territory Health Commission to compile dossiers on staff, hy means of tape recordings and interviews, which are alleged to contain damning evidence on individuals and to which individuals have no access.
On 19 August, 10 months later, in Hansard, the present Minister for Health (Mr Carlton) answered the question with one word-no. One may well wonder why that answer took so long to

Adjournment

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2569

produce. Many Capital Territory Health Commission employees and their union, the Hospital Employees Federation of Australia, had suspected that secret personnel files were being maintained and used in staff selections and appointments and that there were, in fact, two sets of books. In December 1981, in the course of an action on behalf of one of its union members, HEF officials discovered that an unofficial file had been kept on this member. Officials of the HEF were able to view this member's secret file, which was amongst hundreds of others. After the secret files were discovered, further complaints were made to the Health Commission and further assurances given. Hedley Rowe, President of the HEF, was informed by Mr M. Sexton-Assistant Commissioner Personnel and Services, at the Capital Territory Health Commission-that Dr Doust, the Chairman of the Health Commission, had directed both Commission hospitals that only the official personnel file was to be kept in existence and that two sets of books were not to be kept. That has since proven not to be the case. The following is printed in the Capital Territory Health Commission Staff Bulletin issue No. 36/82, under 'Registry Procedures, Confidential Files', after the answer of the Minister for Health in August:
No Commission Officer may request a confidential file to be created without the approval of an Assistant Commissioner or above. It is considered that far too many confidential files are currently being created.
It is clear that the practice of creating secret files is rife and is being continued at present despite the negative answer given to this Parliament by the Minister for Health only two months ago. Yesterday in my electorate office I interviewed a nurse very distressed about the fact that her probationary period had been extended because of one adverse assessment against which she apparently had no means of defending herself. During discussions with the personnel manager and the Hospital Employees Federation officials the woman's file was inspected. In four years there was only one detrimental report. But there was an even more disturbing development, and I will quote from this woman's letter to me. She stated:
I went through my file thoroughly and found an envelope marked -Confidential'. The Personnel Manager said I couldn't open it and he opened it instead. I was deeply distressed by this because inside were seven nude photos of me. My exhusband had tried to get me sacked around September 1979 by dropping nude photos through the post to the hospital and as far away as Goulburn and Wollongong. The police were called and as far as I knew they were given the photos. I certainly didn't expect them to be kept on my file for over two years. Why were they on my file? Who allowed them to be there? Who typed the envelope? Who put them in the envelope? How many times did people look at them and retype another envelope? Were they going to be used against me at a

later date? If my file contained such private non-nursing material how many other files contain scurrilous information?
This is a scandalous situation. The maintenance of secret files on Capital Territory Health Commission personnel has obviously not stopped. I ask the Minister to provide an immediate explanation to this House.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (12.37 a.m.)- Today, as has already been commented upon, we had a situation in which the front doors of Parliament House were smashed by a group of 'protesters representing the jobless'. I put that in inverted commas because I doubt sincerely that many of those people who attended today were in fact jobless. In fact, I would say the vast majority of them held employment in the union movement and were not the people who came here to protest about their lack of work. In other words, they were paid representatives. I have sincere doubts that all of those people were representatives of the relevant unions.
Mr Les Johnson-What would you know about it?
Mr TUCKEYI have eyes and I am not a fool. I can look around the place any time. I like.
Mr Les Johnson-That is debatable.
Mr TUCKEY-The honourable member can debate it but I have evidence. I know myself better than he does. I challenge him to prove to me that all those people out there today were in fact workers from the steel and coal industries. I say that some of them were seamen. It is most remarkable to me, as I mentioned in this place on a previous occasion, that a burden of $30m per annum is levied on the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd by the seamen of Australia. I do not think it is very difficult to say that 1,000 plus land-based jobs are stolen from the iron workers and coal miners of Australia by seamen who choose to work five months of the year. The figure I have cited is an extension of the Industries Assistance Commission report, which quoted an amount of $25m in cost per annum to BHP as a charge of the Navigation Act in 1977. It is also interesting, with all this talk of unemployment, pressure and no work being all the Government's fault, to look at page 35 of the Australian Financial Review of today's date. Under the column 'Defence' is an article headed 'Navy, builders still in ship stalemate'. It states that the Department of Defence and the Vickers Cockatoo Dockyard:
. . . still have not produced agreement on a revised price and delivery date for the Royal Australian Navy's new supply ship.
To be called HMAS Success, the ship is about two years behind schedule and will substantially overshoot its original delivery target of next July.

2570 REPRESENTATIVES 26 and 27 October 1982

Adjournment

The price ~Iso has climbed steeply beyond its quoted October, 1979, contract price of $68.4m.
In another part of that article it is stated:
The Australian Financial Review reported more than two months ago that the Navy and Vickers were locked in what were then described as the "final stages" of talks.
Senator Messner said it had been difficult to attract suitably-skiJled workers to the project, and Vickers had been targeted in a 35-hour week industrial campaign last year.
That is the news today while people are trying to break down the door of Parliament House. The members of that group know as well as we all know that no member of the public is admitted to the building by the stairs of Parliament House. Members of the public are admitted through the security area. Those people who attacked the door today for publicity could have entered the building peacefully through the security area at the bottom of the stairs. They did not choose to do that because there would have been no publicity. It is time that the Press in particular asked who those protesters were today. Were they the genuinely unemployed who concern us all or were they just a group of people who specially came here? The Press quoted the numbers as being as high as 20,000. I thought it was a very small group, one that seemed to lose interest particularly quickly after it had kicked the door in. I protest about and condemn that action. I think it was something about which Australia can have no pride. I say again that it was organised by people who are doing very well-the merchants of industrial relations, as I refer to them. They are people who earn a living from industrial turmoil. I might add that there are people of the same type on the other side, in the employer group. I resigned from the Confederation of Western Australian Industry the other day because I saw that organisation as being a merchant of industrial relations.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chiftey) (12.42 a.m.)-I WIsh to bring a very serious matter before this chamber tonight. On 22 July this year I wrote to ~he Attorney-General (Senator Durack) conveyIng a resolution of the Chiftey Federal Electorate Council of the Australian Labor Party which read as follows:
This F.E.C. _
That i~ Federal Electorate Council--
is appaJled at reading a report in the Sydney Morning Herald °Sn the 16th May, 1982, that the right-hand man of Murray
tewart Rlley-
I interpose there. I think Murray Stewart Riley would be well known for his activities in the drug game. He would be one of the most notorious

people, so far as that industry is concerned, that industry which is doing so much damage, particularly to our young people. I continue with the resolution. It states:
Kenneth Derley -
In other words, he was a right hand man of Murray Stewart Riley-
was released from Berrima Jail on 15th April, 1982 on orders from the Federal Attorney-General, Senator Durack, after serving only three years of an 8, years sentence-Derley being sentenced in February 1979 for smuggling 4.6 tonnes of cannabis worth $46m into Australia in 1978.
That is the resolution. I say to the Attorney General that his comments on this whole matter would be appreciated. I got the following reply dated II October 1982 signed for the Attorney General by the Acting Attorney-General (Mr N. A. Brown). The first paragraph of the letter acknowledges my letter, refers to it and so on. The second and third paragraphs read as follows:
Mr Derley was sentenced by the District Court at Sydney, on 2 February 1979 to a term of 8, years' imprisonment with a non-parole period of 3 years 10 months expiring on 31 December 1982 for conspiring to import prohibited imports (cannabis) contrary to paragraph 86 (1) (a) of the Crimes Act 1914. His Excellency the Governor-General granted Mr Derleya licence to be at large from 15 April 1982.
I repeat, IS April 1982. I do not blame the Governor-General. He acts on the recommendation of the Attorney-General, who also acts on recommendations from his Department. I shall deal with that matter shortly. The letter continues:
Having regard to privacy and other considerations it is not ordinarily appropriate for the reasons why the Commonwealth prisoner is or is not released on a particular date to be made public.
I repeat, Commonwealth prisoner; not a State prisoner. In other words, there is a complete cover-up. We have heard of call-girl rackets in the Crown Solicitor's Office in Perth. We have heard of other gross inefficiencies in the Attorney General's Department, including in Canberra. I can only say that obviously, as the Acting Attorney-General refuses to give the reasons for this release well ahead of time, something is being covered up, and it is up to the Acting Attorney General to come into the Parliament to tell us what it is about. Is he protecting Senator Durack or is he protecting some other officers of the Department who have made the recommendations to him for the release of this criminal? Bear in mind that this is a government that is supposed to be trying to protect the people of Australia against the drug rackets. A racket is being covered up. It is time that we were told what it is all about.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Papers

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2571

House adjourned at 12.47 a.m. (Wednesday)
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Mr N. A. Brown to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Mr Hunt to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969. the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report:
Construction of new building for the Australian Film and Television School. North Ryde, N.S.W.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 26 October 1982:
By command of His Excellency the Governor-General:
Treaties-- Text of-
Which have been signed by Australia and which require further treaty action by Australia before the treaty can enter into force for Australia-
(I) Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh for the exchange of Money Orders, done at Dacca on 15 September 1981.
(2) Agreement on Maritime Delimitation between the Government of Australia and the Government of the French Republic, done at Melbourne on 4 January 1982.
(3) The Sixth International Tin Agreement, concluded at Geneva on 26 June 1981, signed for Australia on 4 February 1982. The agreement entered into force provisionally on I July 1982.
(4) Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons which may be deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects, with annexed protocols, concluded at Geneva on 10 October 1980 and signed for Australia on 8 April 1982.
(5) Agreement on Economic and Technical Co-operation between the Government of Australia and the Government of the State of Kuwait, done at Canberra on 22 April 1982.
To which Australia has become a party by signature-
(I) Exchange of Notes signed at Canberra on 22 September 1981 constituting an Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of Japan concerning co-operation on the project for the Geostationary Meteorological Satellite-2 System. The agreement entered into force on 22 September 1981.
(2) Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the People's Republic of China on a Program of Technical Co-operation for Development, done at Beijing on 2 October 1981. The Agreement entered into force on that date.
(3) Protocol on Economic Co-operation between the Government of Australia and the Government of the People's Republic of China, done at Canberra on 22 September 1981. The Protocol entered into force on that date.

(4) Subsidiary Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of Japan concerning Japanese Tuna Long-line Fishing, done at Canberra on 29 October 1981. The Subsidiary Agreement entered into force on I November 1981.
(5) Exchange of Letters signed at Canberra and Wellington on 18 November 1981 constituting an Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of New Zealand further extending the Agreement on Tariffs and Tariff Preferences of 25 November 1977. The Agreement entered into force on I December 1981.
(6) Exchange of Notes signed at Canberra on 17 February 1982 and at Waigani on 17 March 1982 constituting an Agreement on the continued application of the Agreement on Trade and Commercial Relations between Australia and Papua New Guinea. The Agreement entered into force on 17 March 1982.
(7) Agreement between the Governments of Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America in cooperation with the Committee for the Co-ordination of Joint Prospecting for Mineral Resources in South Pacific Offshore Areas relating to the conduct of a Joint Programme of Marine Geoscientific Research and Mineral Resource Studies of the South Pacific Region, done at Suva on 12 March 1982. The Agreement entered into force on that date.
(8) Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of Fiji for Air Services between and beyond their Respective Territories, done at Suva on 24 March 1982. The Agreement entered into force on that date.
(9) Exchange of Notes signed at Singapore on 23 June 1980 and 14 April 1982 constituting an Agreement amending the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the Republic of Singapore concerning the provisions of treatment in Singapore hospital for Asian residents of Christmas Island. The amending agreement entered into force on 14 April 1982 with effect in some respects from I April 1980.
(10) Exchange of Notes signed at Canberra on 18 February and 18 June 1982 constituting an Agreement amending the Agreement between Australia and New Zealand Relating to Air Services. The amending Agreement entered into force on 18 June 1982.
(11) Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of the United States of America relating to Co-operation on Antitrust Matters, done at Washington on 29 June 1982. The Agreement entered into force on that date.
(12) Exchange of Notes signed at Canberra on 12 July 1982 constituting an Agreement amending the agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of Sweden on Conditions and Controls for Nuclear Transfers for Peaceful Purposes. The amending Agreement entered into force on 12 July 1982.
Which have been signed and in respect of which Australia has taken further treaty action to bring them into force-
(1) Agreement for the Exchange of International Money Orders between the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and the Government of Australia, done at Manila on 14 September 1981. The Agreement entered into force on 1 July 1982 in accordance with an exchange of notes signed at Manila on 3 June 1982 and 19 June 1982.

2572 REPRESENTATIVES 26 and 27 October 1982

Papers

(2) Agreement on Trade, Economic and Technical Cooperation between the Government of Australia and the Government of the Sultanate of Oman, done at Canberra on 20 October 1981. The Agreement entered into force on 13 February 1982 upon an exchange of notes signed at Muscat on 29 December 1981 and 13 February 1982.
(3) Final Acts of the XVlllth Congress of the Universal Postal Union, done at Rio de Janiero on 26 October 1979, General Regulations of the Universal Postal Union and Final Protocol, Universal Postal Convention and Final Protocol, and Detailed Regulations of the Universal Postal Convention and Postal Parcel Agreement and Final Protocol, and Detailed Regulations of the Postal Parcels Agreement. The Acts entered into force generally on I July 1981. Approval deposited by Australia on 2 November 1981.
(4) Convention on Psychotropic Substances, done at Vienna on 21 February 1971 and ratified by Australia on 19 May 1982. The Convention entered into force for Australia on 18 August 1982.
Which Australia has accepted or to which Australia has acceded-
(I) Constitution of the World Health Organization, signed at New York on 22 July 1946. An amendment to Article 74 was adopted by resolution WA 31.18 of the Thirty-first World Health Assembly on 18 May 1978 and accepted by Australia on 29 September 1981. The amendment is not yet in force.
(2) Amendments to the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil, 1954 (as amended in 1969). concerning the Protection of the Great Barrier Reef. adopted by Resolution A.232 (VII) on 12 October 1971 and concerning Tank arrangements and limitation of tank size, adopted by Resolution A.246 (VII) on 15 October 1971, accepted by Australia on 13 November 1981. The Amendments are not yet in force.
(3) Amendments to the following treaties adopted on 28 September 1979 by the Governing Bodies of the World Intellectual Property Organization and the Unions administered by that Organization at Geneva:
Articles 6, 7 and 8 of the Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization (1967);
Articles 13 and 14 of the Stockholm Act (1967) of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property;
Articles 53 and 54 of the Patents Cooperation Treat);

Articles 7 of the Strasbourg Agreement Concerning the International Patents Classification;
Article 5 of the Stockholm Act (1967) and the Geneva Act (1977) of the Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks; and
Articles 22 and 23 of the Paris Act (1971) of the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literacy and Artistic Works.
Instrument of acceptance of the amendments deposited by Australia on 13 November 1981. The amendments have not yet entered into force.
(4) Agreement on the Interpretation and Application of Articles VI, XVI, and XXIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, done at Geneva on 12 April 1979 and accepted by Australia on 28 September 1981. The Agreement entered into force for Australia on 28 October 1981.
(5) Annexes A I and A2 of the International Convention on Simplification and Harmonization of Customs Procedures, done at Brussels on 15 June 1976 and accepted by Australia on 22 October 1981. The Annexes entered into force for Australia on 22 January 1982.
(6) Annex A3 of the International Convention on Simplification and Harmonization of Customs Procedures, done at Brussels on 14 June 1978 and accepted by Australia on 22 October 1981. The Annex is not yet in force.
(7) Annexes CI and F4 of the International Conventon on Simplification and Harmonization of Customs Procedures, done at Nairobi on 9 June 1977 and accepted by Australia on 22 October 1981. The Annexes entered into force for Australia on 22 January 1982.
(8) International Convention for the Suppression of Counterfeiting Currency and Protocol, done at Geneva on 20 April 1929 and acceded to by Australia on 5 January 1982. The Convention entered into force for Australia on 4 April 1982.
(9) Second Agreement to Extend the Regional Cooperative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology, done at Vienna on 1 April 1982 and accepted by Australia on 16 July 1982. The Second Agreement entered into force for Australia on 16 July 1982.
Pursuant to statute:
Remuneration Tribunals ActRemunera tion Tribunal-Determination-1982/83--Chief Executive of the Parliament House Construction Authority and holders of public office on other bodies.

Answers to Questions

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2573 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Tenosynovitis: Department of Communications
(Question No. 4380)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, has there been (a) medical examinations of all workers and (b) an ergonomic assessment of the work process, tasks and work environment made by an ergonomist in all areas where repetitious injuries. for example, tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel syndrome, have been reported; if not, why not.
(2) If so. (a) when were assessments made and (b) what recommendations were made.
(3) Have any recommendations made been carried out; if not, why not.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from my Department and the relevant statutory authorities, is as follows:
(I) (a) No. Medical examinations are however arranged/encouraged when officers or employees report symptoms of apparently job-related illnesses.
(b) No. The wide range of occupations across the workforce in which repetition strain injuries are reported would make a program of ergonomic assessment impracticable on economic and resource grounds. Australia Post is examining repetitive injuries as part of a recently instituted review of the adequacy of existing accident prevention and staff safety measures.
Telecom employs an ergonomist who provides some assessment of work areas where repetition injuries have been reported.
(2) (a) Not applicable.
(2) (b) Not applicable.
(3) See (I) (b).
Code of General Principles on Occupational Safety and Health in Australian Government
Employment
(Question No. 4521)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 29 April 1982:
(I) With reference to the 'Occupational Safety and Health in Australian Government Employment-Code of General Principles', (a) which of the occupational health recommendations from this code have not been printed, circulated and applied, and when will they be applied, and (b) what qualifications are required for officers implementing the recommendations, and is he able to state whether officers from the Department of Productivity in South Australia presently responsible for applying the recommendations have these qualifications.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that 132 of the 194 employees of the Defence Research Centre, Salisbury, South Australia, examined by an audiometrist as part of the Hearing Conservation Program in 1981, had a medically significant noise-induced hearing loss.

(3) Is he able to say whether the audiometric booth designed and built by the Centre meets Australian audiometrical standards.
(4) Have officials from the Minister's Department and the National Acoustic Laboratories Hearing Conservation Program advised the Centre on ways and means by which noise-induced hearing loss could be prevented; if so, is he able to say whether this advice has been acted upon.
(5) Is he able to say when funds are available for noise control at Defence Research Centres they will be adequate to guarantee that employees will not suffer further noise-induced hearing loss.
(6) Will this program be used as a basis for noise-induced hearing loss prevention programs for Commonwealth employees.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The Code of General Principles on Occupational Safety and Health in Australian Government Employment defines responsibilities for occupational safety and health and states, in broad terms, the action that shall be taken to fulfil them. However, it does not provide detailed information on the standards required. This information is to be made available in provisions collated from accepted standards and codes of practice. recommendations agreed by State Labour Departments, State regulations and other information, as applicable.
In terms of the Code, the Director-General of Health is Occupational Health Authority for Federal Government employment and is responsible for health aspects of the Code. In accordance with that role, the Director-General of Health determines periodically National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC) Occupational Health Guides as recommendations for the purposes of the Code. These determinations are published in general issues of the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette and copies of the Guides are circulated to Federal Departments and statutory authorities.
Occupational Health Guides adopted by the NH and MRC are, where relevant to Federal employment, determined by the Director-General of Health. Application of the occupational health recommendations is a responsibility of Head Officers, having regard to the specific needs of individual workplaces. Head Officers are defined for the purposes of the Code of General Principles as the permanent heads of Departments or the chief functional officers of instrumentalities.
(b) No qualifications are prescribed by the Code of General Principles in relation to Head Officers. However. Head Officers have access to the expertise available in my Department to assist in resolving matters concerning occupational health.
(2) I am advised that in 1981, the Defence Research Centre, Salisbury (DRCS) introduced a pilot audiometric study along National Acoustic Laboratories (NAL) suggested guidelines. 200 personnel employed in known noise locations were invited to participate in the study and 194 were given a basic audiometric test. 132 failed the test and are considered to have hearing levels outside normal limits.

2574 REPRESENTATIVES 26 and 27 October 1982

Answers to Questions

In accordance with DRCS hearing conservation audiometry policy, the employees who failed the test have been examined by Commonwealth Medical Officers. Those appearing to have medically treatable hearing losses have been referred to their own doctors. Where the audiogram suggested the possibility of noise-induced hearing loss, each employee has been advised of the implication and importance of the use of ear protection and his/her compensation rights.
(3) The original test booth, although satisfactory with modifications, did not meet the total requirement of AS 1269-1979, in particular with regard to the attenuation of background noise levels. The booth will be modified to meet Australian audiometric standards before a full audiometric survey is implemented.
(4) Yes. The DRCS Hearing Conservation Committee acted upon advice from NAL and my Department when formulating a DRCS management approved hearing conservation policy and procedures program.
(5) The DRCS management committee has recently considered the results of the pilot study. Specific contractual proposals are now being formulated to meet the foreseen requirements of audiometric survey and follow-up audiometric tests to evaluate results of protective measures. Based on present known requirements, funds will be available to implement the proposed program.
(6) The NH and MRC Occupational Health Guide 'Hearing Conservation Program' was determined by the Director General of Health on 23 December 1980. The objective of the Guide is to provide assistance in the establishment of a program to prevent hearing loss at the workplace. As mentioned above, responsibility for implementation of the provisions of the Guide rests with Head Officers.
Income Tax System: Inquiry
(Question No. 4752)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a call by the National President of the Australian Society of Accountants, Mr J. O. MiIler, for a full inquiry into Australia's income tax system.
(2) If so, did Mr Miller suggest that the terms of reference of such an inquiry should be to (a) inquire into the effects of income tax on Australian citizens and corporations and to identify undesirable features and anomalies, (b) suggest means by which the tax load could be allocated more equitably, (c) reCOmmend the actions necessary to identify and deter tax evaders, (d) examine the extent to which trusts have changed the tax burden and (e) identify alternate sources of taxation.
(3) Has this proposal received consideration; if so, what was the result.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) .There have been several inquiries in recent years into general or specific aspects of the taxation system, including the Asprey Taxation Review Committee and the Committee of Inquiry into Inflation and Taxation. In addition some other recent inquiries, such as the Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Fmancial System, the lAC Inquiry into Certain Budgetary Assistance to Industry and the Study Group on Structural Adjustment, have examined various taxation issues as part of wider investigations. The government has Implemented a number of the recommendations of some of

these inquiries and continues to have other recommendations under review.
With regard to the term of reference suggested by Mr Miller concerning tax evasion, I would emphasise that the Government has already introduced or announced a range of measures which it believes will be effective in curbing tax avoidance and evasion practices. In addition this area is constantly being monitored with a view to instituting further remedial action if that should become necessary.
With the foregoing in mind, I see no need at this time for a further wide ranging taxation review of the kind referred to in (I) and (2).
Artillery Training Area in New South Wales
(Question No. 4758)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
Have investigations into the acquisition of a major artillery training area in New South Wales to supplement or replace existing ranges at Holsworthy, Enoggera and Townsville been completed; if so, (a) what are the results of those investigations and (b) what action is contemplated.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.
The investigations to which you refer are of areas in New South Wales where Army could conduct major training exercises, and to which the School of Artillery, North Head, Sydney, and the Infantry Centre, Singleton, could be relocated.
The investigations will involve extensive consultation with State authorities, and careful examination of social, economic and environmental aspects of different options, and are likely to take some time.
The investigations result mainly from the fact that an area formerly used by Army for major training exercises, at ColoPutty, is no longer available, and from the Commonwealth's obligation to transfer the land now occupied by the School of Artillery to the New South Wales Government, under the Sydney Harbour Foreshores Agreement.
Poverty: Welfare Programs
(Question No. 4764)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the disclosures made on the Australian Broadcasting Commission's Nationwide program on poverty.
(2) Has the Government any planned program to alleviate the hardship facing an estimated 13 per cent of our population.
(3) Will steps be taken to ensure that welfare programs will be increased or reviewed so that they provide the maximum benefit to people who are On or below the poverty line.
(4) Will welfare benefits be raised to an acceptable level to provide that percentage of the Australian population most in need with adequate incomes.
Mr Wilson-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.

Answers to Questions

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2575

(2) - (4) A number of commentators have suggested that at the end of the 1970s two million Australians about 13 per cent of the population had incomes less than the Henderson poverty line. The Government has not officially endorsed the use of the Henderson line as a benchmark for measuring poverty in Australia, but I note that the Social Welfare Policy Secretariat in its report on Poverty Measurement estimated that the number of adult income units below the detailed Henderson poverty line in 1978-79 was approximately 460.000. These units included about 1,070,000 people. This represented 9.3 per cent of adult income units, excluding the self-employed, and 9.5 per cent of people in such units. It should be noted that the assessments of numbers made are based on income only and do not take into account capital assets which may be owned by some persons on low money incomes.
The Government is well aware that hardships exist in areas of the community and a large proportion of its outlays are directed to assisting those in need. Spending on social security and welfare alone represents about 28 per cent of total outlays. The Government has announced a number of further measures in its 1982-83 Budget and, of course, will continue to give consideration to ways in which hardship might be relieved. The relevant changes include increases in the rates of unemployment and sickness benefits for youth and for single unemployment beneficiaries without dependents, an increase in the rate of supplementary assistance/allowance for those who rent and a 50 per cent increase in rates of family allowances for first and second children. In addition, most rates of pension and benefit will continue to be adjusted automatically each six months for movements in the consumer price index. Pensioners with private incomes will be further assisted by increases in allowable income limits for pensions and fringe benefits, the introduction of a new pensioner tax rebate, the general reductions in personal income tax announced in the Budget and the substantial increase in funds for the welfare housing program under the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement. Non-pensioners/beneficiaries on low incomes will also be assisted by general tax relief measures, including relief for home mortgage costs, and the new family income supplement which is due to commence operation in May 1983. Concessional pharmaceuticals will be extended, from January 1983. to holders of Health Care cards and to pensioners not eligible for fringe benefits.
Australian Citizenship Certificates
(Question No. 4832)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In which local government areas in each State and Territory were more than 100 certificates of Australian citizenship conferred during 1981.
(2) How many certificates were conferred in each area.
(3) How many certificates were conferred in each State or Territory.

Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Local government authorities which conferred more than 100 certificates during 1981 were:

New South Wales

Ashfield

325

Auburn

318

Bankstown

624

Baulkham Hills

150

Blacktown

446

Botany Burwood Campbelltown Canterbury Drummoyne Fairfield Holroyd Hurstville Kogarah Kuring-gai Liverpool Marrickville Newcastle North Sydney Parramatta Penrith Randwick Rockdale Ryde Shellharbour Strathfield Sydney Sutherland Warringah Waverley Willoughby Wollongong Woollahra
Victoria
Broadmeadows Brunswick Caulfield Coburg Dandenong Doncaster Essendon Footscray Keilor Knoxfield Melbourne Moorabbin Nunawading O a k leigh Prahran Preston Richmond StKilda Springvale Sunshine Waverley Wittlesea
Queensland
Albert Brisbane Gold Coast Logan
South Australia Campbelltown Elizabeth Enfield Noarlunga Salisbury Woodville
Western Australia
Armadale Bayswater Belmont Canning Cockburn East Pilbara

295 161 III 818 120 721 132 195 124 270 155 667 145 157 328 184 317 456 286 109 114 320 419 385 283 197 583 127
389 232 210 253 188 100 179 316 303 144 177 193 233 333 168 291 147 245 365 446 212 266
192 .1,103
188 168
154 144 125 168 184 122
260 219 164 303 166 113

2576 REPRESENTATIVES 26 and 27 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Fremantle

147

Gosnells

364

Kalamunda

225

Melville

262

Perth

590

Port Hedland

129

Roebourne

152

South Perth

129

Stirling

841

Swan

179

Wanneroo

650

Tasmania

None

Northern Territory

None

Australian Capital Territory Australian Capital Territory House of As>embly 211

(3) Number of Certificates Conferred1981

New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

20,643 13,208 3,695 3,650 7,086
355 639 976

Nuclear Weapons: SALT II Proposals

«Question No. 4973)

Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 21 September 1982:

(I) Did the Australian Delegation to the United Nations oppose, move to amend, or fail to vote on, the proposal of the
Soviet Union at the 36th General Assembly to declare first use of nuclear weapons a crime.

(2) What (a) aspects of the proposal are compatible with
or (b) minimum changes in the proposal can make it compatible with, Australia's commitment to (i) non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, (ii) verifiable and enforceable nuclear disarmament, (iii) the development of means for peaceful settle-
ment of international disputes and (iv) public education in the development of effective, representative international peace-keeping, law and order.

(3) Can he say what are the United States of America's objections to the SALT II proposals accepted by the USSR.

(4) Has Australia indicated to the United States the view the US I.eaders have the right to intitiate nuclear war if USSR conventional forces appeal likely to defeat NATO forces.
~5) Has ~~stralia supported the view that a greater firststnke capablhty for the United States is a better deterrent to a ~oviet con~entional attack on NATO powers than near parity m conventional forces with staged disarmament.

Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:

(I) The resolution proposed by the Soviet Union at the 36th Untted NatIOns General Assembly, which included a declarat~on that the first use of nuclear weapons would constitute a cnme, was a resolution entitled 'Declaration on the Prevention of Nuclear Catastrophe'. The resolution was the subject of some revisions by the Soviet Union and of amendments submitted by Mexico. It was adopted by the General As-
sembly WIth a vote of 82 for, 19 against, 41 abstentions. Together WIth t~e Untted States, United Kingdom and other western. countnes, Australia voted against the resolution. A~straha dId n?t see.k ~o amend it. The subject of the resolution was on hnes sImIlar to draft resolutions which for a number of years, have been submitted annually by the'Soviet Union to the General Assembly.

(2) The operative part of the Soviet resolution takes the form of a 'Solemn Proclamation '. The more usual objective of sponsors of disarmament resolutions is to seek a commitment by member states to take specific practical steps. The resolution is thus merely declaratory in character and seeks to gain political advantage. The Government considers that there cannot be progress in measures of arms control and disarmament unless practical proposals are made which are balanced, and which provide for effective methods of verification of compliance with obligations entered into. The absence from the Soviet resolution of any of these elements, together with the fact that it provides nO basis for practical action, indicates that it was not susceptible of amendment in a way which would advance the objectives suggested.
(3) [n the view of the United States the SALT Agreements have not meaningfully constrained or reduced Soviet nuclear capabilities but have promoted a massive build-up of Soviet strategic forces that threatens to significantly affect the strategic balance. The SALT agreements have done little to promote equality in United States and Soviet strategic capabilities. They have not led to more constructive international behaviour by the Soviet Union or to an improved relationship between the Soviet Union and the United States. For these reaSOns the United States Administration has proposed the resumption of strategic arms reduction talks (START) on the basis of firm United States proposals which would require substantial reductions in strategic arms on both sides.
(4) Australia has indicated that it supports NATO miltary doctrine, which is entirely defensive. NATO has made clear that it will not be the first to resort to force, conventional Or nuclear. NATO weapons will never be used except in response to an attack. NATO's stance involves the maintenance of conventional and nuclear forces able to deter any Soviet aggression at the lowest possible level of conflict
(5) Australia has indicated to the United States that it supports the policy of deterrence, that is, the need for the United States and the West to maintain weapons and forces of a nature and size which will demonstrate to the Soviet Union that it cannot benefit from the initiation of conflict against the West, particularly nuclear conflict.
Royal Australian Air Force Base, Butterworth, Malaysia: Locally Engaged Employees
(Question No. 5035)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(I) What is the status of locally engaged employees working for the Australian Government at the RAAF Base, Butterworth, Malaysia.
(2) Is employment of a permanent nature.
(3) Do these employees qualify for long service leave and other forms of accrued benefit.
(4) Is the RAAF the designated employer of local civilian labour.
(5) Are conditions of employment fixed by the Australian Public Service Board.
(6) What conditions apply, to eligibility for gratuity payments for civil employees.
(7) When did the RAAF cease to be the official employer of domestic help for Australian Service families.
(8) Do domestic employees accrue rights for the full period of service to Australian personnel.
(9) What was the reason for the withdrawal of the RAAF as primary employer of domestic help.
(10) [n what way do the terms of employment vary from Australian civilians employed at overseas locations.

Answers to Questions

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2577

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The locally engaged civilian employees currently working for the Australian Department of Defence at Air Base Butterworth are 'exempt' employees, engaged under the Public Service Act. Terms and conditions of employment are set down in the Department of Defence (Commonwealth of Australia) West Malayasia Employees Agreement 1970 which in turn is given force as a Determination by the Public Service Board under provisions of section 88 of the Public Service Act.
(2) The Five Power Defence Arrangement does envisage that nations party to the arrangement would require to employ locally engaged civilians in support of the presence. However this employment is not permanent. The nature of any foreign presence (and indeed the term of such presence) is a matter to be determined by the respective Governments.
(3)The above mentioned Agreement does include provision for sick, recreation and other forms of entitlement. In each case, the entitlement is cast at a level consistent with good employer practice with Malaysia, or with standards prescribed under Malaysian law. An entitlement exists for Long Service Leave under provisions of the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1976 for those locally engaged civilians in employment on 20 December 1976. This entitlement applies only to service after I April 1970 when the Agreement referred to came into formal being, by virtue of a Public Service Board Determination. Long Service Leave is not a feature of public or private employment in Malaysia.
(4) Under the agreement referred to above, the Department of Defence rather than the RAAF, is responsible for policy and general administration of locally engaged civilians in Malaysia.
(5) Conditions of employment are fixed by the Public Service Board in the manner outlined in (I) above.
(6) The Agreement contains entitlements for gratuity payments to locally engaged civilians who, for various reasons, cease their employment with the Commonwealth Government. The entitlements are:
(a) Voluntary resignation or age retirement: three weeks pay for each year of continuous service (as defined in the Agreement), provided that at least five years qualifying service has been completed.
(b) Retirement on medical grounds or death during service: one month's pay for each year of continuous service (as defined in the Agreement), provided that at least five years, qualifying service has been completed.
(c) Redundancy, or resignation attracting redundancy terms: 1.2 months pay for each year of continuous service (as defined) after I April 1970 and one month's pay for each year of continuous service (as defined); prior to this date. It should be noted that the Department is currently involved in negotiations with the Union representing Base employees on the question of retrenchment benefits. This follows a claim by the Union for the three months pay for each year of completed service. This claim was made after my colleague Sir James Killen announced the Government's plans for the withdrawal of No. 75 Squadron, a move which will necessitate an appreciable reduction in the number of locally engaged civilians employed at Air Base Butterworth from about mid 1983. The Union has rejected an offer by the Department of 1.75 months pay for each year's service after I April 1970. Survey material available from an independent source indicates that 45% of Malaysian private employers sampled pay retrenchment benefits of 1.2 months pay

per year of service or less while 94% of those sampled pay 1.5 months pay per year of service or less.
(7) Employment of domestic help by individual Australian Service families commenced on I July 1964.
(8) No, each period of employment with an Australian Service family stands alone for purposes of accrual of rights.
(9) In early to mid 1964, all foreign components of the FEAF presence in Malaysia (i.e. RAF, RNZAF and RAAF) changed their earlier practice of centrally employing domestic staff for individual Service families. The decision to change the arrangement, as it affected Australian Service families at Butterworth was based upon:
(a) The impracticability of continuing a practice inconsistent with that followed for UK and New Zealand Forces; and
(b) the practice for Australian civilians at overseas posts, which is for the family to employ domestic assistance directly.
(10) Australian civilians employed overseas receive similar conditions to those which would apply for employment within Australia. The main area of difference would be that conditions are applicable by virtue of Public Service Board Determinations in recognition of special features of overseas service. By contrast, locally engaged civilian employees receive conditions which are in keeping with those generally in evidence in the country of their residence.
Telecom Advertisement for Technical Officer
(Question No. 5048)
Mrs Child asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(I) What was the cost of an advertisement placed in the Sun News-Pictorial on 22 May 1982 by Telecom Australia calling for applications for the position of a middle range technicalofficer.
(2) Did the advertisement appear in any other newspaper on this or any other dates; if so, what was the total cost to Telecom Australia of the advertisements.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Telecommunications Commission, IS as follows:
(I) $2,750.30.
(2) Yes; $4,798.58.
Production of Parity and Non-parity Oil
(Question No. 5081)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 15 September 1982:
What was the production of (a) parity and (b) non-parity oil produced from (i) small, (ii) medium, (iii) large and (iv) new oil fields (A) on Barrow Island, (B) in Queensland and (C) in the Gippsland Basin for the period January to June 1982.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Production of (a) parity and (b) non-parity oil produced from (i) small, (ii) medium, (iii) large and (iv) new oil fields (A) on Barrow Island, (B) in Queensland and (C) in the

2578 REPRESENTATIVES 26 and 27 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Gippsland Basin for the period I January to 30 June 1981 is as follows:
(A) (i) (a) 81.93 megalitres, (b) none. (ii) (a) 473.04 megalitres, (b) 39.44 megalitres. (iii) (a) None, (b) none. (iv) 2.51 megalitres in total (the concepts of parity and non-parity oil do not apply to production from 'new' oil fields).
(B) (i) (a) 40.20 megalitres, (b) none. (ii) (a) None, (b) none. (iii) (a) None, (b) none. (iv) None.
(C) (i) (a) 321.82 megalitres, (b) none. (ii) (a) 886.96 megalitres, (b) none. (iii) (a) 4,556.06 megalitres, (b) 4,556.06 megalitres. (iv) None.
Mirage Aircraft in 'Operation Western Reward'
(Question No. 5097)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
(I) How long did it take Mirage aircraft deployed from Williamstown, NSW to Learmonth, Western Australia in 'Operation Western Reward' to reach their destination.
(2) What stops were made on the way.
(3) What weapons and ammunition were carried by the Mirages on their flight.
(4) How long did it take additional logistic support necessary to deploy the Mirages in combat situation to reach Learmonth.
(5) Were estimates made of time and cost savings that might have been available if Derby, Western Australia air base had been useable; if so, what are the details.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) RAAF Mirages, participating in Exercise Western Reward, departed RAAF Base Williamstown at 1200 hours on 27 August 1982. The last aircraft arrived at Learmonth at 1830 hours on 28 August 1982.
(2) All the aircraft flew via Townsville and Darwin to reach Learmonth.
(3) No weapons or ammunition were carried by the Mirage aircraft on deployment to Learmonth.
(4) Logistic support for Exercise Western Reward was, in general, prepositioned at Learmonth. However, two CI30 aircraft tasked in support of the Mirages. during their deployment, arrived at Learmonth on 28 August 1982.
(5) In view of Derby airfield's present unsuitability as a deployment base for RAAF Mirages, its use for this exercise was not considered and, hence, no estimates of time and cost savings were made.
Visits by Nuclear Powered Warships
(Question No. 5098)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
What assistance is provided by the Natural Disasters Organisation to port aurthorities to assist in monitoring visits by nuclear powered warships.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Natural Disasters Organisation provides no monitoring assistance to port authorities for nuclear powered warship visits. Defence authorities in each State and the Australian

Atomic Energy Commission (AAEC) make the relevant arrangements with the State port authorities and the State's Nuclear Powered Warship Committee. The AAEC provides monitoring equipment and personnel for each visit.
Visits by Nuclear Powered Warships
(Question No. 5099)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 16 September 1982:
(I) What assistance is made available by the Natural Disasters Organisation to State Emergency Services to plan for and organise safety procedures associated with the possibility of accident in nuclear powered warships visiting Australian ports.
(2) Which State Emergency Services have made use of this assistance and in what way.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I refer the honourable member to Annex C of the May 1976 document Environmental Considerations of Visits of Nuclear Powered Warships to Australia, which sets out the safety procedures that have been established for all ports used by nuclear powered warships (NPWs). The natural Disasters Organisation (NDO) is represented on the interdepartmental committee which co-ordinates NPW visits arrangements, including safety arrangements but the NDO makes no separate contribution to the development of the relevant safety procedures.
(2) See (I) above. The State Emergency Services are those of Western Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, Northern Territory, and Queensland.
Jezzine Barracks Queensland: Transfer of Army Reserve Activities
(Question No. 5227)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
Is it planned to transfer Army Reserve activities from the Jezzine Barracks, Queensland, to the Regular Army Base at Lavarack Barracks, Queensland; if so, to what use will Jezzine Barracks be put and when will this transfer take place.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There are no plans to transfer Army Reserve activities from Jezzine Barracks, Queensland, to Lavarack Barracks, Queensland.
People's Republic of China: Membership of World Bank
(Question No. 5240)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 12 October 1982:
(I) Is he able to say when the People's Republic of China replaced the RepUblic of China as a member of the World Bank.
(2) Is he also able to indicate what moves have been made for the People's Republic of China to replace the Rebublic of China as a member of the Asian Development Bank.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2579

(I) The People's Republic of China assumed the seat designated for China in the World Bank Group-comprising the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Finance Corporation and the International Development Association in May 1980.
(2) The People's Republic of China has not made any application to join the Asian Development Bank. The so-called 'Republic of China' is a member of the Bank under the name of Taiwan.
Commonwealth Vehicles: Rolls-Royce Saloons
(Question No. 4572)
[In substitution for the answer which appeared in the Hansard of 9 September 1982, Page 1350, which had a typesetting erroL]
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) How many Rolls-Royce saloons are currently owned by the Government.
(2) When was each vehicle acquired and what was the purchase price in each case.

(3) Did the Government purchase these vehicles direct from the United Kingdom, or from importers or distributors in Australia.
(4) If the vehicles were purchased from importers or distributors, what are the details in each case.
(5) Where are these vehicles located.
(6) Which persons are entitled to use these vehicles and how is that entitlement determined.
(7) What has been the cost of operation of each of these vehicles since its acquisition.
Mr NewmanThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Commonwealth currently owns 12 Rolls-Royce vehicles. II vehicles, consisting of Limousines, Tourers and Cabriolets, are located in Australia and one Saloon is located in London.
(2) (5) and (7) The purchase price, location, average maintenance costs, and any extra refurbishment costs, for each vehicle are summarised as follows:

Vehicle type

Location

Year model

Purchase price

Estimated average annual
maintenance
cost'

Cost and year of refurbishment

Silver Wraith Limousine Silver Wraith Limousine
Phantom V Limousine Silver Wraith Tourer
Phantom V Limousine Silver Wraith Tourer
Silver Cloud Cabriolet Silver Wraith Limousine Silver Cloud Cabriolet
Phantom VI Limousine Phantom V Limousine
Silver Wraith Saloon

Brisbane Sydney
Sydney
Sydney Melbourne Melbourne
Adelaide Perth Perth
Canberra Canbera
London

1959
1959 1967
1959 1967
1959 1962 1959
1962 1970
1966 1979

$ 17,742 17,658
24,349
17,458 25,497 17,408
18,472 17,410
18,196 26,295
22,866 47,868

$

$

893

789

1,156

319

1,460 3,500

220

454 7,448

t7I2

t229

:j:I,085

:j:940 §42,145

2,976

1979-80 1981-82
1981-82

'Includes repair and maintenance costs only as cost of fuel not available. tThese costs are the average costs from 1969; earlier records are not available.
:j:These costs are for 1981-82 only; previous years costs are not readily available but are estimated to average about $1,000 per vehicle over recent years.
§The decision to spend $42,145 on refurbishing the Rolls-Royce Phantom Limousine, located in Canberra, was taken in the light of the replacement cost of $220,000 as quoted by the NSW distributor.

(3) and (4) Records which could provide complete infor-
mation concerning the purchase of the Rolls-Royce vehicles are not now available. However, the available information is as follows:

Mission vehicle in the UK since at least 1963. Records of the type of vehicle used prior to then are not available.

The Rolls-Royce Silver Wraith Saloon located in London was purchased in the United Kingdom in March 1979.
The Rolls-Royce Phantom VI Limousine located in Canberra was purchased in 1970 through the Melbourne distributor, Kellow Faulkner Pty. Ltd.
My Department understands that most of the remaining Rolls-Royce vehicles were purchased direct from the United Kingdom.
(6) The Rolls-Royce Silver Wraith Saloon located in London is used by the Australian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom. A ROlls-Royce has been used as the Head of

The Rolls-Royce vehicles located in Australia are used by the Governor-General, visiting Royalty, Heads of State and Heads of Government.
The provision of Rolls-Royce vehicles for the Governor General, visiting Royalty, Heads of State and Heads of Government is an established practice which has been endorsed by successive governments over a long period. The number and type of ceremonial vehicles required for these purposes are under review by my Department.

2580 REPRESENTATIVES 26 and 27 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Upgrading of Major Airports
(Question No. 4732)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:

What sums have been spent on the upgrading of major airports in each State in each of the last 10 years.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The figures sought are listed in the following table:

1980-81 1979-80 1978-79 1977-78 1976-77 1975-76 1974-75 1973-74 1972-73 1981-82

Sydney Sydney I.T.B.
Sydney Total Bankstown Canberra

354,868 278,478
633,346 106,662 327,158

483,907 379,357
863,264 381,953 93,528

New South Wales

54,685 2,534,868 308,612 2,165,453

555,822 69,907

1,6\0,732 218,039

3,571,679

1,825,414

2,071,116

1,185,772

363,297 4,700,321 32,858 69,508 58,039 17,684

625,729 1,828,771 3,571,679 1,825,414 2,071,116 1,185,772 37,689 18,688 11,527 124,615 15,944 1,878,284
232,686 220,036 413,154 2,149,421 402,452 43,960

Brisbane Brisbane I.T.B.

. 17,644,217 5,175,478 1,055,498

2,369

2,097

1,299

Queensland 955,695 2,371,795 3,188,392 7,617,940 1,988,518 1,175,615 30,373,197
3,331 77,\04 2,672,502

Brisbane Total . 17,646,586 \177,575 1,056,797 959,026 2,448,899 5,860,894 7,617,940 1,988,518 1,175,615 30,373,197

Archerfield

27,312 18,124

3,805 18,744 22,946 54,825 345,703 137,445 18,257 71,698

Perth landakot

2,477,043 2,928

641,866 1,119,495

9,349

6,668

Western Australia
902,351 640,070 1,568 16,858

739,978 23,139

591,801 1,501,874 3,511,878 1,687,052

2,813

6,726 156,113

Melbourne

1,518,586

Terminal Building 31,164

691,698
14~,404

2,094,006 41,381

Victoria/Tasmania
1,696,674 991,871 1,554,160 140,505 38,076 38,086

1,403,694

1,274,467

2,454,907

1,209,691

Melbourne Total Essendon
Moorabbin Hobart

1,549,750 82,338 60,847 89,053

837,\02 166,S'l1 69,f!lO 238,'159

2,135,387 254,937 37,965 84,042

1,837,179 431,367 100,050 170,857

1,029,947 188,140 149,844 162,170

1,592,246 33,294
275,007 900,655

1,403,694 53,337 32,873
664,598

1,274,467 40,473 131,768 44,991

2,454,907 43,451
233,661 57,961

1,209,691 5,000

Adelaide Parafield

2,825,905 608,322

900,294 134,295

485,343 30,516

South Australia

214,849 286,311

24,051

8,687

273,595 13,675

538,289 47,414

312,000 36,096

458,896 1,688,551 593,184

Darwin

205,637

245,755

494,794

Northern Territory 305,540 367,418

414,715

660,428

517,465

289,466

85,976

Independent Audit: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 4773)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The conditions under which grants are made by my Department provide that a grantee shall furnish a return supported by a certificate, provided by a registered companies auditor or a qualified public accountant who has examined the accounts and records of the grantee, stating that grant moneys have been expended for the purpose of the grant and in accordance WIth any other conditions of the grant.

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of National Development and
Energy
(Question No. 4799)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Organisation
Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia Ampol Petroleum Ltd

$ 17,760
40,005

Answers to Questions

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2581

Organisation

Organisation

Apace Research Ltd

Austeen and Butta Ltd

Australian Cassava Products Ltd

Australian Coal Association

Australian Coal Industry Research Laboratories

Ltd

.....

Australian Industry Research Group

Australian Institute of Petroleum Ltd

Australian Institute of Urban Studies

Australian Mineral Industries Research Associ-

ation Limited . . . . .

Australian National University

Australian Solar Ponds . .

Bitupave Ltd

Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd

CSR Chemicals Ltd

CSR Ltd

Canberra College of Advanced Education

Centre for Urban Research and Action

Chisholm Institute of Technology

Collinsville Coal Co. Pty Ltd

Davy McKee Pacific Pty Ltd

Dulux Australia Ltd

Dunlite Pty Ltd

Economic Research Unit Pty Ltd

Enersonics Pty Ltd

F. H. Goodworth & Co. Pty Ltd

Flinders University of South Australia

Footscray Institute of Technology

Gollin Wallsend Coal Co. Ltd

Griffith University

Hawkesbury Agricultural College

Hytec Controls

ICI Australia Operations Pty Ltd

James Cook University of North Queensland

Macquarie University

Millaquin Sugar co. Pty Ltd

Mineral Deposits Ltd

Monash University

Mount Isa Mines Ltd

Murdoch University

NSW Combined Colliery Proprietors' Association

NSW Institute of Technology

Nicholson and Partners Pty Ltd

Orbital Engine Co. Pty Ltd

Repco Engine Technical Centre

Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology

Sugar Research Institute

Sunspot Design

Tamar Designs Pty Ltd

University of Adelaide

University of Glasgow

University of Melbourne

University of New England

University of New South Wales

University of Newcastle

University of Queensland

University of Sydney

University of Western Australia

University of Wollongong

Vapocure International Pty Ltd

Victorian Solar Energy Council

W. D. Scott and Co. Pty Ltd

...

Water Research Foundation of Australia

Western Australian Institute of Technology

$ 120,129 37,000 218,515
39,700
2,019,998 5,413 10,220
35,000
121,637 205,813
27,500 5,181
869,926 170,623 130,799
6,770 50,654 14,534 214,674 100,000 46,944
1,099 36,602 15,050 12,168 148,660 10,079 17,713 38,254 50,899 30,750 397,927 61,594 42,735 122,807 72,781 360,294 34,228 82,152 36,900 36,458 18,169 35,807 181,540 4,476 108,298
5,053 6,398 102,875 6,925 170,161 2,535 1,045,181 140,208 748,257 414,810 164,979 82,610 25,625 7,125 22,999 25,000 17,801

Zane Solar Systems (Australia)

$ 1,500

The above do not include payments to non government organisations in respect of administrative and operational expenditures incurred by the Department.
Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations: Disposal of Leopard Skin
(Question No. 4911)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
How was the leopard skin. forfeited under the Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations on 26 May 1982, disposed of.
Mr Peacock-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Specimens of Endangered Species which are not imported in accordance with the Provisions of the Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations are disposed of in such a manner as to ensure that they are not used for private or commercial purposes.
The Australian War Memorial Museum, which is mounting a display of military bands, expressed an interest in the skin.
I am advised that the leopard skin was delivered to the Australian War Mc;r,,)rial Museum Canberra on 20 August 1982.
Aboriginal Community Land Holders: Rights and Obligations
(Question No. 5023)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 8 September 1982:
Do Aboriginal community landholders have the same rights and obligations in the Northern Territory as private landholders with regard to, (a) ownership of unmustered or feral cattle, (b) control of unmustered cattle by fencing, in brucellosis eradication, etc, (c) payment of dues and levies with respect to cattle they sell for slaughter or otherwise, (d) negotiation of royalties, compensation and conditions for mineral exploration and mining on their land, (e) control of access to the land by other persons and, (f) conditions imposed on others entering their land; if not, what are the principal differences in each case.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Yes.
(b) Yes.
(c) Yes.
(d) Aboriginal communities holding pastoral leases have the same rights and obligations as other pastoral leaseholders in relation to mineral exploration and mining development. But where land is vested in Aboriginal Land Trusts under Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act, exploration or mining can take place only with the consent of the relevant Land Council and the Minister, subject to exceptions set out in the Act, and such consent may be given subject to agreed terms and conditions.
(e) and (f) Aboriginal communities holding pastoral leases have the same rights and obligations in relation to control of entry to the leases as other pastoral leaseholders, but access to land held by Aboriginal Land Trusts is controlled by the

2582 REPRESENTATIVES 26 and 27 October 1982

Answers to Questions

Northern Territor) Aboriginal Land Act 1978, which provides for a special permit system and allows conditions to be attached to permits.
Dockyards: Work on Australian Military Vessels
(Question No. 5036)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence Support, upon notice, on 9 September 1982:
(I) What (a) construction programs and (b) repair. refit and overhaul jobs on military vessels have been performed by (i) Government and (ii) private dockyards in Australia over the last 5 years.
(2) What (a) construction and (b) repair, refit and overhaul jobs have been performed on Australian military vessels in overseas dockyards in the last 5 years.
(3) In which oVe"eas dockyards was the work done and what was the value of the work in each case.
(4) What (a) construction and (b) overhaul. repair and refit work is planned to he performed on Australian military vessels in the next 5 years and which dockyard will receive the work in each case.
Mr Viner-- The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) (i) Construction programs in Australian Government Dockyards (all carried out at Williamstown Naval Dockyard) over the last 5 years:
Oceanographic Ship (HMS Cook)
Four Water/Fuell.ighter> (in progress)
Modernisation of Destroyer Escorts
HMAS Parra malTa HMASSluan HMAS Der....elll (in progress)
(ii) Construction programs in private dockyards over the last 5 years:
Vickers Cockatoo Dockyard Fleet Underway Replenishment Ship (in progress)
North Queensland Engineers & Agents Pty Ltd 14 Freemantle Class Patrol Boats (5 complete and in service)
Carrington Slipwa)s Pty Ltd --Amphibious Heavy Lift Ship (HMAS Tobruk)
De Havilland Marine 34 Foot Survey Motor Boats
Various private dockyards are constructing miscellaneous Naval support craft.
(b) (i) Repair. refit and overhaul work in Australian Government Dockyards:
Garden Island Dockyard Major refits on:
HMAS Brisbane; HMAS Melhourne; HMAS Supply; HMAS S ....an; HMAS Perth; HMAS Torrens; HMAS Hoban; HMAS Yarra; HMAS Vampire; HMAS Klmbla; HMAS Curlew; HMAS Ibis; HMAS Bass; HMAS Banks; HMAS Snipe; HMAS Slalwart
Intermediate Dockings in accordance with usage upkeep cycles are undertaken between major refits as required.
Williamstown "'aval Dockyard Refits on:
HMAS Derwenl: HMAS Torrens
(ii) Repair refit and overhaul work in private dockyards
Vickers Cockatoo Dockyard Pty Ltd Major refits on:
Submarines

HMAS Oxley; HMAS Otway; HMAS Ovens; HMAS Orion (in progress)
Surface Ships--
HMAS Yarra, HMAS Supply; HMAS Duchess, HMAS Patrol Craft; HMAS Jervis Bay
North Queensland Engineers and Agents Pty Ltd-- Major refits on:
Attack Class Patrol Boats-HMAS Flinders
State DockyardMajor refits on:
HMAS Supply; HMAS Vampire (in progress)
Other Miscellaneous Australian Contractors
HMAS MoresbyWestern Australia Landing Craft Heavy --Queensland HMAS Bass- -Tasmania HMAS Banks--South Australia
Intermediate Dockings in accordance with usage upkeep cycles are undertaken between major refits as required.
(2) (a) Construction programs for overseas dockyards in the last 5 years.
Todd Shipyard, Seattle, United States of America Four guided missile frigates.
HMAS Adelaide HMAS Canberra HMAS Sydney (in progress) HMAS Darwin (in progress)
Brooke Marine, United Kingdom
One Fremantle Class Patrol Boat-(Lead Craft) HMAS Fremantle
(b) Repair. refit and overhaul jobs performed on military vessels in overseas dockyards in the last 5 years:
Various Overseas Dockyards, including Singapore and Pearl Harbour
Miscellaneous work to rectify urgent defects or carry out essential maintenance
(3) Overseas dockyards and value of work undertaken.
Construction
Todd Shipyard. Seattle United States of America:
(Made under Foreign Military Sales Arrangements with US Government)

Year

Payments

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$m
23.067 116.398 199.505 145.232 47.165

Brooke Marine, UK:

Year

Payments

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

$m
1.367 2.953 1.503

Repair. Refit and Overhaul Work
Various overseas dockyards, including Singapore and Pearl Harbour.

Answers to Questions

26 and 27 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2583

Year

Expenditure

%Total annual
expenditure on ship repair

1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

$m

per cent

.040

0.16

.042

0.14

.169

0.47

.088

0.21

.161

0.35

(4) (a) Aside from the ongoing construction projects covered above, the only currently approved new construction projects, not yet commenced, are:
Two prototype Minehunter Catamarans---Carrington Slipways, Newcastle (subject to satisfactory contract negotiations)
Follow on destroyers - Williamstown Naval Dockyard (subject to improved productivity and industrial relations)
Modernisation of HMAS Swan and TorrensWilliamstown Naval Dockyard
Modernisation of HMAS Perth. Hobart. BrisbaneGarden Island Dockyard
Support Craft-one small and one medium Harbour Tug-Contractor not yet determined.
(b) Garden Island Dockyard
Dockins and refits of a whole range of Fleet Units in accordance with usage upkeep cycles including:
HMAS Perth; HMAS Brisbane; HMAS Hobart; HMAS Adelaide; HMAS Canberra; HMAS Sydney; HMASDarwin
HMAS Parramatta; HMAS Torrens; HMAS Swan; HMAS Stalwart; HMAS Jervis Bay; HMAS Curlew; HMAS Ibis; HMAS Banks.
Vickers Cockatoo Dockyard-Dockings and refits of six Oberon Class Submarines as required
North Queensland Engineers and AgentsDockings and refit of Attack Class and Fremantle Class Patrol Boats, as required
Various Contractors, Brisbane, Darwin, Fremantle and Hobart areas
Dockings and refit work, as required, primarily on Landing Craft, Heavy and Patrol Boats, HMAS Moresby, to reflect the use of available facilities in the areas which ships are based
Overseas Facilities-Miscellaneous work to rectify urgent defects or carry essential maintenance (at a level commensurate with that of recent years).

DCIO Aircraft
(Question No. 5201)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 23 September 1982:
(I) Is he able to say whether inquiries have been made concerning the cause of the crash on take-off of a DC I0 aircraft in Spain on 14 September 1982, reportedly from engine failure.
(2) How many DCIOaircraft operate within Australia.
(3) What action has been taken to ensure the safety of such aircraft in Australia.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The unfortunate accident at Malaga in Spain on 14 September 1982 involving a Spantex DC I0 aircraft in being investigated by the Spanish authorities with the assistance of United States officials and techical experts. The Australian Bureau of Air Safety Investigation is monitoring the progress of the investigation and has already received a number of information releases. The Spanish authorities have stated that a preliminary examination of the flight data recorder shows normal operation of all engines.
(2) There are no McDonnell Douglas DC I0 aircraft on the Australian Register but eight international airlines operate these aircraft on regular services into Australian airports.
(3) Even when the causes of the accident have been established the Department of Aviation in Australia would have neither the responsibility nor the authority to direct any remedial action in respect of foreign registered DC IO aircraft. Nethertheless the causes, when established, may have relevance to other types of aircraft in this country and that, principally, is why the Australian Bureau is keeping in touch with the findings of the Spanish investigation.
Visual Display Units: Department of the Vice-President of the Executive Council
(Question No. 5317)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Vice-President of the Executive Council, upon notice, on 14 October 1982:
How many visual display units were in use in the Minister's department and statutory authorities which fall within the jurisdiction of the Minister for each of the last 10 years.
Sir James Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
None.


