House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 126, 1982 Tuesday, 23 February 1982
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FOURTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FOURTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

'Prime Minister 'Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources 'Minister for Industry and Commerce 'Minister for Communicatidlfs and Leader of the House 'Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate 'Minister for Foreign Affairs 'Minister for Primary Industry 'Treasurer 'Minister for Defence 'Minister for Finance
'Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
'Attorney-General 'Minister for Social Security 'Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs ~nd Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, KCMG.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

'Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 20 April 1982)

'Prime Minister 'Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources *Treasurer 'Minister for Communications and Leader of the House 'Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate 'Minister For Industry and Commerce 'Minister For Foreign Affairs 'Minister For Primary Industry 'Minister For DeFence 'Minister For Finance
'Minister For Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
, Attorney-General 'Minister For Social Security 'Minister For Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister For Transport Minister For Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister For Science and Technology Minister For Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister For DeFence Minister For Employment and Youth Affairs and
Minister For Business and Consumer Affairs Minister For the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister For Industry and Commerce Minister For Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister For Aboriginal Affairs, Minister For Health and
Minister Assisting the Minister For National Development and Energy Minister For Housing and Construction and Minister Assisting the Minister For Trade and Resources Minister For Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, C.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, KCMG.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
GuilFoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde FiFe
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgma~
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

'Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry AUred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair LeaderoJthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Managero/Opposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader ojthe Liberal Party ojAustralia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. Deputy Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAustralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip ReginaLd Lynch, KCMG. (To 8 April 1982) Deputy Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAustralia-The Honourable John Winston Howard (From 8 April 1982) LeaderoJthe National Country Party oJAustralia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony . Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leaderoflhe Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Han. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas, C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William, CBE. Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.c. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville HaroLd Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson CharLes, David Ernest Child,Joan
Cohen, Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross, Manfred DougLas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertford Duffy, MichaeL John
Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde
Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'HalLoran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
HaIL, Raymond SteeLe Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George
Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John CharLes Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. RaLph James Dunnet
Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W.
Bonython, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld
Parramatta, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qld Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld
Kalgoorlie, WA. Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. BradfieLd, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
LilLey,QLd Fremantle, WA. Herbert, QLd Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S.W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie, N.S.W. Fraser, A.C.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby,S.A.
Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,QLd Denison, Tas. Melbourne PariS, Vic.
Bennelong, N.S.W. Balman. Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A.
Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NCP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP
LP ALP
LP ALP LP LP NCP LP
ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP
ALP
LP ALP ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman. Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson. Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull. David Francis KaUer, Han. Robert Cummin Keating, Han. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel
Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Maher, MichaeL John
(From 23.3.1982) Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Han. John Colinlon Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter,James Robert Robinson, Han. [an Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scott, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roge,r Francis Sinclair. Rt Han. Ian McCahan Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.c. Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Han. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Han. David Scott, M.e. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert [an Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.C Willis, Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonythan Camer~n Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scumn, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld BLaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.CT. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume,N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare,N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic.
Lowe,N.S.W. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trohe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shortland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
ALP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-LiberaL Party of Australia; NCP-NationaL Country Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FOURTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scolt, Mr Tamblingand Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE - Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LtBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, MrO'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Oppo-
sition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jqnes, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and MrHowe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Kalter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKSMr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Teague and Senator Sibraa, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTARY PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariffand Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedurej-H. Evans UsheroJthe Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk oJCommittees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk oJthe House-J. A. PeUifer, CBE. Deputy Clerk oJthe House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Table Office (Bills and Papersj-J. K. Porter
Committee Office-M. Adamson Procedure Office-J. W. Pender Table Office (Programming}-B. C. Wright (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader oJStaJJ(House oJRepresentativesj-R. T. Martin LeaderoJStaJJ(Senatej-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen
x

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
FIRST SESSION: FOURTH PERIOD
Aboriginal Land Rights Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 16 of 1982)An Act to amend the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 and the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Act 1979, and for related purposes.
Albury-Wodonga Development (Financial Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 42 of 1982)An Act to amend the conditions of certain financial assistance provided pursuant to the Albury-Wodonga Development (Financial Assistance) Act 1973 and to repeal section 10 of that Act.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1981-82 (Act No. 35 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1981-82, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1981-82 (Act No. 36 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981.-82 for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Amendment Act 1982 (Act No.5 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Act 1962.
Australian Centre for International Agriculture Research Act 1982 (Act No.9 of 1982)An Act to encourage research for the purpose of identifying, or finding solutions to, agricultural problems of developing countries.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 46 of 1982)An Act to amend the Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977, and for related purposes.
Bounty Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 21 of 1982)An Act to amend the Bounty (Drilling Bits) Act 1980 and the Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981.
Canned Fruits Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 18 of of 1982)- An Act to amend the Canlled Fruits Levy Act 1979.
Canned Fruits Marketing Legislation Repeal and Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 19 of 1982)- An Act relating to the marketing of canned fruits.
Coal Industry Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 25 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Coal Milling Industry Lang Service Leave) Act 1949 and the Coal Research Assistance Act 1977.
Crimes Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 67 of 1982)An Act to amend the Crimes Act 1914, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 30 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs TariffAct 1966.
Customs Tariff Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act 1982 (Act No. 52 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs TariffAct 1966.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act 1982 (Act No. 53 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs TariJf(Allti-Dumpillg) Act 1975.
Customs Tariff (Coal Export Duty) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No.17 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff(Coal Export Duty) Act 1975.
Dairy Products (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1982 (Act No. 10 of 1982)- An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of dairy products for export.
Dairy Products (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1982 (Act No. 11 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dairy Products (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1982.
Domicile Act 1982 (Act No. I of 1982)- An Act relating to domicile.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No.2 of 1982)An Act to amend the Marriage Act 1961 and the Family Law Act 1975 in consequence of the enactment of the Domicile Act 1982.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Act 1982 (Act No.6 of 1982)An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the production of dried sultanas, and for other purposes.
Edible Oils (Export I~spection Charge) Act 1982 (Act No. 12 of 1982)- An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of edible oils for export.
Edible Oils (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1982 (Act No. 13 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Edible Oils (Export Inspectioll Charge) Act 1982.
Eggs (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1982 (Act No. 14 of 1982)- An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of eggs for export.
Eggs (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1982 (Act No. 15 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Eggs (Export Illspectioll Charge) Act 1982.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Excise Tariff (Off-shore Installations) AmendmentAct 1982 (Act No. 540f 1982)- An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Excise Tariff (Coal) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 24 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Excise Tariff (Petroleum) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 45 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Excise TariffAct 1921.
Export Control Act 1982 (Act No. 47 of 1982)An Act to provide for the control of the export of certain goods and for related purposes.
Export Control (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 48 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Export Control Act 1982.
Freedom of Information Act 1982 (Act No.3 of 1982)An Act to give to members of the public rights of access to official documents of the Government of the Commonwealth and of its agencies.
Governor-General Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 44 of 1982)An Act to amend the Governor-General Act 1974 with respect to the salary of the Governor-General.
Health Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 49 ot 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973 and the National Health Act 1953, and for related purposes.
Home Deposit Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 40 of 1982)An Act to assist persons to purchase or build their own homes.
Homes Savings Grant Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 41 of 1982)An Act to amend the Homes Savings Grant Act 1964 and the Homes Savings Grant Act 1976 for the purpose of terminating their operation.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 29 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 38 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 39 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
International Financial Institutions (Share Increase) Act 1982 (Act No.7 of 1982)An Act relating to the purchase of additional shares of the capital stock of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and of the International Finance Corporation.
International Fund for Agricultural Development Act 1982 (Act No. 50 of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the International Fund for Agricultural Development.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No.4 of 1982)- An Act to amend the International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1963.
Loan Act 1982 (Act No. 32 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
Off-shore Installations (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 51 of 1982)- An Act to apply the provisions of certain Acts to off-shore installations.
Overseas Students Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 22 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Overseas Students Charge Act 1979.
Overseas Students Charge Collection Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 23 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Overseas Students Charge Collection Act 1979.
Radiocommunications Licence Fees Act 1982 (Act No. 65 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect oflicences under the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1905.
Radiocommunications (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 66 of 1982)An Act to amend the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1905 and the Overseas Telecommunications Act 1946 and to provide for certain matters consequential upon the enactment of the Radiocommunicalions Licence Fees Act 1982.
Repatriation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 20 of 1982)An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920, and for related purposes.
Roads Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 43 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Roads Grants Act 1981.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 55 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.1) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 56 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 57 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 58 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 59 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 60 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 61 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 62 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 63 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act 1982 (Act No. 64 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Senate Elections (Queensland) Act 1982 (Act No. 31 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the Senators for the State of Queensland to be chosen by the people of that State voting as one electorate.
Social Services Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 37 of 1982)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947 and the Social Services Amendment Act 1979.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No.8 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
StatesGrants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 28 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States Gralils (Schools Assistance) Act 1980.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 27 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Gralils (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981 and the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 260f 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Supply Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 33 of 1982)An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Supply Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 340f 1982)An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FOURTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
iCustoms and Excise Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Defence Force Discipline Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
.rertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
iHoney (Export Inspection Charge) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Honey (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982Inititiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensi~ns) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Death ofMr A. A. Armstrong OBE., M.e.

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 413

Tuesday, 23 February 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
DISTINGUISHED VISITOR
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that we have present in the gallery this afternoon Mrs Stana Tomasevic-Arnesen, President of the Federal Chamber of the Assembly of Yugoslavia. On behalf of the House I extend to our distinguished visitor a very warm welcome.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
DEATH OF MR A. A. ARMSTRONG, OBE., M.C.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-I move:
That this House expresses its deep regret at the death yesterday of Mr A. A. Armstrong, a member of this House for the Division of Riverina from 1965 to 1969, places on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service and tenders its profound sympathy to his widow and family in their bereavement.
It was with great personal regret that I learned of the death of Bill Armstrong who held the seat of Riverina for the Country Party in this Parliament from 1965 to 1969. Adam Alexander Armstrong OBE., M.C., or Bill, as he was known to us all, was born on 1 July 1909 at Deniliquin. He was elected to this Parliament in the by-election of 27 February 1965 and followed in the footsteps of Hugh Roberton who had held Riverina for the Country Party from 1949 to 1965. He made his maiden speech on 13 May 1965.
Although Bill Armstrong was a member of this Parliament for a relatively short period, he served it and the electors of Riverina with great dedication and distinction. During his time in the Parliament he was a member of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and was a member of the parliamentary delegation which visited South East Asia in June and July of 1966. He served on a number of back bench committees, especially the committees on national development and economics and finance. His interest in these areas enabled him to pursue his own interests so successftdly, to the ultimate benefit of his electorate and the country. Moreover, as a former President of the Conargo Shire and as Chairman of the Deniliquin Pastures Protection Board he was able to bring to his parliamentary duties a useful collection of community experience.
Like so many of his generation Bill Armstrong saw military service during the Second World War. He served with the 38th Australian Infantry Battalion in 1939 and 1940. He was made a

lieutenant in 1940 and joined the Second Australian Imperial Force on 1 September 1942. He saw service overseas in the South West Pacific area from 1943 to 1945. He was decorated with the Military Cross and mentioned in dispatches. Bill Armstrong's great love was racing. He was official starter for the Victoria Racing Club from 1951 to 1970. I am sure honourable members will recall his presence at many a Melbourne Cup. It was for these and many other public services that he was made an officer of the Order of the British Empire in 1972.
Mr Speaker, to his widow, three sons and a daughter, on behalf of the Government and on behalf of this Parliament, I extend our deepest sympathies at their sad loss. His service to his electorate and to this Parliament is a matter of public record. It is a matter he was proud of and it is a matter his family has every right to be proud of. With his passing we, as members of this House, have lost a fine friend and colleague. I commend the motion to the House.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition I join in the expression of condolence to the surviving members of the family of the late Bill Armstrong. I served in the Parliament with him. His period of service here was relatively short, between 1965 and 1969. He entered as a spokesman deeply steeped in the traditions and standards of the National Country Party and he discharged his service here according to those traditions and standards. He was always faithful and loyal to that party. He sought to serve what he believed were the objectives of that party and which in turn he obviously believed would best meet the aspirations of the people he represented in this Parliament.
He gave loyal service to this country as a member of the armed Services, just as he gave loyal service to his party and to this Parliament. He was extraordinarily popular, I recall, even though he was here for only a short period. As a non-punting member of the community, I confess envying the camaraderie and the tight sub-culture of the racing fraternity whose interests he represented and jealously attended to in various ways in this Parliament, as do many other members in this Parliament from different quarters. But essentially he was a popular member. He was hard working. He faithfully sought to represent the people of his electorate to the best of his abilities. The Opposition joins with the Government in expressing condolences to the surviving members of the family of the late Bill Armstrong.

414 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Deaih ofMr A. A. Armstrong OBE., M.e.

Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Mr Speaker, I join with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in expressing condolence to the family of Bill Armstrong. I thank the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition for their very kind remarks. All of us of the National Country Party were saddened last night when we learned of the passing of Bill Armstrong. Bill was more than a parliamentary colleague. Bill was a good friend, a gentleman and a man whose heart was firmly in the land and with the country people. We got a clue of his lifelong interest in horses and racing when he made his maiden speech on 13 May 1965. Referring to Hugh Roberton, his predecessor as member for Riverina, who happily we still see from time to time, Bill Armstrong said:
It happens that the Riverina electorate has chosen as its new representative one whose blood lines are similar to those of the former member. Hugh Roberton is a Scot who was imported into this country. I happen to be of Scots descent and to have been born here.

In World War II Bill Armstrong had a distinguished record. As the Prime Minister mentioned, he served with the 38th Australian Infantry Battalion in 1939 and 1940 and then with the Second Australian Imperial Force. He saw service in the South West Pacific area from 1943 to 1945, being mentioned in dispatches and decorated with the Military Cross.
Bill Armstrong was well known for his association with racing. He was the Victoria Racing Club's official starter from 1952 to 1970 and he started 18 or 19 Melbourne Cups. His racing advice was valued by many of his parliamentary colleagues. He also had an incredible memory. His memory for horse races, sporting events and family histories was something that had to be marvelled at. He was virtually a walking encyclopedia. If a person wanted to know the> name of a property, who owned it and who married whom, Bill Armstrong had all the information. If ever there was an argument he was the person to settle it.

I note, Mr Speaker, that the racing reference was taken up by the following speaker, Ted Peters, of the Australian Labor Party. He congratulated Bill Armstrong on his maiden speech and then added, perhaps a little unkindly to the rest of us:
I can say with absolute honesty that he is a Phar Lap in a field of hacks.
I would commend Bill Armstrong's maiden speech to all honourable members as an example of the vision of Australia's place in the world, of our problems and of our responsibility to mankind, as Bill Armstrong saw them.
He was elected to this House on 27 February 1965 and again in 1966. He held the seat until 1969 when he was defeated by Mr A. J. Grassby. It was a difficult electorate at the time because of the wheat quota issue, but he realised and accepted that such a plan proposed by the Australian Wheat growers Federation and supported by the Government was the only course to follow. He loyally supported the Federation and the Commonwealth Government but failed to retain the seat.
Bill Armstrong's service to the National Country Party did not end with his departure from Parliament. He worked hard and most effectively for us almost until the time of his death. Not many knew how much he helped us, but he did and I want to place on record my pers.onal appreciation to both Bill and his wife Marj for their outstanding service to our cause.

The fact. that the House today is paying tribute to a private member is recognition of his work to the Parliament. He served here and in his electorate with dedication, with skill and with a sense of common sense and judgment that marked everything he did. We honour him also because of the kind of man he was. Bill Armstrong was a quiet, dignified and unassuming man. He did not command respect by demanding it. Instead he won respect from both sides of the House and in the wider community because of his sincerity, because ofhis clear concern for people and their problems and because he was moved by Australia's problems and wanted to play his part in trying to solve them.
One of his great interests was the well-being and development of Riverina and its people. He recognised the tremendous importance to the Riverina and other places of secure water supplies and he worked hard for that security. He also had a wide knowledge of grazing, agriculture and horticulture, and served the rural community through local government and other organisations. His service to the community was recognised in 1972 when he was made an officer of the Order of the British Empire. I know that I speak for all honourable members, but especially for my party colleagues, when I offer our deepest symphathy to Mrs Armstrong, her daughter and three sons. They had a husband and father of whom they can be very proud. We have lost a colleague and friend for whom we had the warmest of affection.

Death ofMr A. A. Armstrong o.B.E., M.e.

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 415

Mr HICKS (Riverina)-I add my support to the condolence motion moved by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in paying a tribute to the late Bill Armstrong, a former member for Riverina in this House. I knew Bill Armstrong for about only two years before his passing but during those years I came to respect and admire this great Australian. Although the recipient of the Military Cross for gallantry in the South West Pacific during the Second World War, as other speakers have mentioned, and the recipient of the Order of the British Empire, because of his humble unassuming nature, few people would have been aware of those decorations.
Three weeks ago, in company with the New South Wales State member for Murray, Mr Tim Fisher, I visited Bill at his home on the outskirts of Deniliquin. He spoke of Australia, its past and its future, reliving old debates in the Parliament and remembering old friends and old adversaries, many of whom predeceased him. He spoke highly of all those who had entered the Houses of Parliament and recognised that although their political viewpoint differed their concern for Australia was real. He knew that although he was not going to be present for much longer, Australia had a great future. His memories turned to racing and he spoke with affection of some of the great horses of the Australian turf and of the many Melbourne Cups of which he had been the official starter. I will and I am sure the Riverina will miss Bill Armstrong, the man who was always willing to assist in any work that he felt would advance the Riverina, which was his home, and the nation of which he was so proud. I add my condolences to those expressed by the Prime Minister and other speakers to Mrs Armstrong and her family.
Mr GILES (Wakefield)-I shall not keep the House for very long. I want to be associated with those members who have spoken and the motion that has .been moved by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). As a Liberal Party member and not a National Country Party member, I must draw that distinction and say how very fond personally I was of Bill Armstrong. I once flew with Bill Armstrong whilst serving with a rural committee which in those days used to fly around Australia. It was an absolute amazement to me to fly over every pastoral area and outback farm throughout the length and breadth of Australia
'and when one said 'What IS that, Bill?' he would
give a potted history of who owned it, who used to own it, and who started and established the par- . ticular property.
As other speakers have said, Bill Armstrong had an absolutely photographic memory in relation to every top pastoral area in Australia. He

had an amazing photographic memory. The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) has mentioned Bill Armstong's amazing memory in terms of the racehorse industry. I would go one further and remind the House that Bill Armstrong could number all the Melbourne Cup winners from day one to the present day, and it took some minutes so to describe them.
I believe that Bill Armstrong's friendship transcended party allegiances in this House, and he had respect for those who worked here over a long period. Perhaps the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), as a strong adherent to and interested person in the racehorse industry, will not mind my saying that years ago in England I went to Ascot, by myself, to see the famous racehorse Nijinsky race. I was completely alone; I knew no one. Suddenly, Bill Armstrong came into view. He had by then been beaten in his parliamentary seat of Riverina. I spent the rest of the day with Bill and his very charming wife. To his wife and family I join with other speakers in expressing my deep regret at Bill's passing, which is a loss to the Australian nation.
Mr LUSHER (Hume)-I should like briefly to add my condolences to those already offered to Mrs Armstrong and her family and to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). I did not know Bill Armstrong as a member of this House. I knew him only after he left it. It will be known to many that as a result of his strong interest in racing, he was known very widely through large parts of my electorate, which, although not in a divisional sense in Riverina, in a geographic sense are accepted as being part of that great area of New South Wales.
Bill Armstrong was obviously very active and he was extraordinarily highly respected by all those who knew him. He was a man who was particularly kind to me. He took an interest in me and gave me a lot of advice. I valued the friendship that we had. I add my condolence not only on my own behalf but on behalf of the large number of people in Hume who were friends of and who enjoyed the friendship of Bill Armstrong, and to pass that condolence on to his wife and family.
Question resolved in the affirmative, honourable members standing in their places.
Mr SPEAKER-I thank the House.
DISTINGUISHED VISITOR
Mr SPEAKER-I wish to inform the House that we have as a visitor in the chamber today the Right Honourable Alick Buchanan-Smith, Minis" ter of State for Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in

416 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Questions Without Notice

the Government of the United Kingdom. I am sure that the House welcomes him.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
BUDGET DEFICIT
Mr HUMPHREYS-:My question, which is directed to the Treasurer, concerns the Treasurer's recent acknowledgment that the Budget deficit will blowout by several hundred million dollars, and later reports that the blowout is likely to .be about $1.4 billion, to make this year's public sector borrowfng requirements the highest on record. What are the Treasurer's current expectations of the extent oftlje deficit blowout? What limitations on that blowout does he expect to achieve through the expenditure restraint measures introduced a few weeks ago? Will the Government finance that increased deficit through increased borrowings from the public or from the Reserve Bank of Australia? If it is from the former, what effect does the Treasurer expect such borrowings to have on interest rates?
Mr HOWARD-I am very pleased that the honourable member for Griffith, as a member of the Australian Labor Party Opposition in this place, acknowledges that big Budget deficits add to the public sector borrowing requirement and also that a larger public sector borrowing requirement adds to pressure on interest rates. It is a proposition that the Government has been advancing for some time but the Leader of the Opposition and the honourable member for Gellibrand have some difficulty in grasping it. It is true that on present indications the Budget deficit will be some hundreds of millions of dollars higher than the figure of $146m which was estimated at the time the Budget was brought down. I stress at the outset that that projection has to be read against the fact that, as the year draws to a close, fluctuations in revenue collections can affect the outcome. The two principal areas of concern are the fact that salaries and wages in both defence and non~defence areas have gone up several hundreds of millions of dollars more than we anticipated and on present indications, subject to any variations in the right direction regarding company tax and provisional tax collections, there looks like being a shortfall in revenue of somewhere between $300m and $400m.
Mr Humphreys-Why is that?
Mr HOWARD-The principal reasons for that are, firstly, the obstruction of the Senate in

not passing the sales tax legislation. If we are looking for scapegoats for extra interest rate pressure, according to the considerations laid down by the questioner himself, we ought at least to look in part to the obstruction of the Senate in blocking that sales tax legislation. Secondly, because of increased industrial strife in Bass Strait, crude oil levy collections this year look like being le&s than we anticipated them to be. Finally, the actual out-
come will not only be influenced by what happens with revenue collections against the considerations I mentioned, but also the Government is currently undertaking a very firm effort to contain departmental expenditure within original budgetary allocations and, to the extent possible, to absorb the salary and wage increases which have occurred. Against that background one ought to bear in mind the figures that I have given.

LOAN COUNCIL

Mr STEELE HALL-I ask the Treasurer whether he will table the terms of reference given to the committee set up to study the future of the Loan Council. Who are the members of the committee which is to conduct that study? When will the committee report and to whom will it report?

Mr HOWARD-I would be very happy to table the committee's terms of reference as they were made public on Friday. The members of the committee comprise officials of the Commonwealth and State governments. It is an inquiry into the operation of a body which has been in existence since 1927, I think. It is an inquiry that is long overdue. We have no preconceived notions, as a government, as to the outcome of that inquiry except that we would want, as a national government, to retain a very direct interest in and control over the direction of national economic policy and management.

The Loan Council was set up to achieve a

number of purposes, including the co-ordination

of public sector borrowings. It must serve the

interests of the Commonwealth in discharging its

national economic responsibility. It must also

serve the interests of the States in facilitatirig the

orderly raising of the necessary loan monies. I

would be very happy to arrange for the terms of

reference to be tabled and to provide to the

honourable gentleman and, indeed, to any other

honourable member of the House, any further in-

formation that they want about this very desirable

and very valuable inquiry.

.

ECONOMY
Mr WEST-I refer the Prime Minister to his 1975 policy speech when he said that a government which understands and can manage the

Questions Without Notice

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 417

Australian economy is essential to Australian prosperity. Does the Prime Minister realise that because of the blowout of the Budget deficit the total public sector borrowing requirement this financial year is likely to be well in excess of $6,000m, the highest on record? Does the Prime Minister also realise that total Commonwealth tax receipts--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will cease giving information and ask for information.
Mr WEST-Is it a fact that total Commonwealth tax receipts plus the Budget deficit this year are likely to amount to almost 26.5 per cent of gross domestic product, well above the average for the three years of the Labor Government? Will the Prime Minister now admit the total failure of his Government's economic strategy and acknowledge that his Government's economic mismanagement is responsible for the current depressed state of the Australian economy?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I would like an opportunity to check some of the figures in the honourable gentleman's long exposition and if he puts the question on the Notice Paper I will do just that. I think the honourable gentleman ought to understand that this economy, as a result of our policies, stands in a much stronger position than that of almost any other industrial country. Employment has been growing in this country and in other countries employment has been shrinking. We have a situation where there is real growth throughout this economy. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has suggested that this economy will still grow significantly faster than the average of other advanced industrial countries in the period ahead of us. That is a pretty good performance because we are very much a trading country. We live on our capacity to sell many commodities in markets around the world. In situations of enormously depressed world conditions, quitely clearly the returns we get from our exports are markedly reduced. Despite those difficulties, this economy is still growing. It is growing strongly. The employment base has also been growing as a result of our policies. If the honourable gentleman would like further information on specific matters relating to the figures he had in his question, if he puts the question on the Notice Paper I will see what advice I can provide to him.
JAPANESE BEEF IMPORTS
Mr HICKS-Is the Minister for Trade and Resources aware of Japan's reduction in overall beef imports this fiscal year and of disturbing reports of preference being given to imports from the

United States of America at Australia's expense? What is the outcome of representations which the Government has been making on these issues to the Japanese Government?
Mr ANTHONY-Concern has been expressed at the decline in Japan's import levels this year. As a-result, the Minister for Primary Industry made a visit to Japan just prior to Christmas to express concern and to get an assurance that Japan would live up to its Multilateral Trade Negotiations undertaking to import 135,000 tonnes in 1982. The Minister was given assurances that that figure would be reached and that there would be no discrimination against Australia. We had an unfortunate episode last month when the Livestock Industry Promotion Corporation-the importing body in Japan-put out a tender for 7,000 tonnes of beef. Half of it was to go to grainfed beef. That meant that a preference was being given to United States exports. As a result of the release of that tender, we protested to the Japanese. I called in the Japanese Ambassador and expressed concern that if this was to be a trend it would be discriminating severely against Australia. The Ambassador, after consulting with Japan, gave an assurance that there would be further tenders for the year and that they would be back nearer the norm. I am pleased to say that in the last couple of weeks two further tenders have been issued. Both of those tenders are back nearer the norm, with approximately 26 per cent to 29 per cent going to grain fed beef. I am much relieved to know that Australia will still be able to get a high percentage of its beef into the Japanese market.
BUDGET FORECAST
Dr EVERINGHAM-I refer the Treasurer to his anticipation, expressed again this morning, that the Budget deficit will be some hundreds of millions of dollars higher than forecast. I ask: When did he first receive advice that last August's Budget forecast was awry? When was that advice conveyed to the Prime Minister and the Cabinet? Does the Treasurer consider that the forecast, despite the new factors he has outlined in his first reply today, was ever realistically achievable or probable, or does it follow the previous Treasurer's tradition of rubbery Budget figures?
Mr HOWARD-To the best of my recollection, without checking the record, I think it first became apparent about six weeks or two months ago that on either side or both sides there could be significant variations. Once again to the best of my recollection, knowledge of this was conveyed as promptly as possible in the circumstances to my

418 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Questions Without Notice

colleagues. Naturally I have kept my colleagues very fully informed of this situation.
The honourable gentleman suggests that in some way the original Budget figuring was unrealistic. Let me reject that. Firstly, on the revenue side, we thought the Senate was going to behave. responsibly. We thought the Australian Democrats were going to do what they said they would do and, therefore, we made the not unnatural assumption that the sales tax legislation would be passed. We had made a fairly generous allowance in our crude oil levy collectionscalculation for the effects of industrial strife, but we apparently did not make a big enough allowance for the effects of industrial stoppages.
It is true that the report of the Coldham Committee of Reference for Defence Force Pay recommended increases in Service pay that were significantly beyond the allowances that had been made by the Department of Finance in putting together the Estimates.
For the information of the honourable gentleman and the House, I make the very obvious point-I do so not in criticism in any way of the officials or the Department of Finance-that essentially these sorts of Estimates are done by officials and are accepted by Ministers. They are not political figures; they are figures which are based upon the advice of officials who do not have political axes to grind in putting them together. To suggest otherwise is, I think, unfair to them. The fact is that the figures proved to be higher than estimated. For good and proper reasons related both to equity so far as salaries are concerned and also to defence Service morale, the Government properly, in my view, decided to implement in full the recommendations of the Coldham report. In plain terms, I reject the suggestion made by the honourable gentleman that in some way the Budget figuring was contrived.
PENSION PAYMENT INCREASES
Mr BIRNEY-Is the Treasurer aware of a growing concern among some pensioners that the forthcoming increase in pension payments resulting from automatic consumer price index increases will place pensions in a category that will attract income tax? Will he take action to alleviate this concern?
Mr HOWARD-I am aware of some concern amongst Australian pensioners that as a result of the increase that will occur in May the amount of the pension will go over the present tax threshold. I say quite plainly and unequivocally that that will not be the situation. Suggestions that it will be

are designed not to help Australian pensioners but to frighten therp.. I hope that those who are really concerned about the well-being and the peace of mind of Australian pensioners will join me and other honourable members on this side of the House in putting to rest any fears that Australian pensioners might have on that score.
ARGYLE DIAMONDS
Mr KEATING-I ask the Minister for Trade and Resources a question on diamonds. I do so in the realisation that the Government will need some time to analyse the announced basis of agreement between Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd and the Central Selling Organisation of the De Beers Mining Company. Does the Minister believe that the question of the value of Argyle diamonds is central to any benefit which may accrue to the nation either by way of dividends in the case of companies or by way of taxation receipts or royalties in the case of governments? Does the Minister believe that it would be unsatisfactory for any contract between Australia and De Beers to be based upon valuations established essentially by De Beers' valuers? Does the Minister see a role for the Commonwealth in making an Australian assessment of the value of Argyle produce, that is, an Australian assessment other than that made by the companies involved? If he does not see a role for the Commonwealth, can he suggest how he believes the national revenue should be protected against transfer pricing whether it occurs intentionally or otherwise?
Mr ANTHONY-I believe all Australians are very pleased that we have made a major diamond discovery in the Kimberleys in the north-west of Western Australia and that this offers potential for a new mining industry in Australia. It is a large-scale operation and, of course, the success of that operation will depend upon a satisfactory marketing arrangement. Discussions have taken place between CRA and the Central Selling Organisation in South Africa in relation to that matter. The Prime Minister and I have been kept informed but, until I have had a formal reply as to the final arrangements, I would rather ,ot comment on that aspect. I think the point made by the honourable member is a very salient one; that is, it will largely depend upon the valuation for those diamonds as to whether the national interest is being properly served. I have had consultations with the Western Australian Minister for Resources Development as to what his Government will be doing in this regard. Under the terms of the agreement entered into with the Argyle joint venturers, sorting and valuation of the diamonds will

Questions Without Notice

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 419

have to take place in Western Australia for royalty purposes. I believe that the Commonwealth Government also has a responsibility. It is important that the Commonwealth Government has a valuer who periodically will check the values of the diamonds leaving the country. There would be no point in the Commonwealth's merely duplicating the work that will be done by the Western Australian Government. I am told that the company also will have its independent valuers to do checks. Therefore, with the two governments and the company checking on the value of the stones, I think we have a fair chance of the national interest being safeguarded. I am not too sure whether many people understand the complexities of the valuation of those stones. Diamonds handled by. the CSO are valued stone by stone against a series of about 2,000 diamonds. That is the London assortment for diamonds. A value is placed on each one of the stones and is recorded. It is a very complex measure and it takes time to do. I think from what I have told honourable members, and the assurance I have given to the House, it is clear that the Commonwealth will be doing its utmost to ensure that our national interest is fully protected as far as the value of diamonds is concerned.
EXPORT OF HIGH PROTEIN MEAT MEAL
Mr GILES-I address my question to the Minister for Primary Industry. Has the Government decided to free up the discriminatory restrictions on the export of Australian produced high protein meat meal?
Mr NIXON-Restrictions on the export of meat meal were introduced in 1958 to try to ensure adequate domestic supply. In the last few months, I have satisfied myself that there is adequate domestic supply. I see no further reason to maintain the restrictions and I have therefore moved to lift them; I should tell the industry though, because of concern expressed by the white meats industry about market control, that I will be monitoring closely to see that supplies are made freefy available on the domestic market at normal commercial prices.
PRIVATE CAPITAL INFLOW
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister a question. Is it a fact that the Budget strategy involved a level of private capital inflow of around $7,500m, or $625m per month? Is it also a fact that private capital inflow for the first seven months of the year has averaged only $430m per month? Therefore, does this require an average

inflow in excess of $900m per month for the remainder of the year if the Government's target is to be met? I therefore ask: In view of the likelihood that foreign capital inflow will not be enough to cover the balance of trade on current account and in view of the blow-out of the Budget deficit, will he guarantee that he will not seek to offset these failures of Government economic policy with scarcer money, higher interest rates and an even more vicious credit squeeze into the second half of this calendar year, in the unwise mannerso characteristic of the Government in cases like this?
Mr HOWARD-The Leader of the Opposition now, like the honourable member for Gellibrand several months ago, is labouring under the misapprehension that the Budget strategy is to get a given amount of private capital inflow. The Budget strategy is essentially one of bringing about anti-inflationary conditions. Elements of that are contributed by a large number of factors. The appropriate size of private capital inflow is determined by the size of the current account deficit and also by the rate of domestic credit expansion. All the factors taken together have an effect on the inflationary environment. I can assure the honourable gentleman that we will continue to follow a firm monetary policy, a monetary policy which will not create the sorts of conditions that the honourable gentleman and some of his colleagues around Australia, including the President of the Australian Labor Party, would like Australians to be frightened into believing will occur. Fighting inflation and making a contribution to that fight by an appropriately firm monetary policy remains the principal aim of the Government. The honourable gentleman knows from his own experience that private capital inflow is one of the most difficult elements to determine in a Budget calCulation. The final outcome will obviously be determined by domestic liquidity conditions in the last four or five months of this financial year. If I were the Leader of the Opposition I would not put too many bets yet on what the level of that private capital inflow will be.
IRON ORE INDUSTRY
Mr DRUMMOND-The Minister for Trade and Resources would be aware of the difficulties being experienced by the Australian iron ore industry. Can he inform the House of the nature of those difficulties and what might be done about them?
Mr ANTHONY-I am very concerned about the declining viability of the Australian iron ore industry. It is not as a result of any inefficiency on

420 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Questions Without Notice

its part. Its members would be amongst the world's most efficient producers. It is basically a combination of factors. Prices have not been going up in real terms as much as inflation has. The importers of iron ore have been playing a depressed market and keeping prices relatively low. Also, the mining operations have not been operating at full capacity although they have had to carry the same overheads. These factors have been bearing very heavily on the viability of the iron ore industry.
I have expressed concern to the steel makers in Japan. I have also consulted with the Western Australian Government and I am very pleased to see that it too has been making representations to the Japanese steel makers that if they want to preserve a secure base for importing iron ore from Australia there has to be a continuation of investment in that industry to ensure that there will not be suddenly a loss of supply and a severe rise in the market. There has to be a continuity of mining operations. I have also used our powers over export controls to assist the companies in being able to obtain the best prices possible. I think the steel industry in Japan should watch the situation very closely because if the iron ore industry reaches the stage where it can no longer continue investment in future projects, ultimately there will be a shortage of supply.
DEFENCE FORCE PAY
Mr SCHOLES-My question is directed to the Minister for Defence. In an answer to an earlier question the Treasurer indicated that unexpectedly high increases in defence salaries were a substantial cause for the Budget blowout. In view of the fact that approximately only 6 per cent was allowed in the last Budget for increases in Defence Force salaries as compared with a figure of 13.5 per cent for average community salaries in the Budget Papers, were the defence forces expected to receive salary rises substantially below those of the rest of the community or were the defence forces salary rises approved by the tribunal in line with those to which the defence forces were entitled? Does the Minister consider that they were excessive?
Mr KILLEN-No, I most certainly do not consider that the rises were excessive. His Honour Mr Justice Coldham and his colleagues, in approaching a review of Defence Force pay, applied completely new principles, which had been adverted to by honourable members in this Parliament over a variety of years but which had never been adopted. In making his determination Mr Justice Coldham advanced the argument that there were significant differences in lifestyle between civil

servants on the one hand-if you like, the general community-and those who serve in Her Majesty's armed forces. That is a view that the Government has accepted. We have regarded Mr Justice Coldham's tribunal as having the characteristics of an arbitral b0dy. Plainly, as my distinguished friend the Treasurer has said, this has presented the Department of Defence with problems. We have sought to absorb within the current Defence vote as much of the increases as we possibly can.. That absorbtion, of course, will be marked by the fact that there will be no dislocation to the defence capability of the nation.
HOUSING: SPECIAL MEETING OF STATE PREMIERS
Mr EWEN CAMERON-My question is addressed to the Treasurer. Has the Government been informed of a special meeting of State Premiers to be held later this week to discuss housing? Will the Government respond to proposals which might emerge from that meeting?
Mr HOWARD-Of course the Government is aware of this meeting which I understand has been convened by the Victorian Premier and which I imagine will be attended by all Premiers from around Australia with perhaps one or two exceptions. I say to the honourable gentleman that the Commonwealth Government will, of course, look seriously at any propositions that come out of this meeting. Naturally, I am not going to make any forward commitment as to how the Government might respond to proposals that have not even been made, but it does give me an opportunity to make it absolutely plain that, contrary to some of the reports that emerged from last Friday's meeting, the Commonwealth Government has not closed the door on some initiatives in the housing area. We are aware of the concern felt around Australia regarding this issue. We are aware that if we are to address this matter realistically we have to address the problem of the availability of money for home lending institutions before we address and try to solve some of the problems that are being posed at present by the price of that money.
We are hopeful that the States will address their minds to those issues and in particular to the analysis contained in the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. We hope they will address their minds to some of the material in that report so far as it relates to this issue. I can assure the honourable gentleman that part of the examination that is being conducted by the Government at present will, of course, embrace a response to and an analysis of any sensible proposals put forward to

Questions Without Notice

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 421

us by the States. The final comment I would like to make on the housing issue is that our concern will be to adopt policies that help young Australian home buyers, not to make statements that are calculated to scare them, such as the statements made by Mr Wran at the weekend.
UNITED NATIONS FUNDING
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Has the Minister for Foreign Affairs seen reports to the effect that Australia proposes deliberately to postpone payment of $16m in United Nations dues and $43m in bilateral aid programs? Would that mean that Australia's international reputation would be severely damaged? Accordingly, I ask the Minister: Are these reports correct? In what areas of expenditure is deferment proposed?
Mr STREET-I thank the Deputy Leader of the Opposition for his question; it enables me to clear up any misunderstanding there may be. Contrary to allegations in articles in today's Press, I emphasise that Australia is not in default of any of its payments due to programs of the United nations and its affiliated agencies. The Government intends that all its commitments shall be met. It is anticipated that there will be some underexpenditure in aid in the current financial year. That is not surprising given the size and complexity of the program, especially in view of the large increase provided for that purpose in the last Budget. Consultations are currently being held between officers of my Department and the Department of Finance with a view to identifying areas in which underexpenditure may occur. It is our intention that wherever possible funds so identified will not be lost to the aid program. Consideration is being given to the estasblishment of a suitable trust fund arrangement to enable funds to be carried forward.
GORDON-FRANKLIN RIVERS POWER SCHEME
Mr BURR-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. Has the Federal Government received representations requesting the Commonwealth to use its influence in Loan Council to prevent borrowings by the Tasmanian Government for the development of the GordonFranklin Rivers power scheme? Does the Commonwealth have power to veto the scheme through the Loan Council and is such action contemplated?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-A good deal has been written about this issue. I think it is necessary to make a distinction between the normal loan funds that are available to States and infrastructure proposals. There has been no infrastructure

proposal for that scheme. I do not know whether the State wants to try to put one forward. Quite some time ago now new infrastructure proposals were frozen-none have been accepted since that time-because the overall borrowing requirement of the States was rising very rapidly and very seriously. There was going to be a very significant bunching effect in the borrowing requirement of States for various infrastructure proposals and the already approved projects had not worked their way through the system to that extent. Against that background, I think it most unlikely that there would be any new approval for any projects.
I also was advised earlier that the funds required for that proposal on the Franklin were in fact smaller on a current cost basis than those required for an earlier scheme on the Gordon which was funded out of the normal Loan Council borrowing programs. I have put the view-I am quite certain it is correct-that, no matter what the States might think of a particular project, all States would object vigorously if the Commonwealth were to impose its decision making on the normal programs of the States. These are matters for which the States must carry responsibility. One of the things we need to understand is that very often people in the community address questions to the government that is responsible for the issues concerned and, if those people fail to get the answer they want from that government, they address the same question to a government that is not responsible for the issues.
On this matter clearly the State Government has responsibility. Why else would the State Government have held a referendum on the matter? The referendum might not have helped the State Government very much; nevertheless, it held the referendum and it made certain decisions. Whatever decisions the State government makes I believe they need to carryon their own account. It is within the State government's constitutional authority to make such decisions. Irrespective of whether those decisions are good or bad, it is the State government that needs to be responsible for them. That responsibility cannot be transferred merely because a State government's decision does not suit some people.
TELECOM AUSTRALIA: VIDEOTEX SYSTEM
Mr SCOTT-Is the Minister for Communications aware that the Livestock and Grain Producers Association of New South Wales has made a submission to the public inquiry into telecommunication services in Australia which supports Telecom's prime role in developing videotex? Is the Minister further aware that the Association

422 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Questions Without Notice

has submitted that the decision he made last October to prevent Telecom pursuing videotex had been hasty and not in the interests of the rural community as a whole? Has the Minister received representations expressing a similar view? Will he reconsider Government policy on this matter?
Mr SINCLAIR-I have received no communications from the Livestock and Grain Producers Association on this matter, but no doubt the honourable gentleman was interested to read in the media this morning that two Victorian companies have introduced a videotex proposal on a national basis based on Prestel. I am told that in fact it is a more extensive service at this stage than would have been offered by Telecom if Telecom had undertaken the proposal. Let me reiterate for those who might be interested in opening such a service that Telecom is, of course, quite prepared to co-operate in providing those parts of the service that require a technical base. Had Telecom adopted the proposal it would have been impossible for others seeking to introduce either the present state of the art or subsequently developed states of the art to provide those services because Telecom, with a monopoly in a particular area, obviously would have been a reluctant partner. Telecom, of course, has the only Australia wide cable service. I understand that the videotex service that has been introduced by two Melbourne-based companies is now available in every State capital in Australia except, I think, Darwin and Hobart. I would hope that it will meet the requirements of the Livestock and Grain Producers-indeed, every other potential Australian customer.
PUBLIC BROADCASTING STATIONS IN MELBOURNE
Mr FALCONER-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications. I refer to the statement by the Minister on 14 February announcing that applications would be called soon for nine new frequency modulation public broadcasting stations in the Sydney area. These will be category C licences. Can the Minister inform the House when a similiar stage is likely to be reached in the development of public broadcasting in Melbourne? Can he assure me that the outer eastern area of Melbourne around Ringwood, where there are groups interested in applying for such a licence andwhere a test broadcast was carried out last year, will be included in any such development?
Mr SINCLAIRIt is quite true that there has been a development which I think is much to be commended in that applications are now being called for nine low power category C public radio

stations in Sydney. As the honourable gentleman has intimated, there is interest in many parts of Australia in similiar low powered stations. I think it is worth looking at the state of progress and seeing what can be done in Melbourne and indeed in other communities. It is of interest that at the moment, I am told, only one potential public broadcaster has indicated interest in a low powered public broadcasting station in Melbourne. The nine low powered public stations that have been called for in Sydney are regarded as a pilot project. Indeed, they were foreshadowed by my predecessor as long ago as 1978. The Government, on its own, cannot plan these mini stations serving small localised communities. Rather they need to begin at the bottom and come from the community. In the instance of the New South Wales stations, the New South Wales Public Broadcasting Association co-ordinated the activities of a number of potential applicants so that there was developed a coherent plan which embraced all the Sydney area and which was based on those community groups' requirements. Of course, there are still some areas of Sydney that I am told are not covered. One would hope that the New South Wales Public Broadcasting Association will be able to take those areas into account in the future. I hope that it will now be possible for a body equivalent to the New South Wales Public Broadcasting Association to develop a similarly coherent proposal for Victoria. Indeed, the Public Broadcasting Association of Australia has already, I understand, initiated some discussions towards this end. I hope therefore that Melburnians will not be denied the benefits, subject to the applications beginning in the community in the same manner as they began in Sydney.
REFUGEE PROGRAM
Mr YOUNG-I direct a question to the Prime Minister. Is the Australian refugee program subject to the announced Government expenditure cuts?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The decision in relation to the holding of expenditure in certain areas until the Government had made decisions was one in relation to holding discretionary expenditure. I would not regard the refugee program as discretionary expenditure but I will have consultations with the Ministers concerned in relation to it to see how the matter is progressing.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Tuckey having addressed a question to the Minister for Industrial Relations-

Questions Without Notice

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 423

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out or order. I am not going to allow questions based on a rumour.
ECONOMY: STATEMENT BY TREASURER
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I ask the Treasurer whether he can confirm the accuracy of a statement attributed to him during a media interview about the disastrous course of the Australian economy. The Treasurer is reported to have said:
I'm not saying everybody else is to blame. Obviously. the Government has made its share of mistakes . . .
If the Treasurer has been correctly quoted, will he detail to the House the specific nature of the mistakes that he now admits he and the Government have made?
Mr HOWARD-I would say first to the honourable gentleman that I have never given a media interview on the disastrous state of the Australian economy because it is not in a disastrous state. I do recall giving the other day an interview about a miscellany of economic matters. In the course of that interview I did make the remark that the honourable gentleman has attributed to me. I do not mind saying that any government has made its share .of mistakes. Quite obviously, this Government has been no exception, but I am very pleased to be able to say to the honourable gentleman that the success of the economic policies which the Government has followed bear favourable comparison with what has been done in so many countries around the world. Most importantly as far as the Australian people are concerned, the extent to which they compare favourably with the alternative economic strategy that is being put forward at present far outweighs the effects of any mistakes that this Government has made.
UNITED STATES NAVY: MISSILE LAUNCHING
Mrs DARLING-My question, which is addressed to the Minister for Defence, relates to United States naval vessels using Australian port facilities. I ask: Firstly, is it a fact that a United States Navy submarine, as reported in the Sydney Press, accidentally launched a live, non-nuclear missile in the direction of the United Statesowned Caribbean island of St Croix? Secondly, will he confirm that, while the search for the missile was on, the official United States Navy spokesman said: 'We have our fingers crossed that it landed in the sea '? Thirdly, in the light of Uriited States naval vessels, some of which normally carry nuclear weapons, making use of Cockburn Sound and other Australian waters, will the Government

express its concern to the Department of the United States Navy that tighter and more acceptable operational procedures be adopted in order to prevent a repetition of such incidents in the vicinity of Australia?
Mr KILLEN-I must be reading the wrong newspapers. I would not like to treat the honourable lady's question with any measure of levity. I will treat it seriously, but I have seen no reference to such an incident and officers of my Department have not given me the slightest indication concerning it. Mind you, we have had one or two other diversions. I do give the honourable lady an assurance that I will have the matter examined promptly, will treat the question as being on notice and will provide her with an answer beforethe afternoon is out.
AUSTRALIAN LOAN COUNCIL
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-I table the terms of reference for the inquiry into the role of the Australian Loan Council.
CRIMINOLOGY RESEARCH COUNCIL
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-Pursuant to section 43 of the Criminology Research Act 1971, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Criminology Research Council. The report was released to honourable members during the recess.
STATES GRANTS COMMISSIONS
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- Pursuant to section 10 of the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976, and in accordance with the Federal Government's federalism policy to direct personal income tax assistance to local government, I present the reports of the States' Local Government Grants Commissions which contain the recommendations for distribution of Commonwealth funds to individual councils by the State Grants Commissions for Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia. Honourable senators and members have already been advised of the allocation within their own States. Payments to the States in respect of the recommendations contained within the reports were made during late August and early September 1981 by the Treasury.
TRANSPORT PLANNING AND RESEARCH PROGRAM
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable members, I present a report prepared by the Department of Transport titled 'The Transport Planning and Research Program: Report of Progress to 30 June 1981'. This is the final report

424 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Interest Rates

containing information on projects undertaken by the States with assistance from the Commonwealth under the Transport Planning and Research (Financial Assistance) Act 1977. Honourable members will recall that the Transport Planning and Research Program was discontinued following the Review of Commonwealth Functions. However, I would draw attention to pages three to seven which list projects undertaken by the Australian Road Research Board and the Australian Railway Research and Development Organisation. The Commonwealth is continuing to provide funds for both these organisations in 1981-82 and future assistance is under review.
ACADEMIC SALARIES TRIBUNAL
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to section 122DD of the Remuneration Tribunals Act 1973, I present the 1981 review of the Academic Salaries Tribunal. The report was released to honourable members during the recess.
DEPARTMENT OF HOME AFFAIRS AND ENVIRONMENT
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Department of Home Affairs and Environment.
INTEREST RATES
Discussion of Matter of Public Imp~rtance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received letters from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) and the honourable member for Eden Monaro (Mr Sainsbury) proposing that definite matters of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion today. As required by Standing Order 107 I have selected the matter which in my opinion is the most urgent and important; that is, that proposed by the honourable member for Gellibrand, namely:
The Government's failure to prevent or ameliorate the soaring level of interest rates.
I therefore call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (2.53)-The Opposition brings this matter before the House because it is of excruciating concern to the whole nation. Home buyers, both existing and potential, renters, farmers, consumers, small businessmen and even large businessmen are all affected by the soaring interest rateS now being experienced. Nothing

epitomises this Government's failure and the failure of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Treasurer (Mr Howard) to handle the economy more than the situation in regard to interest rates. The Government has continually tried to portray itself as a low interest rate party but, as with taxation, about which it has also tried to portray itself as a low tax Nrty, it has raised interest rate levels to the highest levels in our history.
In 1977 the Prime Minister said that interest rates would fall by 2 per cent. In fact, the bank mortgage rate is now 2 per cent to 3 per cent higher than when he made that promise. That again shows how much worth we can place in his election promises. The Government has justified its Budget strategy in the last two years largely by claiming that it would take the pressure off interest rates. But, the reverse has happened. Interest rates have soared and there is nothing surer than that controlled interest rates will rise again after the Lowe and Victorian elections. Banks are reportedly pressing the Government now for a rise in the bank overdraft rate but, for blatant electoral reasons, the Government has put it off until the elections are out of the way.
There is no doubt that there has been a substaqtial rise in interest rates in the last year or two. Over the last two years we have seen bank mortgage rates up by three to 3-1 per cent; the bank small overdraft rate up by 3+ per cent; the trading bank certificates of deposit up by 3+ per cent; the two year bond rate up by 43 per cent; and 13 week Treasury notes up by 6.7 per cent. All this is bad enough, as everyone in the country knows, but there is no doubt that the whole structure of interest rates is now about to rise again. The Reserve Bank of Australia has been warning for months that the June quarter, which is always a period of seasonal tightness of credit, will be especially tight this year. All commentators are predicting further interest rate rises. I quote from just one, the Syntec journal, which is well known. The 8 February edition of that journal states:
A prolonged period of tight fiscal and monetary policy is in prospect, with the current measures only a tentative first step.
Further on it states:,
Corporate planning should allow for:
(i) a further rise in the economy's official interest rate base and its extension to household rates;-
That is the view of one authorative commentator. There are many others, all of them saying the same thing; that interest rates in this country are set to rise again. Without a considerable change in this Government's economic policies,

Interest Rates

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 425

we must expect to see interest rates rise across the board in the very near future.
The impact of rising interest rates is horrendous. The living standards of home buyers are reduced because disposable income is reduced. On top of the severe restrictions caused by increased tax burdens, increased interest rates have created real difficulties for many home buyers. Already there are stories of people having to sell houses because they cannot keep up the repayments. There are many of those stories and there will be many more if interest rates rise further. The impact on access to home ownership is, of course, clear. Repayments are too high for most income earners already. At 12+ per cent interest, repayment on a $30,000 loan over 25 years is $330 a month for which, with the normal limit of 25 per cent on gross income for repayments, one would need an income of $303 a week. Two-thirds of all wage and salary earners have incomes less than $303 a week; so they are out of the market for a start. If the rate rises by one per cent to 13+ per cent the repayment rises by $22 a month, and one would need to earn $325 a week to qualify for a loan. The income of 74 per cent of wage and salary earners is below that level. .So with the high interest rates that are already being chargedbuilding societies, up to 15 per cent; finance companies, any figure we like to choose but up to 20 per cent-it is quite obvious that only a very small proportion of wage and salary earners can now afford a home loan. A further rise in interest rates will mean that very few wage and salary earners will be able to contemplate a home purchase.
There is also the impact on the quality of housing. Inevitably with rising interest rates the percentage of home ownership must fall. Indeed, it has fallen' already, as we heard recently in a debate on housing last Thursday. Home ownership has fal'~n from 73.8 per cent in 1978 to 71.9 per cent last year. People who would have bought homes now have to rent. They cannot afford homes and because there are more people looking for rental accommodation, rents are' increasing. For many people, of cour~e, the real alternative is not to rent or to buy a house but to live in caravans. Increasingly we are seeing the development of caravan suburbs. If anyone laughs at that, he does not realise what is happening in the community in which we live. In my own area there is a mushrooming of caravans and I am sure that is true in many other parts of Australia. The impact on the quality of housing with the move into caravan suburbs is obvious.

There is also a very damaging impact on economic activity. Not only are the housing and building supplies industries devastated, but also rising interest rates hit investment generally. Investment becomes more expensive and personal consumption is affected because of the increased cost of finance. So we have severe recessionary impact on the whole economy. That is why we are headed for deeper recession, declining growth, rising unemployment and falling profits.
Why has all this happened? The Government says there are two basic causes. One is increased demand for funds in the capital market because of the surge in investment; the second is in increased interest rates overseas, especially in the United States of America. The Government therefore argues that there is little it can do about interest rates, that it is just an innocent victim. All it can do is chop back on the deficit and semi-government borrowing programs to reduce the public sector borrowing requirement and so reduce demand in the capital market.
Firstly, we reject the notion that the demand for capital is the only domestic factor leading to interest rate rises and that little or nothing can or should be done to affect the demand for funds by the corporate sector. The Government takes the view that the corporate sector borrowing requirement must be taken as given and that all adjustments that must occur in the demand for funds in the capital market must be by the public sector and the household sector. Thus in its last two Budgets it has increased taxes, cut expenditure and restricted semi-government borrowing programs, so as to reduce government demand for funds and, allegedly, so as to take the pressure off interest rates. But of course that policy has been a crashing failure. Australians have paid the increased taxes, they have suffered the reduced expenditure on their behalf and they still have these soaring interest rates.
Secondly, insofar as increased demand for funds is a cause of rising interest rates, it would pay the Government to give attention to the area from which the increased demand for funds has been coming, that is, the corporate sector, because of the greatly increased level of investment for resource development. The Government's failure to take any action to control demand for funds for such investment means that adjustment is being borne by the public sector, through severe cutbacks, and by people's living standards, because of increased taxes and increased interest rates, The rise in overseas interest rates is undoubtedly a factor in the interest rate development, but the Government cannot explain the aCtual level of interest rates in Australia on that basis. The fact is

426 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Interest Rates

that many overseas countries have interest rates that are below ours, and they are just as affected by United States interest rates as we are.
Thirdly, it is most important to realise that the Government ignores several other factors which have brought about soaring interest rates and which are largely or wholly within its control. One of these is the slow rate of growth of the money supply. It is running at 7.7 per cent in the first six months, compared with the Budget target rate of 10 per cent to 11 per cent. The Government just talks about the demand for funds, but it has no regard to the supply of funds. If that supply of funds is increasing slowly, inevitably there will be a shortage of credit and an increase in interest rates, especially if there is also concurrently a high level of demand for funds. Why is the money supply growth slow? It is because of the failure of the Budget assumption that almost half of the increase in money supply growth would come from external sources. The Government has done nothing to rectify that. It is within its power to do so. The money supply growth could easily be expanded by this Government, if it saw fit to do so, but it has deliberately kept it low and is thereby creating the conditions for further interest rate rises. The reason it refuses to boost the money supply growth is of course, that this is its only policy to control inflation.
The Government has itself exacerbated the inflation rate by its own actions in respect of the Budget. In the last December quarter we have seen 2.2 per cent of the 4.2 per cent rise in the December quarter due to this Government's actions in respect of health insurance, sales tax and cutting back funds to the States. So it has brought our inflation rate into double figures. It then says: 'Now that we are back into double figures, we need a tougher money supply policy in order to control inflation.' What an absurd situation that is. Deregulation of bank deposit rates has also been a factor in the rising level of interest rates. In December 1980 the Government deregulated bank deposit rates. That led to a competitive scramble for funds between the banks and the building societies, with inevitable pressure for higher interest rates, which eventually led to a one per cent increase in the controlled bank mortgage rate in mid-1981.
The Government attempts to give the impression that it is a victim of circumstances, and that there is nothing that it can really do about it except what it has been doing. That is utterly misleading. The policies that it has pursued have played a major part in bringing about the horrendous situation that faces us today. What is the Government doing about it now? Absolutely

nothing-at least, nothing that will improve the situation. It refuses to take action to increase the rate of growth of the money supply. It refuses to take any action even to alleviate the hardship it has created for recent home buyers and potential home buyers, or to increase funds for housing in any way. Rather, it is pathetically asking the States to come up with some ideas. It clearly has no ideas of its own. We have reached the stage at which undoubtedly the Government does not know what to do. Now that its Budget strategy is falling apart and it is faced with further interest rate rises, it is in a state of bewilderment. We have the Prime Minister pathetically asking the States to do something about cash management trusts. If he thinks that they need to be controlled, he could easily do something about it himself by proclaiming Part IV of the Financial Corporations Act, and using the powers which that gives him to control cash management trusts. But no, he does not do that; he says to the States: 'Please do something about it.'
The only action that the Government is taking is likely to exacerbate the situation and send bank mortgage rates through the roof. ,That action is to contemplate deregulation of bank mortgage interest rates in line with the conclusion of the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. This is despite the fact that the Campbell Committee's report acknowledged that deregulation would send the bank mortgage rate up to the government bond rate, which is now 15 per cent. So the Government is contemplating deregulation of interest rates, knowing that the report which says that that should be done confesses that that would mean that the rate would go up to the bond rate of 15 per cent. On the face of the Campbell Committee's report, deregulation would lead to at least that level of increase in the bank mortgage rate without any further rise in the general level of interest rates. But as further interest rate rises generally, including the bond rate, seem certain to occur in the near future, the bank mortgage rate would be likely to rise-on the Campbell Committee's assumptions-beyond the 15 per cent level with deregulation.
However, it seems that the Campbell Committee was wrong in its assessment that the bank mortgage rate would not go beyond the bond rate with deregulation. A recent study by two economists at the Australian National University's centre for economic studies-Messrs Albon and Piggot-showed in a published paper that regulation would increase the average mortgage rate, which at December of last year was 13.6 per cent, to between 17 per cent and 18 per cent. Thus they

Interest Rates

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 427

expect a rise of 3+ per cent to 4-1per cent in the rate of interest on the average home loan if deregulation of bank mortgage rates and building society rates is introduced. It is almost unbelievable that at a time when interest rate rises are sending the nation reeling the Government is seriously considering'a move which would have horrendous effects on the people of this nation and on the Australian economy.
The Treasurer must take responsibility for this. He is the one who set up the inquiry, who established its terms of reference, who gave it instructions about the deregulatory nature of the report he wanted, who has continuously expressed his philosophical attachment to deregulation and who is doubtless now trying to persuade the Government to accept its re'commendations. This should be enough to have him sacked from the office of Treasurer. Not only has he brought about the highest interest rates in our history but also he now wants to pursue policies which would add an enormous extra burden to home buyers in this country, sending the average mortgage rate up from 13.6 per cent to between 17 per cent and 18 per cent without any further increase in the general level of interest rates, which every commentator acknowledges is certain: to happen in the very near future. This Government's behaviour in respect of interest rates is a condemnation of it, a condemnation of the Prime Minister and a condemnation of the Treasurer. This Government should be thrown out on this issue alone but there are very many other reasons why it should be sacked.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.8)-1 very much welcome the opportunity to debate the subject of interest rates. It is undoubtedly one of the areas of greatest concern to Australian people at present. It is a subject that warrants very careful consideration and serious debate. It is a subject that does not deserve the irresponsible scare tactics that were used in relation to it at the weekend by the New South Wales Premier, Mr Wran, who quite properly has been roundly condemned by many people in the Australian community who do not normally join in debates of this kind.
It is an undoubted fact-I am pleased that the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) was prepared to acknowledge it-that we are living in a world environment of high interest rates. Anybody who pretends that it is possible for interest rates to reach the level that they have reached, particularly, in the United States of America and in other parts of the world and for this country to remain unaffected by those developments-not only remain unaffected but

perhaps go against that trend-does not in any way understand cause and effect in economic matters. We are living in a world environment of very high interest rates. Unfortunately, most of the indications are that those high interest rates around the world will persist for some time into the future.
I do not believe that the cause of high interest rates will be ameliorated by the budgetary policies being followed by the United States Government at present. One cannot run a deficit approaching $USI00 billion, as is now in prospect for the forthcoming fiscal year in the United States, without having an ever increasing public sector borrowing requirement. As at least some members of the Opposition acknowledged during Question Time, the size of the public sector borrowing requirement has quite a significant effect on interest rate pressures in the community. The bigger the borrowing requirement, the greater is the demand of the public sector for funds and the greater is the pressure on interest rates unless one is prepared to let go completely the money supply with all of the consequences that that implies for inflation.
In saying that we live in a world environment of high interest rates and in saying that it is unreal to expect interest rates to be low in Australia when they are high in the United States of Americia, I am not saying that our policies do not have some effect on the level of interest rates in Australia. To that extent I do have common ground with the honourable member for Gellibrand. Of course, domestic economic policy has an effect on the level of interest rates in Australia just as domestic economic policies had an effect on the world-wide inflation that hit Australia in the early and middle 1970s. It is the conduct of domestic economic policy so far as it relates to imported economic ills that is the critical test of economic management for any government. The honourable member for Gellibrand says that the situation with interest rates could be better. He says that, if the Australian Labor Party were in control of affairs, interest rates would be lower and things would be better.
Let us examine his alternative strategy. As best I could deduce from his speech today, his alternative strategy was. based on two propositions. Firstly, he said that we should take an axe to the corporate sector, get stuck into it and reduce its borrowing requirement. According to the honourable member for Gellibrand, it has been getting away with too much. Such action would do great things for employment in Australia. It would do great things to the dole queues in Australia. It would do great things for the young Australians who look to the corporate sector to provide 75 per

428 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Inter(!st Rates

cent of jobs for school-leavers. The first proposition by the honourable member for Gellibrand was that, if we want to do something about the demand for funds in the Australian community, we should get stuck into the corporate sector. I know he would love to do that. But that sits very much at odds with the experience of the Australian community over the last few years.
At the very time when employment growth in Australia has been the strongest for a decade, private sector investment in Australia has been the strongest for 30 years. That demonstrates the absolute link between the volume of private sector investment, the growth of the corporate sector and the capacity of that corporate sector to provide more jobs. If the honourabe member for Gellibrand wants to argue to the Australian people that one of the solutions to the interest rate problem at present is to restrict the activities of the corporate sector, he is quite welcome to do so. I do not think even many members of his party will be very impressed with an economic argument that states that we have to do something about interest rates by reducing economic growth. If we restrict the borrowing demands of the Australian corporate sector and say 'you cannot borrow so much'-that is the consequence of restricting that sector's borrowing demands-an effect will be had on what the corporate sector does,on the volume of economic activity, on the volume of economic growth and, therefore, on the total number ofjobs provided by the corporate sector.
That is not a misrepresentation of what the honourable member for Gellibrand was arguing; I think it is a very fair interpretation. He said the Government ought to do something about the borrowing demands of the corporate sector. That can mean only one thing; that is, that some kind of restraint would be put on the rate of growth and the rate of activity of the corporate sector in Australia. One of the great things that the Australian economy has going for it at present is that, unlike most of the economies of the Western world, it is growing. It has more economic activity than most of the economies of the Western world. It is one of the strong points of the Australian economy. It is a very strange thing that the alternative Treasurer of this country comes into this place and says that we ought to be getting stuck into that very strong point of the Australian economy. Of course, the most disastrous consequence of that would be the effect that it would have on job opportunities.
The second panacea that the honourable member for Gellibrand offered was that we should allow the money supply to grow at a faster rate. He says that we are holding the money

supply too tightly, that we are obsessed with the demand side of the interest rate problem and that if only we allowed the supply to rise more in response to demand-an increased government demand, according to the honourable member for Gellibrand and a reduced corporate sector demand; they are his own words and I do not think that is an unfair interpretation of what he saidall of the problems would be solved. Both today and on earlier occasions he has based this argument on his analysis that the volume of moneyM3-has grown by 7.7 per cent seasonally adjusted for the first five or six months of this financial year and that because that is below the range of 10 per cent to 11 per cent, which was stated in the Budget Speech as being consistent with our economic objectives, things are too tight. He said that we would have to do something to allow that to go out and that if we did that we would have a significant fall in interest rates. He was not prepared to say by how much. Mr Wran is prepared to say how much in his view they are going to go up. But the honourable member for Gellibrand, I think quite responsibly, is not prepared to put his name to some kind of reduction as a result of allowing this seasonally adjusted figure to go out. The fact, of course, is that seasonally adjusted calculations are subject to very serious reservation so far as projections of the final money supply outcome are concerned. For example, over the half year to December 1978 the annual rate of growth of the money supply seasonally adjusted was 10.4 per cent. The final year outcome in that year was 11.5 per cent. In December 1979 it was 11 per cent and the final year outcome was 12.3 per cent. In December 1980 it was 11.6 per cent and the final outcome was 12.7 per cent. In other words, there is evidence based on earlier years' figures that those sorts of calculations can seriously understate what the final outcome is going to be.
I can say to the honourable member for Gellibrand, as I have said before to the House, that the Government will not hold the money supply any tighter than is necessary to achieve its anti-inflationary objectives. But, of course, the solution of the honourable member for Gellibrand and the solution of the Australian Labor Party, as it was when it was in office and as no doubt it would want it to be now, is to let go on the money supply. We all know what happened to the rate of growth of money supply, the rate of inflation, the slump in private sector investment and the volume of unemployment when that strategy and that alternative approach was tried by a Labor government in office. So the alternative strategy of the honourable member for

Interest Rates

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 429

Gellibrand falls to the ground on both those counts. The proposition that one should get stuck into the corporate sector is one that would destroy the economic growth that we are now enjoying. The basis of his alternative proposition that one lets the money supply expand is based upon, I think, an inaccurate reading of the figures as they now exist.
Inevitably in this debate one should say something about the issue of housing interest rates. I would like to say something about this subject because obviously it is the most sensitive area of the interest rate argument. Firstly, I want to reject the argument put forward by the honourable member for Gellibrand and repeated by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) that it was the deregulation of deposit rates for Australian banks in December 1980 that led to the interest rate increases that have occurred since then. The honourable member for Gellibrand knows that is not correct. If these rates had not been deregulated, if the banks had not been able to offer more competitive rates as a result of the freedom that they were then given by the Government, their deposit intake now would have been even less than what it has been over the last 12 months. The honourable member for Gellibrand knows very well that until then the savings banks were suffering very badly in the deposit race so far as building societies and other deposit taking institutions were concerned. The performance of the savings banks over the last 12 months has been none too hot. It would have been even worse if that freedom had not been given in December 1980. That freedom was necessary to assist the competitive position of the savings banks. It is a complete misreading of the situation to suggest that in some way that has been responsible for the interest rate escalation that has occurred over the last year or 18 months.
Of course the States have a role to play in this issue. We are not trying to push responsibility off to the States but we are making the very legitimate point that the cost of housing, the cost of land around Australia, is as big a problem-if not a greater problem-for potential young home buyers as the level of interest rates. Do not let anybody come into this place and say that State governments and local governments are not responsible for policies that have an effect on the cost of land and the cost of housing. It is State government policy and local government policy that have an effect on them. In asking the States to put forward their views we are not in any way walking away from our responsibilities. We are quite properly saying to State governments: 'Well,

if you are so concerned, give us some realistic proposals that are going to increase the flow of money into home lending institutions because it is no good trying to solve the problem--
Mr West-What is your solution to the problem?
Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for Cunningham interjects and says: 'That is our problem'. I would like to remind him that almost half of the institutions that lend for housing in Australia are the direct legal and constitutional responsibility of State governments and not of the Commonwealth Government. I remind him that permanent building societies, the State Savings Bank of Victoria and many others, of course, are the responsibilities of State governments. It will be very interesting to see what propositions are produced as a result of the meeting between the State Premiers.
The honourable member for Gellibrand also said something about the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. Without in any way preempting and commenting upon the decisions that the Government is going to make in a number of the areas canvassed by the Campbell report I would correct his interpretation of what the report said. The report argued-I believe the Committee presented a great deal of material to support the argument that it advanced-that interest rate controls had a perverse effect and that far from assisting the people that they were designed to assist they had the counter productive effect through a rationing out process of discriminating against low income borrowers and tending to advantage middle and higher income borrowers. In fact, a good deal of material was assembled by the report to support that proposition.
Nobody on any side of the House in present circumstances welcomes the present level of interest rates. The Government will, of course, continue to follow policies that are designed to keep as much pressure as possible off interest rates. But I ask the House to ask itself whether it seriously believes that the alternative-the economically irresponsible, ill thought out and poorly thought out economic policies of the Opposition-would really give us an era of lower interest rates. I suggest the answer is no.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (3.23)-The defence of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) essentially remains unconvincing because it is becoming quite clear that the Government has effectively lost control

430 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Interest Rates

of the economy. Its budgetary strategy is in .tatters. His faced with ever-rising inflation. If there were ever an objective that was clearly stated by this Government it was that the reduction of the rate of inflation was its primary objective. Yet, here. w.e are with double digit inflation after the five or six years the Government has had to pursue its restrictive policies. The rate of unemployment has remained at a high level and is moving up again. All the crowing about the deficit was made less than 12 months ago. Yet the deficit has ballooned out by more than $900m so far this year. The Government has no one .to blame. but itself for the failure of these policies. The Treasurer, no doubt as an aspirant for the leadership of the Parliamentary Liberal Party, is himself forced to defend the Government's economic poliCies for which he can blame no one else. This advocate-lawyer Treasurer is now defending the Department of the Treasury brief and the Government at the point where the pressures which result from five years oftight monetary policy are showing themselves most strongly. I want to emphasise that point. When we talk about monetary policy we have to look at what has happened over a period. When we talk about the record of previous governments we have to remember that when Labor came to power at the end of 1972 there had been a 34 per cent increase in the money supply during the previous six months-a massive blowout in the money supply.
The figures indicate what has occurred in the period in which this Government has been in power. Sinc.e 1977-78 real gross domestic product increased by 12.49 per cent, assuming the Budget forecast for this financial year is realised, whereas over the same period the money supply increased by only 5.66 per cent in M3 terms; or 5.03 per cent in M I terms. Those figures are deflated to take account of the consumer price index movements over the period. Whilst we concede that there has been some growth in the economy since this Government has been in power, that growth has not been matched by growth in the money supply so that funds are available within the community and we do not have the kind of excessive pressure on interest rates which is resulting in the cata" strophic situation to which we refer in this debate.
The effects of the credit squeeze on the banks is riow forcing them to pay higher and higher rates of interest for fUhds, as the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) pointed out. That fact is illustrated by the bulletin of January this year of the Reserve Bank of Australia which shows a dramatic shift in the source of bank funds in the current financial year compared with the position in previous Years. Fixed deposit borrowings have

moved from around $10 billion through 1978 to 1980 to more than $ I 5 billion in the current financial year; that is, there has been an increase of a massive 50 per cent in the fixed deposit borrowings by banks in the course of the current financial year. What that means is that as the Government tightens the money supply the banks in the search for funds at a time of relatively heavy demand are forced to pay extremely high interest ratesinterest rates of perhaps more than 16 per cent. That inevitably will mean pressure will be placed on interest rates across the board, including housing interest rates. No wonder the Premiers are screaming, either publicly or privately.
The Fraser Government certainly will salvage the dim chances of the Liberal Party of Australia of recovering the Victorian election. The high cost of money must play havoc with States such as Western Australia and New South Wales undergoing resource development. Those States, faced with massive development projects such as the Eraring power station project in New South Wales or the North West Shelf in Western Australia, will require huge amounts of capital. The Government is not only a high tax government; it is also a dear money government. Interest rates have never been higher in the post-war period and they are expected to go higher. That is predicted not merely by politicians who tend to have a gut feeling about such politically sensitive matters but also by many financial commentators.
Let us take., for example Malcolm Wilson, investment editor of the Sydney Morning Herald. He pointed out in an article of 11 February that the main pressure on interest rates has been the desire of the monetary authorities to keep down the rate of growth in the money supply. The idea is that the rate of growth in the money supply should be held to a figure of between 10 and 11 per cent in the current financial year. He pointed out that the failure to change that policy must mean ever growing interest rates. Of course, as the honourable member for Gellibrand pointed out, we have not even had that rate of growth in the money supply-we have had a rate of growth that is more like 7 or 8 per cent-so far in the current financial year. Taken with other aspects of economic management, that represents a disaster for the Australian economy.
One area of great concern is that of home interest rates. That problem grows daily more serious. Since February 1980 savings bank interest rates on home loans have increased by 3 percentage points-from 9.5 per cent to toe present rate of 12.5 per cent. In the same period building society interest rates have risen from 11.2 per cent

Interest Rates

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 431

to 14.5 pet. cent in some States and to 15.5 per cent in other States. As the tight money situation deepens people must increasingly turn to other sources of finance. Sharp increases in interest rates are occurring in those areas as well. For example, the interest rate on trading bank overdrafts of less than $100,000 has increased from 10 per cent in February 1980 to the present rate of 13.5 per cent. Insurance company rates have risen from 11 per cent on average in early 1980 to 12 to 15 per cent in late 1981. The use of finance . companies as a source of housing finance has increased dramatically. Their interest rates vary from 16 per cent to as high as 20 per cent. In the present situation people are often forced to go to high priced second mortgage packages, which result in even higher housing costs. Under this Government not only has the cost of housing grown substantially but also the cost of money to buy housing has risen dramatically. Whilst the Government might talk about State responsibility in relation to housing costs, it was this Government which commissioned an inquiry into housing costs, no doubt at very great expense. But we have seen nothing of the report of that inquiry or its recommendations since it was introduced in this Parliament.
The Government's housing policy is, in summary, in tatters. More and more people in Victoria are losing their houses because they cannot afford housing repayments. The housing industry in that State has never been more depressed. Building firms are packing up and leaving the State. The Commonwealth and State housing policies are separately misguided, but taken together they represent in Victoria an unmitigated disaster. Mr Kennett has lost control. He is desperately seeking to blame Canberra in order to distract attention from his own mismanagement. However, Canberra can and will provide no assistance because housing, as was made quite clear by the Treasurer today; is nowhere in its priorities. It gets harder and harder to understand this Government's priorities. The Government, having talked up the resources boom, is now seeking to prick the balloon by imposing restrictions on overseas borrowings. Those problems would not have arisen if the Government had settled down to plan carefully a program of phased development.
The approach the Government has taken to development is now the source of a number of quite serious problems. It encouraged the States to mount massive infrastructure borrowing programs for accelerated resource development. However, the projects are not of the type that can

be efficiently accelerated. The result of the acceleration has been, particularly within the context of the Government's tight monetary policies, much more expensive programs. The Victorian Government has had the State Electricity Commission of Victoria borrowing money at the short end of the market, with catastrophic results on the Loy Yang project. The need to advance deadlines has tended to raise construction costs sharply. It is impossible to insulate the wage push in resource areas from the rest of the economy, especially in the absence of a comprehensive wages policy. In the resource development areas new demands are now building up for much needed social infrastructure, placing even more pressure on public sector spending of the various States.
This Government is facing a crisis in interest. rates for a number of reasons: Because it has been overimpressed with Friedmanite money policies; because it has budgeted in the tightest manner on the things which affect people while boosting funds for pet projects which were inadequately evaluated. The Government is failing because it does not believe in economic planning by governments. The result has been that the corporate planning departments of the larger corporations have been able to run rings around the Government to place themselves in the strongest position. The Government is suffering from the fact that there is an international recession and it cannot insulate its policies from that recession. Worse than that, it has worked its hardest to ensure that our economy is more integrated with that of the international resource giants, which means that when they suffer so do we. This Government has not run an independent economic policy; it has run a policy which is at the behest of international capital.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (3.33)-1 thought I ought to get this argument back on its tracks to start with. The first thing I wish to say is that in January 1972-1 take these figures from a table published in the West Australian on Saturday, 20 February-a man on average weekly earnings paid 27.8 per cent of his income in repayments on his house-an average house, just after it was bought. In February 1982 he paid 26 per cent of his income on repayments on his house. Therefore, in rough figuring, he was paying about the same percentage of his average weekly earnings in repayments on his house.
I thought I should say that because of what the Opposition spokesmen are beginning to say about very high interest rates. None of us are very happy

432 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Interest Rates

about interest rates at the present time, in addition to costs being high for all the other things households need to buy. It is meaning that people just cannot buy a house. I appreciate the problem, but discussion about it needs to be put on track. I also point out that that person who bought a house in January 1972 is now making repayments on it, even since the rise in interest ratesallowance has been made for interest rate changes since the initial repayment-which represent 9.9 per cent of his average weekly earnings. In anybody's language, that is a reasonable amount to have to repay.
As usual, the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) started his speech by saying that the Government had lost control of the economy. We always hear that from the person who is recognised as being the president of the socialist left. Controls are the only things that he ever thinks about-controls on every aspect of government and every aspect of the lives of the people of this country, which is the old way of the socialist left. The present Government wishes to control to the minimum degree possible. In that way we can have an economy in which individuals are allowed to make decisions. Traditionally, that has been the way in Australia and that is why Australia has been so successful. The honourable member for Batman does not like having a tight monetary policy, despite the fact that he likes having controls. I am confused about that. I am not quite sure whether he wants controls or not. If he does not like having a tight monetary policy-that is something that the present Government believes to be fundamental to a good economic policy-he must want high inflation, he must want a crippling of the working man, he must want a reallocation of the resources to the rich, and he must want later higher interest rates, not the lower interest rates that, ostensibly, he argues to be in favour of.
I acknowledge that the interest rate question is now much larger than it used to be. There was a time under a previous coalition government when interest rates were around 5 per cent or 6 per cent and the cost factor of interest rates in housing repayments was much lower. If the interest rate of a 25-year loan or any other long term loan is low the interest rate factor is a small proportion of the repayment.1t is only when interest rates are high that this factor becomes a major proportion of the repayment cost. That is the situation now. The present Government is not running away from that problem. Thank heavens the present government is in power; otherwise interest rates would be higher than they are at present.
I know what will happen when interest rates drop substantially, as will occur under sound

economic management. I will start receiving letters from the people on the other side the equation, that is, the lenders. I predict that in my own electorate many people in the household sector-people on low incomes who are net savers; that is, people who do not just pay off their houses but who are able in addition to put money away-will come to me and say that as interest rates have dropped their income is lower. That is one point that needs to be made. There are many people in the Australian economy, including many pensioners, who depend on a level of interest rates for their income. It will be a problem for the Government to compensate them in some way in looking at possible forms of compensations when interest rates come down.
Having said that, I do regard it as a tragedy for many young people, especially those who moved into a house not long ago and who have family commitments which are tightly constrained by factors such as having young children, who find mortgage repayments very difficult. It is a matter to which the Government has applied its mind over many years and it is the reason why it has been its policy for many years to ensure that interest rates in the banking system, at least for those people who are borrowing only on first mortgages, are subsidised by other borrowers. It is a matter of record, and it has been very clearly pointed out in the Campbell Committee's report, that in many cases the people on relatively higher incomes are the ones who are getting the greater benefit of those cross subsidies. Often it is the people on lower incomes, who admittedly are borrowing money on first mortgages at a subsidised interest rate and who are forced to take out a second mortgage at perhaps 18 per cent, who find their total average borrowing rate is very high at a time when they can least afford it-when their families are young and perhaps the wife does not have the capacity to go out and get a job to help to support the family and before inflation has watered down the cost of repayments through incomes going up.
I hear from some people cries that somehow the Government can fix interest rates, that the Government can hold them at a level. I understand from newspaper reports that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), by way of some election ploy for the seat of Lowe, is going around saying that the Labor Party has some magical power to hold interest rates. Nobody has ever discovered how to do that. It is like holding the price of petrol at an artificially low price. One finds after a while that it runs out and there is none left. If one were to hold interest rates at.an artificially low price one would find in the present climate

Interest Rates

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 433

that there would not be any money, people would not save; there would be no incentive at all for people to save. One thing we need to get interest rates down is. a better supply of money from savers-that is, people who put their money into savings as distinct from consumption-so that money will be available for those who want to borrow it. That is a self-evident fact.
Given that the Leader of the Opposition is patently wrong, given that that fact is borne out by the remarks of the New South Wales Premier who has admitted in the newspapers in the last couple of days that he will have to instruct the building societies, if the climate is severe, to have interest rate rises, and given that there are some people in the economy who understand that there are mechanisms of supply and demand in the interest rate structure, what this Government is doing is trying very hard and "ery successfully in the world environment to see that that mechanism is given a chance to work.
If we were to go along with what the Labor Party wants, the mechanism of keeping interest rates to a minimum would not work becauseand this was borne out by the remarks of the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) in some of his more famous statements-the Opposition wants higher taxes and therefore wants people to have less money in their pockets; it wants less money to be available for people to save and therefore less money to be in the banking system for other people to borrow; it wants more government spending on such recent wild schemes as the Labor Party's health scheme, which basically is a resort to the old Medibank arrangements, which meant that a rort occurred in the medical profession; and it wants more money spent on government housing as distinct from housing that householders can themselves provide, thus giving a higher rate of ownership of houses in Australia. Above all, the Labor Party never retreats from its basic policy of wanting higher wages and salaries in money terms, fostering that policy in the Public Service and in other places. If Labor Party supporters want to deny that accusation, I challenge them to tell me when anybody in the Labor Party has been prepared to stand up and say that the average working man in Australia does not want wage and salary rises if they are not accompanied by productivity. The trouble with the Labor Party is that it is tied far too much to the unions, certainly those unions which do not care about working people but which care only about the people in privileged positions and do not understand the nexus between jobs and wages. But that is getting off the subject somewhat.

Australia wants a government that understands the mechanisms behind the interest rate structure; one that understands that constraint imposed by government is for the health of the economy; one that understands that more calls on the community by government through taxation only mean less money is around for borrowing by other people in the community. The Labor Party apparently wants more calls on the community for its spending programs. It wants people to have less money to spend or more money to borrow. It therefore wants higher interest rates.
In talking about the supply and demand situation, I would like to quote from a document I received today from the Australian Bankers Association. It quotes Mr Cameron, the Director of the Association, as follows:
Current expectations of lending for housing by banks are substantially below the estimates made by the Indicative Planning Council last December.
He went on to say:
The major factor behind this lower level of bank lending for housing is the effect of official constraints on the ability of savings banks to attract deposits for onlending.
It is those official constraints that the Labor Party seems to want. The Labor Party does not really care about interest rates. All it cares about is putting fear into the minds of people and it fails to recognise that there are principles under which sound government can govern, and they are the principles that we are bent on following at present.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposed sales tax of 2.5 per cent on books, magazines and newspapers represents a tax on knowledge which should not be contemplated in a civilised country. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this proposed sales tax be withdrawn from the budget proposals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mr Shack and Mr Wilson.
Petitions received.

434 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Petitions

Sales Tax Legislation
To the lionourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The' undersigned citizens of.Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to impose a tax on books, magazines and newspapers particularly educational publications and books of a religious nature, is abhorrent to the notion of the right to information, a clear infringement of our democratic freedom, and that no such tax is levied on any other country with which Australia is usually compared.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Governmlint will withdraw its announced intention to impose a sales tax on books, magazines and newspapers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling, Mr Hicks, Mr Hodgman and MrLusher.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Hc;mourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Librarians and library users throughout the nation call for the exemption of books, periodicals and newspapers from the imposition of sales taxes.
The tax exempt status of libraries and schools will not protectthem from general cost increases which sales tax and its collection will cause. Indeed, exemption claims on millions of items per year will themselves add to the cost burden of both libraries and suppliers.
This tax is socially injurious and unworkable, and a burden on education, science and culture.
Your petitioners therefore pray: that your honourable House will exempt books, periodicals including newspapers from the proposed sales tax.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That Federal funding of children's services which has been reduced by almost 50 per cent in real terms over the last five years should be restored forthwith to at least 1975-76 level in real terms so that children's services can be more equitably provided throughout Australia.
That Budget allocations for children's services be spent in full for the purposes designated.
That current plans to impose a means test on the users of child care services will place them out of the reach of the bulk of the users and should be dropped forthwith.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
bY'Mr Armitage, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
National Estate Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the lack of effective Federal environmental protection legislation and urge that suitable legislation be enacted immediately.
Your petitioners are concerned that National Estate areas such as South West Tasmania, the Great Barrier Reef and the Western Australian Jarrah Forests cannot be fully protected until adequate legislation exists and is enforced. Your humble petitioners therefore call upon the House of Representatives to ensure that all provisions of the Heritage Act and the Environment Impact Proposals Act are fully complied with in respect of National Estate Areas. In particular your petitioners call upon you to adopt the recommendations of the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment of South West Tasmania. Your petitioners believe that this is a national issue and must be resolved by the action of the Federal Parliament.
Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free, Dr Klugman, Mr MacKellar and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with home building, clothing, footwear, books and newspapers, wrapping for food.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament to exempt these items from the proposed Sales Tax as requested by the Senate to avoid such taxes on necessities of life becoming a further bur<;len on home builders, families and children, or inhibiting the free flow of information through books and newspapers or reducing employment opportunities for people in the industries concerned and beyond.
Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hawke and Mr Hurford.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with educational books, clothing, footwear, newspapers, buildings and food wrappings, as these sales taxes impose a further burden on home builders, families and children; inhibit the free flow of information through books and newspapers; and reduce'employment opportunities.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should-Exempt these items from the proposed Sales Tax legislation, as requested by the Senate.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodges andMr Humphreys.
Petitions received.

Petitions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 435

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Enquiry.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron, Mrs Darling and Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.
Theatre in Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by proposed reduction in funds to Theatre in Australia. This will result in the reduction of the Theatre's contribution to the quality of civilised life, refinement and projection of national identity, and its contribution to tourism; and the reduction of employment opportunities in the Arts.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should-Support Theatre in Australia by increasing grants to a realistic level.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie and Mr MacKellar.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The 17.5 per cent sales tax on pet foods places unreasonable financial strain on pensioners and other pet owners.
2. A pet is not a luxury item for many owners, it fills a vital part in their lives and, in many cases, is therapeutically beneficial, particularly for families and pensioners.
3. The added financial strain may cause many people to abandon or otherwise dispose of their pets, thus adding to the distress of already disadvantaged people and further overloading the resources of animal welfare societies.
4. In view of the abandonment of sales tax "on veterinary drugs, it seems inconsistent to tax pet foods when food is as much a basic need as medicines.
We therefore request that this tax on pet food be immediately withdrawn.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.

Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned wish to lodge a protest against the 17t per cent tax on pet foods and pet products. This taxation has dealt a crippling blow to pensioners, low income families, children and the handicapped; all of whom love and treasure the companionship of their pets.
We therefore request the Government to reverse its decision.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will give this matter earnest consideration and your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Shack.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Federal Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth. That the imposition of 2t per cent sales taxon books, magazines and journals-
(a) is effectively a tax on the free How of information, the dissemination and growth of knowledge and the first step toward political censorship.
(b) is in direct contravention of the Florence Agreement (which Australia has in the past supported) which guarantees the right to the free flow of information.
(c) will discourage the publication of Australian books, magazines-and journals, particularly academic journals, at a time when publishing costs in Australia are prohibitive through multinational publishing firms.
(d) will seriously threaten the ability of public libraries and libraries in educational institutions to adequately serve library users given the hidden costs associated with increased paperwork to fulfil the requirements of the Act.
And your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to honour the request from the Senate to exempt 'necessities of life' from sales tax, and in particular to exempt books, magazines and newspapers from the imposition of 2+ per cent sales tax as from 1.1.82.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
.South West Tasmania: Wilderness Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parlimne'1t assembled. The humble petition of the underslgne-d-citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal . Parliament not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised
for development of roads or dams in the South West of Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pra~.
byMrBaume.

436 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Petitions

Petition received.
Perth Airport
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that total annual aircraft movements into and out of Perth Airport are expected. to more than double over the next fourteen years.
Your petitioners note that this will produce a dramatic increase in noise pollution in the surrounding suburbs, particularly those directly beneath flight paths.
Your petitioners fllrther note that unlike Great Britain, Australia has no legislation to allow payments of compensation for injurious affection.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
(I) That the Minister for Transport implement a curfew banning traffic movements at Perth Airport between 11.00 p.m. and 6.00 a.m.
(2) That legislation be introduced to allow payment for injurious affection, including compensation for cost of insulation of private and public buildings.
(3) That the planned parallel runway be constructed immediately so as to direct air traffic over the non residential area at Newburn.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Sex Discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) that the Australian government signed the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women in Copenhagen in 1980;
(b) that the Convention came into force on 3 September 1981;
(c) that Australian women suffer serious disadvantage in employment, education, accommodation, membership of licensed clubs, provision of goods and services including services relating to banking, insurance and the provision of grants,loans, credit or finance;
(d) that this disadvantage could be overcome by (i) mak: ing unlawful certain discrimination on the grounds of sex and marital status, (ii) eliminating discrimination on the ground of sex and marital status and (iii) promoting affirmative action for women in employment;
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament pass the Sex and Marital Status Discrimination Bill 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;

That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Refuges
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the Womens Services, i.e., Womens Refuges, Womens Health Centres and Womens Rape Crisis Centre. In particular that:
I. National funding under Special Purposes Grant (Section 96 of Constitution) for a new category called Womens Services to be administered federally under one department.
2. That as an interim measure, current funding of administrative arrangements remain in force.
3. Such Special Purposes Grant funding to be on a guaranteed triennial basis which must take into account inflation and indexation rises.
4. Definite Government policy commitment to a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and develop new ones. That such funds be distributed in such a way as to insure equitable national distribution of these resources.
by Mr Coleman.
Petition received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the projected repeal by the Queensland State Government of the Aborigines Act 1971-1979 and the Torres Strait Islander Act 1971-1979 will almost certainly lead to the degazettal of all Aboriginal reserves in Queensland, as has already been the case with Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That if, as is likely, the Aboriginal communities from these reserves are placed under similar shire council legislation on fifty year leases, they will be exposed to serious encroachment on their land by mining and tourist interests.
That it is also quite clear, on past evidence, that these interests will have the full backing of the Queensland Government and the rights of Aboriginal people to land rights and self-management will not be granted by that Government.
That the Commonwealth Government has the power to legislate and acquire land for Aboriginal people under its constitutional powers since the amendments to the Constitution in 1967, but it is your petitioners' sincere belief that it failed to act in 1978 and thus, failed in its duty before the people of Aurukun and Mornington Island.
That the Aboriginal people of Queensland have stated that they want land rights and self management.

Petitions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 437

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government make use of its constitutional and legislative powers to grant Full land rights and selF management to the Aboriginal people of Queensland.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Connolly.
Petition received.

Telephone Charges
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth: 'We wish to voice our objection to the latest rises in telephone charges of Telecom Australia, deeming such charges to be unnecessary and outrageous. '
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government will: 'Cause Telecom Australia to make telephone services available to every Australian home by bringing their installation and rental charges in line with North America and abolishing Fees for local calls.'
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Broadcasting Licences

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned
citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:

That Family Radio Ltd represents the largest single interest group in the community~i.e., christians~who do not have a
voice in public broadcasting commensurate with their representation:

That prime time access to existing broadcasts by christian groups is virtually non-existent, and access at other times is Fast disappearing:

That, by comparison with other capitals, Brisbane is en-

titled to at least one more category 'S' FM broadcasting

licence.

.

That there appears to be no prospect of the release of
Further category 'S' FM licences in the near Future for Brisbane:

That satisFactory fulfilment of the aims of Family Radio and its expansion can only be achieved by broadcasting in its own right under licence:

That Family Radio has a responsibility to the large support
groups which have contributed substantially to its development, to achieve the aims in broadcasting and community work For which it was established:

That there is an urgent need For the kind of service and sup-
port that Family Radio can provide to other community groups through the particular type of integrated programming proposed by the company under a Full-time licence:

And that pruned government resources are obviously
insufficient to advance the development of public broadcasting as originally intended.

Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the Govern-
ment will support Family Radio's application for a broadcasting licence and will enable more category 'S' FM licences to be made available in Brisbane.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Darling.

Petition received.

Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government and Telecom management have presided over the deliberate scaling down of Australia's telegram services, to the disadvantage of those poorer people in the community who cannot afford telex or telephone facilities and rely on the telegram service in time of emergency; that the Government and Telecom Management have undermined the telegram service by increasing the unit cost of telegrams by over 130 per cent in four years with the result that the use of telegrams as a form of communication has fallen by approximately 60 per cent in that time.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government and Telecom Management retain the telegram service at a standard and cost that will not disadvantage the ordinary citizen.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. Because of an anomaly in tax rates a single income family pays nearly $10 a week more tax than a dual income family earning the same total amount.
2. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been increased since then, yet over the same period living costs have increased by nearly 60 per cent.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament should act:
I. To restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them for Future price rises.
2. To increase the spouse J"ebate from $830 to $1,342 per year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That noise levels created by aircraft using Eagle Farm Airport already constitute an annoyance and inconvenience to those residents living near the airport and along flight paths.
That relaxation of the Eagle Farm Airport curFew to allow any aircraft including TAA's Airbus to fly into and out of Eagle Farm Airport between II pm and 6 am would:
(a) Substantially increase the inconvenience and annoyance caused by aircraft noise because the operation of aircraft at this time would seriously disturb-people's sleep;
(b) Contradict and negate a commendable undertaking made by the Commonwealth Minister for Transport, The Hon. Ralph Hunt, in reply to a question on notice in the Parliament, that the curfew will remain on the runways at the existing site at Eagle Farm Airport.

438 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Petitions

Your petitioners therefore humbly ;>ray that the Commonwealth Government will not approve the application of TAA-or any other Airline-to relax or withdraw the curfew at Eagle Farm Airport.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Ethnic Broadcasting
- To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
That the report on migrant services recommended that the extension of ethnic radio should be phased over the next three years to cover all capital cities and provincial centres with large numbersQfmigrants,

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:

That the Federal Government has continually ignored this recommendation,
That the 1981-.82 allocation for two Special Broadcasting Service run stations in Sydney and Melbourne is $4m while the then operating 13 Public Broadcasting stations servicing the rest of Australia were allocated only.$450,OOO,

(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increases in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of com~ parable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) those students and potential students from social grouprcurrently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for postsecondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
I. post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students
2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately
3. the Minister of Education immediately clarify the Government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever humbly pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pancrease: Australian Drug Evaluation Committee
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the total Budget allocation for public ethnic broadcasting stations for 1981-82 is $400,000, and represents a cut in funding of 25 per cent in real terms,
That this amount falls short by $120,613 of the assessed minimum required to maintain the current level of public ethnic broadcasting,
And that a distinct bias has emerged in the Federal Government's attitude to ethnic broadcasting, discriminating against ethnic communities outside Sydney and Melbourne,
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government more equitably distribute funding to ethnic broadcasting, and that such funding be provided by legislative enactment.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
That by reimposing a means test on pension increases and pension fringe benefits for pensioners over the age of 70, the Government has introduced political considerations into the payment of pensions,
That the Government should remain consistent with the previously unanimously endorsed policy of the Parliament that the age pension for those over 70 should be free of a -means test.
That in respect of this means test, pensioner fringe benefits are of primary importance.
And your petitioners therefore pray that the Government will remove the means test on pension increases and fringe benefits for pensioners over 70 years of age at the earliest possible opportunity.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

That tests performed at the Royal Childrens Hospital, Brisbane, indicate that the drug, Pancrease, can provide sig-
nificant relief and assistance to sufferers of cystic fibrosis.

by Mrs Darling. Petition received.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:

Pensioner Non-interest Bearing Accounts

That the Government will require the processing of the drug, Panciease, by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee of the Department of Health, as a matter of high priority.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received..

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That any proposal by the Government to threaten pensioners' entitlements to fringe benefits by establishing a ceiling on the allowable amount of savings in non-interest bearing accounts is completely unfair and does not take account of the natural need of all pensioners to maintain some savings for occasional expenses such as house maintenance.

Petitions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 43.9

Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government will not proceed with any such proposal, and should instead direct its attention to those pensioners who enjoy extremely high levels of extra income yet manage to remain within pension eligibility guidelines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that we deplore the fact that the unemployed are not allowed or encouraged to make significant earnings over and above their unemployment benefits without substantial loss of their unemployment benefits.
We are very concerned that the allowable earnings for unemployment beneficiaries remains unchanged at the 1969 level-$3 for under 18 years and $6 for over 18 years.
This discrimination is a further example of the Government's harsh and insensitive treatment towards the unemployed and their families, and creates unnecessary divisions within Australian society.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should decide to provide all the unemployed with the right to earn at least $30 over and above the unemployment benefit before they suffer a reduction in their benefit.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth: That Australian families will be seriously affected by the Budget announcements which include the raising of, or imposition of, Sales Tax on the many items which must be provided by parents for their children's schooling.
We condemn the proposals as a regressive tax measure which will seriously affect Australia's students.
Sales Tax increases will affect the price to parents of a variety of items including school clothing, school footwear, exercise books, books and magazines for reading purposes, stationery, sports equipment, and other school requisites and will seriously disadvantage parents who are already finding it difficult to provide essential educational items.
Your petitioners request that the Government will not impose any further tax on those items which are needed for the educational progress of Australia's students.
Any your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFife.
Petition received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of citizens of the Commonwealth submits:
That off-shore oil exploration within the Great Barrier Reef region constitutes a serious threat to the richest and most varied living system on earth.

Your petitioners request that your Honourable House will-
(I) Prohibit oil exploration within the Oreat Barrier Reef Region,
(2) Declare the entire Great Barrier Reef Region a Marine Park under the Federal Government's Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975,
(3) Provide the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority with the staff and the resources for effective management of the Region.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray..
by Mr Free.
Petition received.
Children's Services
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: We the undersigned are gravely concerned about comments being made, which if true, would implement undesirable changes to the Federal Children's Services programme. We strongly support the continuation of the present programme with sufficient expansion to allow further new programmes to be established.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Registration Fee for Periodicals
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: We the undersigned, respectfully ask that the Australian Government request Australia Post to review the recently introduce.d annual registration fee for periodicals.
With many periodicals produced for distribution to members in small numbers only, this new impost, together with the recent increases in postage rates, considerably adds to the administrative costs of small clubs and organisers, whose activities are non profit, and are directly involved in communityactivities.
Accordingly, we earnestly request this review, with a view to smaller clubs and organisations, at least, being exempted from the requirements of annual registration.
We thank you in anticipation of your support.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House'of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That (a) the export of live animals for slaughter over'ins: and (b) the shipment of live horses to Japan senten,-.c-; ::uch animals to cruel and inhumane treatment in the eX p'" .",,- cess and at the hands of foreign importers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ban the export of live animals for food and allow only carcass trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound willever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.

440 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Petitions

Petition received.

Sun Screen Lotions

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

I. That the price of sun screen lotions, despite being exempt

from sales tax, are excessive, since Australia has the highest

rate of skin cancers in the world.

-

2. That sun screens approved for sales tax exemption should also be eligible for deductions under health insurance schemes.

Your petitioners there humbly pray that the House of Rep-
resentatives will request the Government to make these products deductible under health insurance schemes.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Humphreys.

Petition received.

Telephone Service for Pensioners
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the indiscriminate denial of the telephone rental concession to pensioners who share accommodation with others, or with wage earners earning over $94.10 per week, is causing pensioners unnecessary hardship.
That vast majority of recipients of pensions and benefits who share accommodation do so out of necessity, i.e. to help in defraying household expenses, or to provide a home for their children. They do not derive significant financial gain through sharing accommodation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Govern-, ment will direct Telecom Australia to extend the telephone rental reduction to all pensioners not deriving significant gain through sharing accommodation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Pensioners
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
The proposals contained in the Social Services Amendment Bill, 1981 limiting the sum of money to be retained in a current-cheque account to $2,000 for a single pensioner and $3,000 for a married couple are unacceptable in that:
both single and married pensioners are, at regular intervals, faced with meeting recurrent expenses in connection with home maintenance, insurance, motor vehicle repairs and so on, for which no financial provision or assistance is given;
that such recurrent expenditure, when coupled with unexpected or unplanned expenses arising from family crises, health or funeral costs, will quickly exceed the proposed new limits; and
no other repository, except a current-cheque account, is able to provide funds as conveniently, or at short notice to pensioners.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to consult with pensioner groups in

order to arrive at a more realistic limit for pensioner cheque accounts, before the debate on this matter is once again resumed in the House.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Aviation Charges
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That the recommendations of the General Aviation Study (1979) currently under consideration by Transport Australia will, if implemented, cause a disproportionate and unjust share of the costs incurred by Transport Australia, to be borne by the General Aviation Sector.
2. That the General Aviation Study's recommendations are derived from false premises, as follows:
(i) The term 'General Aviation Sector' is a misleading one because it covers all flying for private and business purposes (other than public transport or the armed services);
(ii) the General Aviation Study fails to make clear how it has allocated costs against general aviation (as opposed to the costs of maintaining services hardly ever used by sections of general aviation, e.g. terminals to accommodate large passenger aircraft); and
(iii) the cost-recovery recommendations of the General Aviation Study are neither equitable nor efficient (e.g. the current Air Aviation Charges average at $800-$900 per aircraft while the proposed increase would lift charges to around $12,515 per annum, per aircraft). They are therefore not levied on a 'user-pays' basis, but against individual aircraft, irrespective of degree of usage of services.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to allocate charges to general aviation on a 'user-pays' basis, e.g. through the introduction of a fuel levy at the point of sale of aviation fuel.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
National Roads Construction Program
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth that your petitioners believe that:
The decision to subject the National Roads Construction program to the tendering system will:
(a) threaten the jobs of 790 workers employed in 17 main road depots in New South Wales;
(b) impair the day labour sytem and undermine the capacity of Departments of Main Roads to train staff and test road construction concepts;
(c) have a disruptive effect on the employment opportunities available in small communities;
(d) reduce the flexibility of the Department of Main Roads to handle emergencies caused by flood or fires; and
(e) ultimately increase the cost of road construction at taxpayers' expense.

Petitions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 441

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government withdraw this disruptive proposal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within four years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of Australian Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament assembled take action as it deems appropriate to ensure that the present Federal Government children's services programme is maintained and improved, and the Child Care Act is retained as a legislative base for this important programme.
In considering the recommendations of the Spender report, no recommendations put forward should be implemented without full consultation with community groups.
The present subsidy system to Child Care Centres should be retained. The proposal that moneys be made available to subsidise child care in commercial centres is viewed with grave concern. The proposal to alter the present guidelines for subsidy in different programmes and introduce a common means test is also viewed with grave concern, as the present arrangements are effective.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action on the above mentioned issues.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
1. there is a lack of public information about the content and intention of the proposed legislation on Plant Variety Rights;

2. there is concern that the ethical and moral issues of
granting private proprietorial rights over genetic resources have not been properly and publicly considered;

3. there is evidence to suggest that such legislation may

lead to a reduction in the plant diversity;

.

4. there is reason to fear that farmers may be restricted in their activities due to the controls placed on the use and propagation ofseed stocks;

5. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights legislation will lead to higher costs for farmers, the consumer, the plant-
breeder and the tax payer and

6. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights legislation
will lead to a further increase in foreign control of Australian resources;

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament ensure:

(i) that information be made freely available to allow full and informed public discussion of the issues involved.

(ii) that the Government undertake to carry out an analysis of the costs and benefits involved to the various sectors of Agriculture and the Nation as a whole.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by MrKerin.

Petition received.

Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should take steps to ensure that, under the proposed new Sales Tax arrangements, no levy of Sales Tax be made on newsletters distributed free bf charge by non profit interest groups, societies or other similar bodies.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Killen.
Petition received.

Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKiIlen
Petition received.

Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The failure of the Federal Government to seek information from the census re disabled people-i.e. partial or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and for, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public

442 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Petitions

Service-note the small number currently employed within the Service.
3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpetuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people on their boards and little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.
4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop "normalised" support systems-attendant care.
5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide "noninstitutionalised" specialised accommodation for those people who would not be able to benefit from or cope with attendant care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a "disability" allowance means test free for all disabled people-this wou'Id assist with necessary equipment and mobilility costs.
7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event of a disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g. Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of Federal I.Y.D.P. Funds-e.g. nonreceipt by some States of funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recognise that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives as in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Queensland respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are aware that the proposed Sales Tax is only one aspect of a Budget needed to support the growth and development of our country.
And that every Australian, whether rich or poor must aid this aim.
But that the social conscience of a country must be judged by the way in which it responds to the needs of its poorest, most helpless citizens.
And that this latest imposition will be responsible for Australia being judged not only by its own people but by the rest of the world.
We, the citizens of Queensland most humbly pray that:
In the cause of justice and equity, your honourable members will reject any attempt to impose a Sales Tax on all essential goods including packaging of Foods, shoes, clothing, literature and building materials.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron and Mr Thomson.
Petitions received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The

humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Lyne respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Kendall 2439 Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners thereFore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cowan.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Lyne respectFully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Buladelah Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners thereFore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCowan.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Forrest respectFully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Pemberton Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners thereFore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Drummond.
Petition received.
Minister for Communications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of the Australian Postal and Telecommunicatons Union respectFully showeth:
That the Prime Minister of Australia should seek the resignation of the Minister For Communications. Failing this the Prime Minister should dismiss the aForementioned Minister. We seek this action Following the Minister's apparent lack of concern for the welFare of his employees in the Australian Postal Commission and the Australian Telecommunications Commission.
Staff ceilings imposed as directed by the Minister show that the future employment security of Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union members is jeopardised. It is our

Petitions

23, February, 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 443

educated estimation that these staff ceilings will also effect the standard of 'service provided to the public by the two Commissions,
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Prime Minister will take immediate action to abide by our desire.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Duffy.
Petition received.
Institute of Early Childhood Development
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of citizens in Victoria showeth that at a general meeting concern was expressed as to the necessity to retain the Institute of Early Childhood Development as an autonomous institution.
Your petitioners therefore pray that you would make note of the following resolution passed at a public meeting held in Melbourne on 12 August 1981:
We request that the Federal Government continue funding the Institute of Early Childhood Development as an autonomous specialist institution recognising that it is unique inits capacity to serve the needs of the early childhood field in Victoria and throughout Australia.
And your petitioners as is duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hawke.
Petition received.
w. S. and L. B. Robinson College, Broken Hill
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Riverina respectfully showeth:
That the W. S. & L. B. Robinson College of University of New South Wales must continue to serve the tertiary education needs of people of Broken Hill and train people for the mining industry in Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The Parliament shall require the Council of the University of New South Wales to maintain and expand the educational courses offered by the W. S. & L. B. Robinson College and take all such other action as is necessary to ensure the acceptance of new enrolments in 1982 and thereafter.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray:
by MrHicks.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble. petition of the undersigned students and staff of the University of Tasmania respectfully showeth that the introduction of tuition fees for second and higher University degrees would:
I. have substantial ill effects on the Australian economy in particular, and society in general, by limiting access to education for Australians,
2. be a barrier to increased equality of education for Australians,
3. directly inhibit the ability of Australians to undertake retraining in response to the changing demand for skills within the Australian economy, and

4. curtail the substantial contribution to research and teaching that is currently made by postgraduate students within
Australian universities.

Your petitio,ners therefore humbly pray that the House of representatives will:

(I) not allow the introduction of tuition fees for second and higher degrees, and

(2) ensure that any tuition fees are not charged at Aus-

tralian tertiary educaion institutions',

.

.

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.

by Mr Hodgman.

Petition received.

Pensions ofItalian Immigrants
To the Speaker and Honourable members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned residents of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Australian Government take urgent steps to formulate and approve a social security agreement with the Italian Government based on the rights and. the needs of Italian immigrant workers in Australia.
Moreover with the present petition we request that the following important questions related to the pensions of Italian immigrants be urgently resolved within such an agreement; in particular we request:
(1) That Italian immigrants who have gained the right to Australian pensions and are no longer resident in Australia be given the opportunity to apply for and obtain the pension without having to return to Australia.
(2) That periods of residence in Australia of less than ten years presently required by the Australian legislation be considered for some entitlement to the Australian pension.
(3) That the issue concerning the unfair. reduction applied to the pension of Australian residents who are receiving an Italian pension be resolved.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Sydney respectfully showeth that your petitioners call upon Federal Parliarnent not to:
I. Lift the curfew at Kingsford Smith Airport' for any reason.
2. Not to pursue the proposal to b.uild an additional runway at Kingsford Smith Airport.
These proposals, if carried out, would add greatly to the noise, stress and pollution for the thousands of residents 'who live in the densely populated suburbs around Kingsford Smith Airport.
Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.

444 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, Federal Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Hindmarsh Division" State of South Australia, petition that:
Competition between banks and finance companies by giving ever-increasing interest rates to obtain the investors' capital, is against the nation's best interest. It penetrates every form of activity by constant demands for higher wages to meet these explosive conditions.
It is an intolerable burden to the younger generation of family life, that by necessity are the recipients of these excessive interest rates that are catastrophic to house purchase and natural living.
We therefore re~pectfully petition for an urgent annual realistic controlled reduction right 'across the board' on all existing and future interest rate agreements. With a maximum interest percentage ceiling on investors' capiial, and a scale of interest charges for loans as appropriate.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will give effect to our submissions.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
WAGE DETERMINATION AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Ministerial Statement
Debate resumed from 16 February, on the following paper presented by Mr Viner:
Wage Determination and Industrial Relations-Ministerial Statement, 16 February 1981
and on motion by Mr Sinclair:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (3.54)-In concluding my remarks on the ministerial statement, it is appropriate that I restate some of the arguments made on behalf of the Opposition. I begin by saying that all Opposition members who have spoken have pointed out that essentially the deficiency in the statement was that, yet again, it was a one-sided presentation of the prublems surrounding industrial disputes in Australia.
As far as the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) is concerned, and as far as this Government is concerned, in every situation it is the trade union movement that is to blame. As I have already pointed out, the only occasion on which I have heard the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) or any other member of the Government say that there might be some merit in a trade union dispute was when'they referred to the rights of the Polish workers and the Solidarity movement to go on strike. No experienced student of our industrial system, no judge on our industrial tribunals, would fail to say that in Australia industrial disputation is very much a two-sided affair. In any industrial dispute it is

quite wrong and fallacious to endeavour to say that there is only one side to the dispute. Herein lies the seriousness of this statement. Basically the statement says that there are industrial problems in Australia and that the Government proposes to solve those problems by attacking the trade union movement yet again. It is unfortunate, but I think it is evidence of intent that in introducing this statement into the House the Minister was anxious to completely blacken every aspect of the trade union movement that, despite the fact that he had all the resources and expertise of his Department available to him, yet again, this unfortunate Minister, could not even get the statistics right. His gross exaggeration in his statement of days lost by industrial strikes was ultimately admitted after it had been pointed out by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), the Opposition's principal speaker. This Minister, in putting his case to the Parliament, with all the resources available to him, had to produce figures which were blatantly inaccurate and conclusions which were blatantly false in order to overstate
his case.
The reality of the situation is that the Government must accept the great proportion of the blame for the problems of industrial disputations in Australia. Honourable members opposite are pleased to say they live in a competitive society but competition does not just mean competition between two grocers at the corner of the street; competition in Australian society is a continual competition between professional groups and social groupings in our society for larger slices of the community's economic wealth. One of the features of the Fraser Government has been the continual loss in purchasing power and a continual decline in living standards of the average Australian worker. Inflation, which was 9.2 per cent in 1980, was 11.3 per cent in 1981. Interest rates are at an all time high; we are looking at interest rates of between 18 per cent and 20 per cent. In 1975 the average wage earner paid 4+ per cent of his earnings in tax; he is now paying 11 per cent. Under the adminsitration of the Fraser Government there has been a shift or real wealth away from the working sectors of the community, from the wage earners, to the wealthier sections of society. That imbalance has created a situation where trade unionists-who after all are ordinary Australians-who are trying to purchase their houses, who are trying to educate their kids and protect their living standards, will resort to industrial action where necessary in order to maintain and improve their own standards. If the Government is serious about wanting to reduce the level of industrial confrontation in Australia then it

Wage Determination and IndustrialRelations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 445

ought to abandon its own tactic of confrontation, get on with the job of tackling the problems that bedevil this economy and stop trying to blame one section of the community for the failure of its economic policy.
Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (4.0)-1 am pleased to have heard the comment of the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) that there are two sides to any industrial question. That is accepted by all members of the House and one of the reasons for introducing the proposed legislation is to solve the problem where the two participants are unions. The establishment of industry or enterprise based unions should help to remove from the whole processes of industrial disputation the conflict that takes place between one union and another. Goodness knows, many of the problems we have seen in Australia in recent times have been brought about by the effects of one union fighting another for a small number of union members so that it can establish total control over an industry. It does not matter whether it concerns the waterfront industry or any other industry; this has been a natural process in Australia. It does not matter whether it involves the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union or the Builders Labourers Federation; the wish to claim members has been the reason for many disputes in Australia. It does not matter whether it is the metal workers' union or the Federated Storemen and Packers Union, as we have seen in Sydney recently. There are two sides to a dispute, and the movement towards enterprise or industry based unions will help resolve this situation. If honourable members opposite claim that it will not then I would like to hear them say so because, by claiming that, they are endorsing the disruptive activities of unions like the Storemen and Packers, the BLF and the metal workers' union in industries where they have no overall coverage and should never have overall coverage but in fact claim by disruptive processes that they should represent a small but particularly important and sensitive group of individuals.
I would like to put forward for the information of the House something of the Australian Labor Party's attitude to this vexed question. I refer first of all to the Labor Party's platform document. On pages 93 and 94 it is stated, firstly:
The recognition of the rights of unions to regulate their own affairs in a democratic way free from government and judicial interference . . .
'Free from government and judicial interference' means that if a bunch of thugs gain control of a union they will scrap the rules and run it their own way without the interference of law. That is

absolute rubbish. I do not know how honourable members opposite can live with a platform of that type. What about this statement:
Exempt unions from provisions of the Trade Practices Act.
The Labor Party will apply the Trade Practices Act to business but not to unions when there is monopolistic practice. This is an unrealistic document. It is time the Labor Party got back to the basic factors and re-examined its policies and platforms. It further states:
Recognise that the legitimate role of the trade unions is not limited to legally defined industrial matters.
This means an increased number of stoppages created by circumstances such as that involving the Medibank system or any other socially acceptable objective that the union movement likes to put forward. I refer to the work place. What we really want is for those fellows who are on the shop fioor, who are consistently told by their union leaders what they will do-this can be applied to the Wollongong case where the storemen and packers told the oil industry workers they would go out--
Mr Barry Jones-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order. Can the honourable member for Mitchell identify the document from which he is quoting?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! That is not a point of order; it is a request.
Mr CADMAN-I will identify the document. These are statements from the Labor Party platform.
Mr Barry Jones-What is it headed on the front?
Mr CADMAN-It is under the heading 'Industrial Relations'.
Mr Barry Jones-What is the document called?
Mr CADMAN-I am quoting from the document I have extracted from the Labor Party's platform. If honourable members would like, I would be pleased.to table it. 1 will seek leave to have it incorporated in Hansard. It is called The ALP and Private Enterprise'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Mitchell has requested leave to have the document incorporated in Hansard. Is leave granted?
Mr Barry Jones-I have not seen the document. I would be glad to give leave if we could see it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Leave is not granted. I call the honourable member for Mitchell.

446 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

Mr Barry Jones-Could we have a look at the document?
Mr CADMAN-When I conclude my remarks perhaps we can resolve this matter. I need the document to make further quotations. It is also interesting to note the attitude in regard to other industrial relations matters. Under the heading 'Industrial Relations', the document states:
. . . organise in democratic trade unions and to collectively bargain and to exercise the right to strike in the course of such activities immune from any pains and penalties.
I should like to refer the House also to further statements by a spokesman for the Opposition. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) stated in 1981:
. . . whatever else might happen, we are-and will remain-a political party inextricably linked with the industrial movement in Australia.
I refer to a further quotation made by Mr Hayden:
Without the financial support they give us we would either wither and go into extinction or we would have to obtain funds from other sources.
Finally I read this quote:
The Labor Party won't hestitate to condemn irresponsible trade union action.
I cannot see how it could possibly do that. In practice and in government the Australian Labor Party did not and would not proceed to condemn, because of the link by funds and by party structure with the union movement. So it is left to the present government parties to conduct sensible industrial relations in this country.
Having made those quotations, I refer the House to a nice little document entitled 'Unions in the Soviet Union' published in 1979. The author of this document is Mr Pat Clancy, a well known Australian unionist. In this document, Mr Clancy states:
Not a single piece of legislation dealing with questions of labour, wages or living and working conditions, can be passed in the USSR without the consent of the trade unions.
That is almost parallel with what the Labor Party is proposing in Australia.
Mr Barry Jones-Come on, not even you believe that.
Mr CADMAN-It is indeed. The Opposition is saying that the union movement must be free from judicial control and have a right to operate without interference in its own field. That exactly is what Pat Clancy says happens in the Soviet Union. The Opposition may say that is not its intention. I suggest that it change its platform, change its policy, and let the Australian people know what its policy is. I think that one needs to refer to a disillusioned socialist. This man, Paul

Johnson, has visited Australia and has quoted his concepts about collectivism and the movement towards socialism in Great Britian. This is a matter that is before the House arising out of the statement by the Minister. Mr Johnson states:
Moreover the closed shop opened the road to the corporate state, in a peculiarly British version which proceeds by imperceptible gradations rather than a sudden coup d'etat.
Johnson is arguing about the importance of the individual rather than the importance of the organisation. I think if we look at the way in which the Labor Party wishes to wash its hands of any involvement in union affairs-legal affairs, funding arrangements, judicial procedures and ,union rules-as it claims is its intention, it is moving towards what Johnson complains of in the United Kingdom and what in fact is the situation in the Soviet Union.
For the benefit of honourable members. I refer to some current matters which support the proposed legislation and the Minister's statement. Firstly, let us look at wages and wage claims and the proper processes by which those claims are made. I am not sure whether honourable members are aware of it but the claims by printing industry unions-claims for increased wages and for a reduction in working hours-would result in increased wage levels of 31.35 per cent in the printing industry. In the building industry the claim is already settled. Increases in wages and reductions in working hours will mean that there will be an increase of 18 per cent in effective wages paid in that industry. In the metal trades, a similar 18 per cent increase will apply. Discussions are going on in the iron and steel industry, and I understand the coal industry has settled wage claims which involve a pay increase of 24.5 per cent. As far as the North West Shelf of Australia is concerned discussions are continuing there.
It would seem to me these wage claims far exceed the proper productivity claims that could be made for those industries. They far exceed a catch-up. Over the last two years there has been a significant and real increase in wages. Those wages are not related to productivity. They involve a process of bargaining and disputation that has forced the Australian economy to a situation in which the most' important thing for advancement and well-being on an employment basis, stability of the economy and the well-being of workers who want to bring in a regular wage, will be industrial disputation. That is the area that we as Australians need to watch. If the Australian Labor Party is committed to the well-being of the nation, it will not argue one side of the case. It will analyse the situation in the union movement and

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 447

the interplay between union organisations and come forward with proposals that do not settle for peace at any price but which have a sensible and rational. basis that will encourage employment and encourage membership of unions, not reduce it, because that is what is happening. The Labor Party will also bring forward proposals which will allow economic stability so that Australia remains competitive in world markets.
A great deal of community concern is being expressed about the level of industrial disputes in Australia. Community concern has been strongly expressed both in Victoria and New South Wales in relation to the Builders Labourers Federation at the moment the subject of a royal commission, the Federated Storemen and Packers Union and the identified criminal element within it and in New South Wales a consistent spate of stoppages which in one week have the storemen and packers emptying shop shelves and taking 36 hours to decide that they would go back to work. Then we had that union calling out storemen and packers in the petrol industry so that there were no petrol deliveries in New South Wales. It is a criminal thing. I think the Premier of New South Wales used the term 'a tinge of lunacy' to describe this type of activity. It is much more than a tinge oflunacy. I think the tinge of lunacy is here in this place, on Opposition backbenches. Honourable members opposite support such unions by acquiescing, by not being critical, by not being prepared to adopt the mild and moderate role-but an ineffective one of the Premier of New South Wales who has referred to a tinge oflunacy.
Members of the community, if honourable members opposite went out to speak to them, would surely drive home the fact that they are most concerned and distressed by the ability of a small group of unionists to control their lives. In the same week that we had the storeman and packers dispute, which depleted shop shelves of food and stopped petrol supplies, we had a rail strike, coal strikes and a power workers' dispute. So there were few parts of the normal life of an average individual which were not affected by industrial. disputation in New South Wales.
I would like the Opposition to propose reasonable and proper attitudes and proper processes whereby we can move towards industrial sense in Australia. The measures that have been proposed by the Government and which will be legislated will seek to move towards industry or enterprisebased unions in which the workers within a particular industry or in a particular workplace can co-operate with management, and cannot be interfered with by outside sources such as the Storemen and Packers Union, the Amalgamated

Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union or the Builders Labourers Federation. These are the unions which need to be identified as disruptive and crazy. These are the unions that any employer knows will try to torpedo the well-being of his workers. They are the very unions which are most strongly resisted by the vast majority of union members in Australia. The other area in which the Government is seeking to move is to prevent the compulsory nature of union membership and also to--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (4.15)-When Parliament resumed last Tuesday for the commencement of the autumn session, one of the first acts performed by the Government was to introduce the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner). He presented this House with a ministerial statement. I take it that that statement is the basis for the debate today. Having listened to the honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman) it becomes quite clear that the main thrust of the Government's approach to industrial relations is running quite true to form. It is using the forms of the Parliament to carry out its usual procedure of union bashing rather than getting out into the workplace and discussing with people the proper relations which bring industrial peace.
[
The Minister alleged in the opening remarks of his statement:
Wage determination and industrial relations are of the most profound importance to the welfare of all Australians . . .
He then stated that these matters were also important to the development of the Australian economy. He then proceeded to put before the Parliament the Fraser Government's policy regarding wage determination, industrial disputation and proposed industrial legislation.
Anyone who was here last week will be well aware of the Fraser Government's motive in seeking to accelerate the constant attack on trade unions as a calculated attempt to reduce and, if possible, to destroy their credibility in the eyes of the public. By the end of last week the tactic was obviously being pursued by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) when he answered the Dorothy Dix question from the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris), who I am glad to see in the chamber listening to the debate. He admitted that the Prime Minister knew of the question that was coming to him. So we are quite aware that this Government is not backward in using the forms of the House for union bashing and creating industrial unrest.

448 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

In adopting this sort of approach, the Prime Minister knew that he was in breach of Standing Orders at the time. The honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) quickly raised a point of order-that on industrial relations matters such as this, where a union is before a royal commission, a commission set up by the State Government 'and the Federal Government, the Prime Minister was out of order, and he knew it. Mr Speaker ruled him out of order. So what did the Prime Minister do? He quickly turned his attack on the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria, John Cain, once again for political purposes, in the guise of a question relating to unions and industrial relations matters.
We need to make very clear what John Cain said that provoked this attack from the Prime Minister. What he said was quoted on the front page of the Sun newspaper, which is not known to be a great supporter of the union movement. It was quoted right at the top, and what the Prime Minister said about Mr Cain was quoted alongside. The Prime Minister said:
He-
That is, Mr John Cain-
has made it virtually clear that . . . he would do his best to see that the recommendations of the commissions were not implemented.
The Sun newspaper highlighted that on the front page by putting right next to that what Mr Cain said, so that every Victorian could clearly see what the Prime Minister of this country is prepared to do in the way of industrial relations to create unrest and confrontation. John Cain said:
I will examine what the arrangements are, and any report that is made would be acted on by us in a responsible way.
The record still shows that the Prime Minister was lying to the Parliament.
Mr Hodgman-On a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker, the honourable member should withdraw that imputation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-I am s.orry, I was checking up on the statement and I did not hear the imputation.
Mr Hodgman-The honourable member made an imputation which is unparliamentary and which he should withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Would the honourable member for McMillan withdraw the imputation.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-All I can say, Mr Deputy Speaker, is that I quoted what the Hansard of last week clearly indicates. That is all I said-that the Prime Minister misled this House with false information and that he lied.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I think the honourable member should withdraw. He knows the forms of the House.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-I withdraw, Mr Deputy Speaker. I turn now to the statement by the Minister, of which we were all given a'copy. The statement itself, as was clearly illustrated by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), has the stamp of this Government firmly implanted therein. On page 15, paragraph 2, the implications in regard to working days lost through strikes have clearly been misrepresented and in fact they had to be corrected later by the Minister. That is the typical form of the Government in its approach to industrial relations. It is the form of the Prime Minister in his approach and of the Minister who, in presenting the statement to the House, could not even get his facts right. There is only one reason why the Government does this. The Government is very keen to see that we do not have industrial harmony and that there are industrial disputes, because then it can hammer away at the Labor Party as the honourable member for Mitchell attempted to do, by quoting from documents which have not as yet been tabled in the House but which I will be very glad to look at when the honourable member tables them.
The Minister indicated in his statement that a wages policy needed to be seen in the context of reducing inflation and in the light of the reasons why indexation had to be abandoned. He also said that wage indexation could operate effectively only as long as the consensus between the parties necessary for its survival remains intact. It is clear that the Fraser Government has consistently opposed wage indexation, both the idea itself and its application in practice. The Minister has sought to blame the unions for the abandonment of indexation in July 1981. Let us getsome of the facts correct. Throughout the period of wage indexation, the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission emphasised that the surv~val of its 'fragile package' of rules, as it called it, depended on co-operation from all sides. We need to look at that fragile package to see what the situatiori was.
In 1975 the guidelines offered unions quarterly cost of living wage adjustments if the unions confined their claims for other benefits to cases of substantial changes in work value, t.o particular cases and to national productivity changes. That was only part of a larger package which the Labor Government put forward at that time in 1975. Bearing in mind the experience of having no system with which to restrain wage increases outside the accepted guidelines, a negotiated package at

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 449

that time was Qf extreme impQrtance. In the package was the use Qf the Prices JustificatiQn Tribunal and it was expected to. recast persQnal inCQme tax so. that there WQuid be less Qf a tax bite Qn wage increases. The first Qf the annual 'productivity' inquiries promised in 1975 has yet to. be held. The change Qf GQvernment saw to. that. The quarterly CQst Qf living adjustments became sixmQnthly. The GQvernment, at that stage, had set in train its attempt to. do. away with wage indexatiQn. The GQvernment, in addressing its case against uniQns fQr nQt cQmplying with the guidelines, cQnveniently ignQres the fact that wage guidelines were Qnly part Qf that larger package.
The Fraser GQvernment brought in new PQlicies which virtually destroyed what the CQnciliatiQn and ArbitratiQn CQmmissiQn had been depending Qn as the supporting mechanism fQr thQse wages principles. The Prices JustificatiQn Tribunal has been abQlished. Tax indexatiQnhas been abandQned. The proPQrtiQn Qf pay rises paid in tax to. the Fraser GQvernment cQntinues to. escalate. The figures fQr this year shQW an increase Qf 22 per cent in the take from the pay-as~yQu earn taxpayer. So. it is quite easy to. see that this GQvernment had no. intentiQn Qf hQnQuring the 1975 agreement that the uniQns had. Then the GQvernment came Qut and blamed the uniQns when the thing broke dQwn because the uniQns went Qutside the guidelines. There were no. guidelines which CQuid have wQrked, the way the Federal GQvernment was running things. It is typical Qfthe approach taken by the GQvernment.
We need to. lQQk at the situatiQn tQday. With indexatiQn abandQned last July we need to. see the present situatiQn, to. see where industrial relatiQns are gQing and what is happening. There is a hearing before the CQnciliatiQn and ArbitratiQn CQmmissiQn which cQmmenced tQday and which has been adjQurned. I shQuld like to. put befQre the Parliament a summary Qf the Australian CQuncil Qf Trade UniQns case that is gQing befQre that hearing. The ACTU newsletter Qf 11 February 1982 states:
On February 10, the ACTU lodged a national wage claim for-
(a) Wage increases based on community catch-up, and
(b) The introduction of automatic quarterly cost of living adjustments.
In respect of community catch-up the ACTU will submit that a standard of $25 per week at tradesman level is an appropriate community standard benchmark with increases to other categories to be adjusted on a percentage relativity basis.
This is the impQrtant part:
The ACTU will submit that employees not in receipt of such increases other than for special reasons identified during

the course of the post wage indexation period, should be entitled to increases on this ground. The ACTU recognises that substantial groups of wage and salary earners have in fact already obtained or are in the process of obtaining increases in the order claimed and as such there is no expectation that the claim will have general significance.
The uniQn movement is resPQnsibly approaching the CQurt Qn this matter. The newsletter cQntinues:
Consistent with Congress policy the ACTU will be seeking to obtain automatic quarterly cost of living adjustments. The claim will encompass movements in prices for the quarter ending in December 1981.
We all knQw what that was-4.2 per cent. It WQuid be 16.8 per cent Qn the methQds Qf calculating inflatiQn used by the right hQnQurable member for Flinders (Sir Phillip Lynch). So. we are 10Qking at abQut 16.8 per cent.
Mr Bradfield-HQw do. yQU wQrk that Qut?
Mr CUNNINGHAM-On the approach Qf the right hQnQurable member for Flinders Qver the years. The hQnQurable member shQuld go. back to. 1975 and see how he used to. do. it. The newsletter went Qn to. state:
In doing so the ACTU will recognise the standards already created in a number of key negotiated settlements which provided for mid-term reviews.
The claims will be made on the understanding that there is no expectation of a general increase and that the priority will be to seek to establish the grounds for the introduction of indexation and a return to a centralised system of wage fixation in accordance with ACTU policy.
We need to. lQQk at the GQvernment's approach to. this matter to. see just where we are gQing. At this stage, I WQuid like to. refer to. the prQceedings Qf the cQnference Qf CQmmQnwealth and State Ministers which was held in Canberra Qn 13 August 1981. I want to. qUQte what the Prime Minister had to. say there as regards a centralised system Qf wage fixation. He said:
We support a centralised wage fixing system which has the State industrial tribunals as part of that system in addition to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
But we have been infQrmed by the Minister fQr Industrial RelatiQns that the Federal GQvernment will argue solidly against an increase fQr thQse people who., as the ACTU case clearly puts it, have missed out Qn any increase up to the present-in other wQrds, the weaker members Qf Qur cQmmunity. If we are nQt gQing to. go. into. the ArbitratiQn CQmmissiQn-the umpire's CQurtand supPQrt thQse peQple who need cQnciliatiQn and arbitratiQn to. maintain a standard Qf living, are we then gQing to. endQrse thQse uniQns which supPQrt the free enterprise approach Qf take what yQU can Qut Qf the cQmmunity? Is that the SQrt Qf approach we shQuld all be lQQking at? I knQw that is the philoSQphy in life Qf hQnQurable members Qn the GQvernment side-the strong get stronger

450 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

and the weak just drop off. The Government is opposing a sensible approach to industrial relations and is virtually saying to the union movement: 'You will have to get out into the marketplace and fight with the strong if you want the increase'. Yet the Government does not want industrial disputes. It is amazing how the Government can twist it around. Let us also look at how the Government has used industrial relations to give this country a bad image overseas. It is always saying that we have a bad image overseas concerning industrial relations. Again I would like to quote from the document of the proceedings of the conference of Commonwealth and State Ministers and refer to a little discussion between Mr Wran and Mr Fraser. Mr Wran said:
It is about time that some things were got into perspective. More man days are lost by way of public holidays in Australia than by all the strikes.
Mr Malcolm Fraser said:
On the other hand there are a lot of public holidays.
Mr Wran countered:
That might be a different question. We should put into perspective the fact that our record is no worse than the United States' and is better than Canada. This constant trumpeting of Australia's deficiencies-we have some; we all know that-is one of the greatest weaknesses for our image overseas.
What did Mr Fraser say? He said:
I agree with you. . .
From the Prime Minister's performances inside this House one certainly would not think that he does agree with that because he uses every opportunity to publicise and earbash unions over and over again. In the last two minutes I have available to me I would like to take another point from the document which the Minister brought into the House. On page 9 he said:
Conditions in overseas economies make restraint in Australia all the more important-
He makes this dubious claim:
for while our economy has been growing, and our national output and employment have been rising, our major trading partners have been experiencing continued recession, and growing unemployment; and as a consequence, inflationary pressures in those countries have been falling. There is now a real prospect of inflation rates in Europe and North America dropping below Australia's ...
In other words, what he is saying is typical of the Government's approach-we have to get back into the experience of continued recession and growing unemployment. After six years of the Fraser Government this document is a complete damnation of its approach to industrial relations. The methods put forward in the later part of the document as regards industry unions are too farcical even to debate. Anyone with any sense can see that if we have something like 2,000 unions we will have more problems than we would have if

we had a situation such as that which exists in Germany where the union numbers are down to about 16. We have something like 300 unions in Australia. We should be looking to union amalgamation and not this crazy situation put forward by the Minister. He wants to divide the work force into tiny industry unions all over the place. The only reason he wants to do that at this time is so that this Parliament can be used for political purposes because a State election and a by-election in New South Wales are coming up.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (4.30)-The statement of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) on wage determination and industrial relations provides an opportunity for discussion on matters of real importance to the future prosperity of Australia. I would like to direct attention to certain matters raised in the statement, particularly in regard to the industrial relations aspect of that statement. Very few Australians have not suffered from industrial disruption in the past year. There has been a marked incr~ase in strike action, particularly in the latter part of last year and in the early part of this year, and especially in New South Wales at the moment. Anyone moving around the Australian community would be left in no doubt as to the general disgust at the overuse of the industrial weapon by certain unions.
I add that it is also doing considerable damage to our international trading reputation. The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham), who has just spoken, said that we ought not to trumpet that too greatly. I agree that in an overseas selling sense it is not something we want to say a great deal about. But I can assure honourable members that we do not have to tell our suppliers. I recently had the opportunity of speaking to various officials from ministries in Tokyo and senior management in one of the major trading corporations in Japan. We-I and other members of the delegation of which I was a member-certainly did not volunteer information about the industrial relations situation in Australia. On every occasion when we discussed our trade they raised the matter with us. It mayor may not be true that Canada and the United States of America also have industrial relations problems but the fact is that our industrial relations problems unquestionably affect our ability to export and unquestionably have affected our trading partners' views of our country as a reasonable, responsible and reliable supplier.

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 451

In recent times a strong feature of the industrial disputation has been the number of strikes arising from demarcation disputes or caused by relatively few employees-key workers-who occupy sensitive, important positions in an industry. Of all types of industrial dispute the demarcation dispute is the kind which provides the greatest irritant to the public at large. Any dispute can be disruptive to the public but disputes between unions which' cause hurt to everyone, although they are really fights between themselves, are viewed by the public as intolerable. It is true that the Australian Council of Trade Unions has rules for the regulation of demarcation disputes but these rules do not, apparently, require industrial action to cease while the dispute is sorted out. However that may be, steps must be taken to limit the likelihood of this kind of dispute occurring. Steps must also be taken to minimise the loss suffered when selected employees strike and effectively put others out of work. I, therefore, welcome the measures touching upon those matters which are referred to in the Minister's statement.
Much of the discussion about the amalgamation of unions has proceeded upon the basis, to which I think the honourable member for McMillan recently referred, of amalgamating in to fewer and fewer and, presumably, larger and larger unions-a form of union conglomerate. As the Minister said in his statement, these unions encourage development along lines which, in the Government's view, do not assist in reducing the level of industrial disputes to any marked degree. Indeed, one would fear that in our environment unions which straddle so many industries in so many places of work, as ours would if we had only four of five unions, would end up having their own internal demarcation disputes. The Government's policy is to encourage industry-based unions. This is a policy which must necessarily be viewed as a long term one. The structure of unionism in Australia at the moment is such that we could not expect to reorganise, except over a very considerable period. On my admittedly rather brief observation of industry or enterprise-based unions, I du not think that they produce demarcation disputes. There is a very clear and precise form of demarcation which necessarily exists in an industry or enterprise-based union; that is, that the union covets all of the employees in that particular enterprise but does not purport to cover employees outside of it. If that form of union is accepted as the basis upon which unions can be formed, there can be no grounds or justification for poaching.
With many unions presently in existence, key workers who do not belong to a major union can

create substantial industrial disruption and effectively deny useful employment opportunities to their fellow employees. Regrettably, there have been many recent examples of this. Further, rolling strikes and bans from plant to plant, or industrial action by small key groups, have been used to put intense economic pressure on employers. In many instances where an employer has employees whom he cannot employ-not because the employees are not willing to work but because of lack of supplies, lack of power or the inability to move the goods produced-that employer or business is faced with sustaining the employees. Through no fault on the part of the employees, they are not able to produce the goods. Equally, through no fault of the employer, he can no longer justify paying them. In such a situation, an employer needs protection and the Government will now provide it.
One of the pieces of legislation that the Government has foreshadowed will provide employers with the automatic right to stand down employees who are unable to be usefully employed because of the effects of industrial action by the other employees of the same employer, or because of industrial action by employees of other employers. In view of current industrial practice, this is a desirable measure. It should -be stressed that stand-down clauses will operate only if a situation arises as a result of industrial action. An employer cannot use his particular economic circumstances to stand down employees. If the unions accept the normal processes of negotiation, conciliation and arbitration, instead of taking industrial action, standdowns will not be required.
Other measures which the Government intends to introduce include a provision for the right of the individual to choose to join or not to join a union. The Government is legislating to incorporate the principle of voluntary unionism in the Conciliation and Arbitration Act and to withdraw from the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission the jurisdiction to grant union preference. These various legislative initiatives are only a part of what is necessary to reform the industrial relations environment in Australia. The Government, together with the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Confederation of Australian Industry, is currently examining the
report of Mr Richard Searby, Q.c., and former
Deputy President Taylor on the simplification and streamlining of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. It is hoped that government, employer and employee can jointly arrive at some suitable process by which we can avoid the sort of industrial disruption which has been so severe in

452 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

recent years and from which New South Wales is suffering so acutely at the moment. Of course, whatever legislation we adopt, it is the attitudes of employers, employees and government that ultimately test how effectively these things will work. In stating that, one has to reflect upon the different attitudes and approaches of government.
The honourable membetIor Mitchell (Mr Cadman) mentioned the 'hands off' attitude which the New South Wales Government seems to adopt to its industrial problems and which is clearly not an appropriate approach forany government. Whilst it is true that we must attempt to conciliate and to negotiate in order to avoid industrial disputation, it is not possible to maintain industrial peace without some rules or legislation. If one looks at the position in New South Wales at the moment, one sees the result of the Australian Labor Party's approach to strikes and industrial disputes. In the 9 months from January to September last year, New South Wales lost 11.5 million working days through strikes. Victoria lost 5.8 million working days through strikes. In that period the Australian total was 25.6 million working days lost. Therefore, the New South Wales figure was more than 40 per cent of the total working days lost. Put another way, Victoria, with 27 per cent of the Australian work force, had 22.8 per cent of working days lost; New South Wales, with 35 per cent of the Australian work force, had 44.9 per cent of working days lost. The reality is that the New South Wales Government has adopted a 'hands off' approach which, regrettably, the Labor Opposition in Victoria would. probably like to employ if it were given the chance.
The fact is that we must have rules and we must have some means of governing disputes when they occur. The Victorian State Government has acted decisively in regard to industrial matters and has introduced legislation which has undoubtedly had a beneficial effect for the people of Victoria. That is reflected in the figures I recited for working days lost. It is also worth citing the pieces of legislation which have produced that effect. Firstly, I refer to the Vital State Projects Act which was used and which assisted in the ultimate completion of the Newport power station which, as any Victorian will know, is now working. Secondly, the secret ballots legislation in Victoria enabled the new Industrial Relations Commission to order a secret ballot. That legislation was used to good effect in a strike of the Ford Motor Co. of Australia Ltd Broadmeadows factory which involved some bitter feelings. Thirdly, last July the

Essential Services Act was invoked very effectively by Premier Thompson to end the dispute involving the transport workers. During that dispute, food and essential supplies were not reaching the citizens of Melbourne. The legislation had a beneficial effect.
Finally, I refer to the Wrongs (Public Contracts) Act which was introduced in December last year and which enables the responsible Minister or a statutory authority to recover, on behalf of the people of Victoria, losses or damages caused by workers being induced to break their contracts of employment. Taken together, all these measures have meant that the industrial situation in Victoria has been far more satisfactorily managed than, and compares favourably with, the unhappy situation presently in New South Wales. I am bound to say that I am concerned that the industrial relations situation in Victoria could be treatened if there were a change of government there. The Labor Leader of the Opposition in the State was quoted in the Australian of 26 December-
Mr Duffy-Be careful how you quote him, Graham.
Mr HARRIS-Indeed; I am grateful for the assistance of the honourable member for Holt. According to the Australian, the Victorian Leader of the Opposition said that the four pieces of Victorian legislation 'remain a pointless and provocative threat to the conciliation and arbitration system as long as they are on the statute books of Victoria'. I gather that there is no contest that that is an accurate report. The only assumption one can make from that is that it is the intention of the Labor Opposition in Victoria, if it were to have the opportunity, to remove those pieces of legislation from the statute book and leave the unions in Victoria to operate untrammelled. Indeed, the Labor Party in Victoria seems to think it can gain industrial peace simply by letting the unions have their own way. To date, the experience of Victoria compared with the experience of New South Wales, clearly shows that such an objective is a vain one and will not work.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr DUFFY (Holt) (4.45)-The statement of the Minister Jor Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) on 16 February was another grandstanding performance attempting to hide the fact that this Government has no policies on industrial relations and wage determination. It was a desperate attempt to divert attention from the real issues

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 453

on which this Government will be judged in the Lowe by-election and in the election in Victoria.
It is necessary to look briefly at the history of wage indexation to put into perspective the role played by the Liberal Government in this place and also by the Liberal Government in Victoria. In April 1975 the Full Bench of the Australian Con.ciliation and Arbitration Commission brought down the historic decision which introduced wage indexation. In the 1975 national wage case hearing which led to wage indexation the Victorian Liberal Government gave evidence against the proposal. The Fraser Government, since it came to office, has tried to use quarterly wage indexation hearings as a vehicle for reducing the real buying power of wages. The performance of this Government in wage indexation cases is a matter of public record. I refer to the table incorporated in Hansard on 16 February at the request of the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) which shows that between March 1976 and January 1981 there were 15 indexation hearings. On 10 occasions the Fraser Government argued for no increase at all in wages for the workers of this country. Not once did the Government support workers obtaining a full flow-on of the increase in the cost of living. Yet this Government attempts to blame the unions for the collapse of wage indexation. This is a government which has embarked on a deliberate tactic of reducing the buying power of wages and thereby causing the workers of Australia to bear the brunt of its failed economic policies.
During the period of this Government income tax paid by pay-as-you-earn taxpayers has risen from 42 per cent to 46 per cent of total tax receipts. At the same time, tax avoidance, which of course is not available to wage and salary earners, continues to thrive. This Government claims to have taken a great deal of action in the area of tax avoidance. But in fact, after a tax avoidance scheme has operated for some years, this Government may then take steps to block such a scheme. However, until this Government makes it clear that it will act retrospectively on tax avoidance it cannot be taken seriously on this issue. In the meantime the tax avoiders continue to benefit and the wage and salary earners continue to suffer. The Minister for Industrial Relations in his statement, in a desperate attempt to justify his position, claimed that living standards have risen. He cites as evioence for this ridiculous assertion the fact that average weekly earnings have increased from $239.10 per week in September 1979 to $301.10 per week in September 1981. The point that supporters of the Government refuse to accept is that only about 33 per cent of wage and

salary earners are in the average weekly earnings bracket. Their position is bad enough. But what do the Minister and the Government say about the majority of Australian workers who are earning $200 or less per week?
This Government uses industrial relations as a political gimmick where the workers of Australia become a pawn in their power game. DuriD~ its period in office it has used legislation in the area of industrial relations to provoke unions and divert attention from the real problems faced in Australia today. We all agreed with the Minister for Industrial Relations when he said in his statement 'that wage determination and industrial relations are of the most profound importance to the welfare of all Australians'. But the Australian Labor party does not see all the blame on one side and it does not accept that there can be industrial peace in an atmosphere of confrontation by legislation to be used by a Government obsessed by union bashing. Between now, the by-election in Lowe and the election in Victoria the .prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and his henchmen will continue with the tactic of attempting to divert the electors from the real issues.
The honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris) stated in his speech that industrial relations in this country have caused damage to our international trade and reputation. He went on to quote discussions that have taken place with representatives from Japan. The statement that the problems of industrial relations in Australia are causing damage to our international trade and reputation is trotted out day after day by representatives of the Government. It is almost likewatching the film Casablanca for the fifth or sixth time. In this debate the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) nailed the hypocrisy of this Government on this issue when he quoted the two views of the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) who is also the Deputy Prime Minister. When in Japan the Deputy Prime Minister has one view but when in Australia and it is a matter of electioneering he takes another view. In view of the fact that again today we have had this statement made, it is worth quoting what the Deputy Prime Minister in fact said on this matter. He stated:
There is one aspect about Australia that is sometimes raised . . . . and indeed was raised at last week's discussion.
That is the industrial relations situation in Australia.
I acknowledge there are too many strikes in Australia but the position in Australia is not as serious as the position in the US, Britain or a number of other large industrialised countries.
In Australia strikes are generally of a short duration compared with other countries.

454 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

Furthermore, in terms of man days lost the impact of strikes in Australia is 'small compared with that of public holidays and normal holidays of workers.
He did not say so, but he may hold the view that holidays ought to be something to which workers still should not be entitled. He correctly went on to state:
. It i~ also important t? recognis~ the different social/political history and context In Australia compared with Japan.
In summary, I believe that the industrial situation in Australia is given too much prominence by some people.
Despite industrial disruption, Australia has remained a reliable supplier to Japan and still offers advantages of price, quality, transport costs and stability . . .
Even though we have strikes, Australia is a very stable country and strikes do not lead to fundamental changes in the social and political order.
The concern that people in Japan might have about our industrial relations should be kept in perspective. Australia's problems are relatively minor when compared with the problems that exist in so many other resource exporting countries around the world.
That is what the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia said in Japan, when it suited him. When we put this matter in perspective we see that the view he expressed there was the correct view. Yet day after day we hear honourable members opposite blaming the unions for industrial relations problems which cause enormous damage to our international trading reputation. The previous speaker in this debate, the honourable member for Chisholm, said that the unions were to blame and other speakers on the Government side of the House will repeat it. They had bettt<r make up their minds. The Deputy Prime Minister, in particular, had better make up his mind. He cannot say one thing when it suits him while he is in Japan and say the opposite for purposes of electioneering in Australia. That applies to all honourable members opposite. It is about time they made up their minds about what is correct. We on this side of the House have no doubt what is correct.
The honourable member for Chisholm also stated that attempts must be made to conciliate. It certainly was delightful to hear that because I have not seen any evidence in this House of that being the view of the Minister who has this area of responsibility, the Minister for Industrial Relations, the view of the Prime Minister, or the view of any. of the leading members of the Government: The basis of their industrial policy is confrontation. As was indicated by the Deputy Prime Minister, honourable members opposite have two views. One of those views concerns union bashing, a tactic they use to cover for their lack of policies on wage determination and industrial relations. The other view was spelled out by the honourable member for Chisholm when

speaking about the coming Victorian election. If

we were to accept what he said about the last few

years in Victoria and about the many years of a

Liberal government in Victoria-in fact, most of

the years since 1958-we would believe that in

that time we had very little industrial strife in

Victoria.

.

Again, honourable members opposite had better make up their minds because they seem to have two views on these matters. On the one
hand, when it suits them they will say that the industrial strife in Victoria has been such that it has caused great damage to Victoria. On the other hand, we have had to sit here today and listen to statements made from the Government side of the House to the effect that the industrial relations situation in Victoria is so good that it would be dreadful if it were to alter because of a change of government. The change of government that will take place in Victoria on 3 April must improve the industrial relations situation in Victoria. It will not cause the change in the industrial relations situation indicated by the honourable member for Chisholm. That is so simply because the Australian Labor Party in Victoria fully appreciates, as the Labor Party representatives in this House have always appreciated, the fact that an industrial relations policy based on confrontation with and provocation of the unions will not work. In fact, the newly elected Victorian Labor government after the election on 3 April will be in a position to look at conciliation, something which has been missing for far too long in Victoria.

Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfield) (4.59)-The debate is on a subject of profound importance to the future of this country and of all the Australian
people. The statement made by the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) on the subject of industrial relations, which detailed some of the Government's intentions in that area is significant because it comes at a time when as a nation we are on an economic knife edge. No government, irrespective of political colour, facing such a situation can possibly do its duty by the Australian people unless it feels it has behind it the support of the vast majority in the nation. The reality of the situation we are facing is simply this: A marked increase in industrial disputation has taken place in
recent times. It is not the first time that has happened and one would be very foolish to suggest that it will be the last.

Let us go back to what happened in 1974 when the Australian Labor Party was in power. Of course, on many occasions it told us of its special relationship with the trade union movement. Nevertheless, during its period in government we saw a record level of industrial disputation

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 455

throughout this country. In a wider context, substantial increases in wages have been received by most members of the work force since the abandonment of wage indexation. We just heard the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy) speaking about indexation and suggesting that the Government was at fault. The reality of the situation is simply that a group of powerful unions-by no means all the trade unions; I go to some pains to emphasise that fact-decided to use their muscle, principally on their employers and the industries in which they worked, to establish agreements outside the wage indexation guidelines. Perhaps one could say in retrospect that the whole idea of wage indexation was doomed to failure from the begining. It was not doomed because the idea was wrong; it was doomed because regrettably the sections of the community which had most to gain from working within the guidelines contained some people who regarded their selfish interests as being of much greater importance than the interests of the nation as a whole.
That has resulted today in a fundamental questioning of the traditional system taking place. Many people now are wondering whether the conciliation and arbitration system which we have had since Federation is the best solution to Australia's industrial relations problems. As with most situations, one must simply look at the record and ask: Has the system succeeded? One can change a situation as often as one likes in terms of the methodology or techniques applied, but the fundamental question one always comes back to is whether there is good will. In a democratic country such as Australia, where we do not take to the lash, where we do not throw people in gaol because they disagree with the political views of others, we simply have to depend on the majority deciding what is regarded as being in the nation's interest.
It is undoubtedly a matter of profound shame and concern, certainly to members of the Government and I would hope to member's of the Opposition, that we have in our country a small group of trade unionists belonging to various unions who are more determined to see the achievement of their ambitions of power and what comes with power than to play their part in building up a great Australia for all our people.' This Government has a responsibility to all Australians. A healthy economy is the only way that we can guarantee that all our people have an opportunity to enjoy a successful and satisfying life.
Mr Howe-What rubbish!

Mr CONNOLLY-Members of the Opposition might say 'what rubbish', but I would like to know how to get more than a dollar out of a dollar. A simple law of arithmetic applies. The Opposition, when in government, made a desperate attempt to give everybody a 27 per cent wage increase across the board in 12 months. That established for all time the belief in the community that the money tree grows indefinitely, that it does not suffer the problems of seasonal changes, that money can be taken from others. The Opposition forgets the fundamental fact that what has to be taken must first be produced. Our industrial well-being depends on those who have the vision to plan ahead and to make entrepreneurial decisions. It depends also on those who must take those decisions and turn them into reality. Therefore, managers and workers need each other and Australia needs both of them if we are to get the best out of our community. The damage caused by unnecessary strikes, the sapping of the morale of the nation, the tendency of so many to want to act outside the provisions of the law, make one suggest that we are facing today, a situation in which there are two communities: Those who want to work within the law and those who want to apply the right of power outside the law. We saw a classic example of that in my State of New South Wales only a few weeks ago with the storemen anq packers dispute in Wollongong. It was not principally a dispute over wages. It was not principally even a dispute between employers and employees. It was an interunion dispute over which union owned which workers and which union was going to steal the members of one union and place them in its union. Arising out of that incredible example of internecine strife the entire State of New South Wales was effectively closed down for most of one week. Transport did not run and food was not being supplied. The energy which is so essential for all industrial activities simply failed to flow. When police arrested some of the pickets there was a strike, despite the fact that the picketing took place on private land. Apparently we are being told by members of the Opposition that the rights of privacy do not count, that the rights of the majority to be fed and clothed do not count and that if some group of trade unionists wishes to argue with another group as to who should own certain members the issue should become a matter of major national importance.
I suggest that their order of priorities, as is usual, is upside down and the order of priorities of this Government must continue to be directed at the greatest good for the greatest number. The essence of that situation simply is that as we head

456 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

into the 1980s, with all the social and economic problems we know we will be facing, it is vital that the economic and social sinews of this nation be kept intact. If that means that we have to weaken the strength of some trade unions to protect the interests of their members against some union bosses who, as I said earlier, are interested in a mad scramble for power at any price, be sure of one thing: This Government will not flinch from its requirements and its responsibilities in this matter.
The package which has been put forward by the Minister for Industrial Relations covers three very important questions. Firstly, the right will be given to employers to stand down employees who no longer have any effective work as a result of strike action in their own company by other unions. Secondly, we are working towards the establishment if union members so wish-I emphasise that point-of company and industry unions, which incidentally is also the basic policy of both the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Council of Trade Unions. It is perhaps sad, however, that we have not been able to get an agreement between the three parties concerned as to how this can best be applied. The third factor which is fundamental to a democracy is the right of freedom of association and also the right not to associate if one so desires. In other words, the provisions for compulsory unionism will no longer apply in those areas of industrial activity over which the Commonwealth has some control.
These elements are essential if we are to get back into a situation in which people know that when they make a decision which they know will be of significant danger to the rest of the community they must also be prepared to accept that such decisions carry with them consequences. It is not reasonable that the majority of the Australian people should be held to ransom year after year by a small group of unionists who see their rights to themselves principally as things to be regarded as the-reason for all power regardless of the impact that it can have on the rest of the community asa whole.
The point has to be made for the benefit of those who doubt this fact that under the Constitution the Commonwealth does not have direct power over wages. We have never had that power. Whilst we can apply some considerable influence over our own employees, it certainly does not apply in respect of wages and the economy as a whole. For that very reason, this Government has been prepared to accept the determinations of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. We believe that the legal framework

which has been established, and which on international standards has worked fairly well, is one which is worth continuing provided the otherside of the industrial ledger-the trade union movement-is also prepared to abide by the determinations of the Commission. But when we reach a situation in which the unions take power into their own hands, when they are not prepared to wait for a determination, when they are prepared immediately to go on lightning strikes regardless of the cost to their members, to their members' families and, above all, to the community as a whole, it is quite obvious that we cannot continue to expect this country to move forward economically if we are to allow to pertain an industrial situation which is close to chaos and anarchy.
It remains the Government's firm view that sustained control and reduction of inflation are basic to the achievement of substantial economic growth and the improved living standards that all Australians obviously seek. We should not permit or in any sense encourage, as the Opposition undoubtedly does and has always done, some unions to feel that they can adopt bully boy tactics, they can show muscle to their members, such as the situation in the metal industry where by demanding high wages at the top of the market they effec.- tively destroy the companies at the bottom and with the destruction of those companies will also go the jobs of the people employed in them. If that is what Opposition supporters call an attitude of industrial common sense, it is something I find impossible to comprehend. Obviously a trade union should be interested in the interests of all its members and the principal element in looking after those interests is that those people should have a job. The one area in which the unions have failed so lamentably in recent years-I add that the employers have a role to play here as well-is that neither unions nor employers as a whole have gone out of their way to explain to the work force exactly where they fit into the total industrial picture.
For example, last week on a certain radio program a trade unionist phoned up and said to the announcer: 'When they give us a wage rise why don't they tell us what we will have to pay in tax?' I thought that was an interesting comment because it demonstrated,quite clearly that when a trade union sets out to demand high wages it apparently deludes its workers into believing that if they get a $20 or $25 increase somehow or other it will all be going into their pockets. It is only because of the suffering that the members ultimately undergo when they discover that is not the situation that they learn t6 their cost. But because of

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 457

all this we are placed in a situation today in which Another aggravating factor is that, after

if we cannot control and bring back into some months of frustrating talks between unions and

form of order the significant wages spiral which is employers, the Federal Government frequently

now ,taking place we will effectively destroy the intervenes to prevent a settlement. In many other

undoubted economic achievements of the last six cases, the dispute does not involve higher wages at

years, My advice to those people on the other side all but rather a call for better working conditions

of the House who laugh and scoff at this is that the or an improvement in work methods which will

day will come when they will have to eat their benefit the Australian public as a whole.

words because they will come back to the point which I made when I started my speech today; that is, it must be realised by all sections of the community not only that they have a part to play but also that it is not possible economically for one section to demand more out of employers, out of the industrial fibre of Australia, unless they are also prepared to first increase productivity.

This is particularly the case with the teacher and public service unions. For example, the recent stoppages by public service unions took place because of the arbitrary cuts made in the staff levels of various Government departments, such as the Department of Social Security. In the case of the latter, at a time when unemployment and deprivation are at the highest level for over half a

'Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (5.13)-The Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) has indicated his intention to introduce a number of legislative initiatives and in making his announce-
ment he has paraded the measures as being a responsible and reasonable response to industrial disruption. That response is no more reasonable than the statements we have just heard from the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly). I will comment on some of his statements later in my speech. The statement by the Minister would

century, the Federal Government has insisted upon reductions in staff levels. This has meant that people who seek support from the Department are not being adequately assisted. In these circumstances, the action of public service employees in making protest stoppages was a responsible attempt to make the Government aware of how it was evading its responsibilities to the Australian people. Their stoppage was not made in support of higher wages but rather the underprivileged of the community.

be amusing if it were not so tragic. Here we have a Let me turn now to the actual facts about

Minister of a government which time and again strikes in Australia. The Minister, in his speech

has indicated, both by regulation and by legislast Tuesday, attempted to mislead the House by

lation, its hostile and confrontationist attitude to stating that twice as many working days were lost

the union movement, claiming that it is sympaththrough strikes in the September 1981 quarter as

etic to industrial relations problems. Only rein the corresponding period in 1980. This state-

cently the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) ment was not true. It was made with deliberate in-

visited the Loy Yang power station and attempted tent to mislead the House. Fortunately, on that

to provoke the workers into making a violent occasion the Minister was caught out in his ter-

demonstration. Why did he do so? He did it beminological inexactitude by the honourable

cause, like the Minister for Industrial Relations, member for Wills (Mr Hawke). The point I make

the only way he can deal with the unions is against is that the Government is constantly attempting

the background of hostility and aggression. This to mislead the Australian people in relation to in-

Government has no sympathy for or understanddustrial disputes. The Australian Financial Re-

ing of the need for workers to organise together to view, in an article last December, pointed out that

protect themselves against the exploitation of the definition of strikes used by the Australian Bu-

employers.

reau of Statistics is biased upwards in comparison

with overseas strike figures. The article quoted

In addition, the attitude of the media towards one industrial relations expert as saying:

industrial disputes is one-sided. In many instances The Australian definition includes smaller and

when an industrial dispute is reported in a shorter strikes than are counted in most Western

newspaper, on radio or on television, the full facts Countries , . .

are rarely explored. Workers do not welcome This is important, because most of the strikes

strikes as they result in a considerable loss of pay counted in Australia are small and short.

to the workers concerned. In many cases a strike . takes place after months of negotiation and dis-

Mr Porter-With devastating effect.

cussion between employers arid employees. Only Mr MILTON-We have now a contribution

after the employers announce that they are not from one of the honourable members on the

prepa~ed to make any offers do we see the probGovernment side who know nothing about indus-

lems arise.

trial affairs and make no attempt to get down onto

458 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations.'

the job site and see what actually happens in an industrial dispute. For example, a strike by 50 miners for half a day would appear in Australian statistics as 25 man-days lost. In Britain or the United States it would not be counted at all. The plain fact is that Ministers should stop making selective comparisons with overseas work stoppages, because they are just not comparable with the industrial situation in Australia.
While there is no doubt that much work needs to be done by both unions and government so that local shop floor disputes can be handled promptly to avoid work stoppages, there is no evidence that this Government has any intention of helping unions improve the situation. In fact, the proposal by the Minister to introduce legislation to facilitate enterprise, or company, unions is ludicrous, as it will introduce a new, disruptive element to the industrial scene. The Minister has already agreed that a multiplidty of unions can create substantial industrial disruption; yet he now proposes to encourage the growth of hundreds of small unions all over the country.
Such a move will create industrial anarchy and one can only conjecture that this is what the Government is seeking. At present, the union movement is sufficiently united to prevent the gross exploitation of workers which inevitably occurs when employers seek to maximise their profits. An industrial scene peppered with hundreds of weak unions would be an ideal background for the Government and the huge corporations which control the major sectors of the Australian economy to enforce an increase in working hours, reduce wages and introduce machine-controlled working conditions.
Couple this proposition with the Minister's proposal to introduce what he calls 'voluntary unionism' and the Government's strategy is quite plain. It is a strategy of return to the industrial scene of the 18th and 19th centuries, when workers were just work slaves, lucky to get a job despite low wages and bad working conditions. These are the sorts of conditions which the honourable member for Bradfield was advocating in his speech.
It seems that the Minister cannot understand the simple fact that unionists have a right to refuse to work with non-unionists. Voluntary unionism means that unionists can be required to work alongside people who, at worst, may be hostile to the union movement o'r, at best, ignorant of the great advances in wages and working conditions which have been won by unions-usually after many bitter struggles with employers. Does the Government really expect that workers can be forced to work alongside people who may be

prepared to sacrifice all the advances which have been made by organised labour in over a century of hard-won industrial gains? The Minister tl;llks about freedom of choice but what about theJreedom of choice of individual unionists? Are they to be tyrannised by a minority of black legs? Rest assured, the union movernent will fight the implementation of such repressive legislation. Thus we will be subjected to more industrial stoppages-a position which the Government hypocritically states that it is trying to avoid.
I would also like to make some comments about the wage determination policies of this Government, as announced by the Minister. He talks about Australians sharing the benefits of economic growth and the rising standards of living, but at the same time states that there must be limits to the growth of wages. What he really means is that the share of the economic output of this country, all of which is provided by Australian workers, must be decreased. Ministers and Government 'members toss around selective statistics in their attempts to prove that wage earners are better off now than ever before. The Minister for Industrial Relations is no exception, and now that the honourable member for Wills has been able to prove that the Minister supplied misleading figures to this House we know that the other statistics he supplies will also be misleading. Ask average Australians how they view the situation. The Government can toss around all the figures it likes but the people out there-the ones who are listening to this debate-know that their standard of living has fallen since that fateful day in 1975 when this Government ignored all democratic traditions and grabbed power. Incidentally, I make no apology for reminding members about that despicable period in the history of this Parliament, for there is no doubt that such a coup could happen again in the not too distant future.
Wages have not kept up with the cost of living and it is not the intention of the Government that they should. That is why it has acted to destroy wage indexation. It knows that only unions with industrial strength can win wage increases. Now that wage indexation has been abandoned, the bulk of unionists are not able to keep pace with cost of living increases. The only way in which there can be any understanding of the industrial relations policy of this Government is in the context of an attempt to destroy completely the union movement of this country. Such policies will not succeed and the Minister for Industrial Relations should resign because he has lost the confidence of the union movement and the many millions of Australian workers whom the union movement represents.

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 459

I conclude by supporting the comments of the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy) who emphasised that after 3 April we will have in Victoria 'a Labor government which will have an understanding of the legitimate aims of the union movement.
Mr PORTER (Barker) (5.24)-There is no doubt that Australia's industrial relations record is disgraceful. The last international comparison that I saw appeared in the International Labour Organisation's 1980 Year Book of Labour Statistics. Perhaps the honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) does not like to be reminded of that source. That comparison showed that Australia falls in the top four of 16 developed countries for number of working days lost per thousand employees in 1979. There can be no doubt that we have one of the worst strike records. Indeed, we are in the league of Spain and Italy. What a league to be in.
Mr Milton-You can not compare our figures with those used overseas; it is misleading.
Mr PORTER-The honourable member for La Trobe does not like the truth. If we take an average of the number of man days lost per thousand workers over the five years to 1979, Australia's record is seen to be even worse than that of Britain.
Britain-did I hear a slight accent from the honourable member for La Trobe-had an average loss of 1,042 work days while we lost 1,204 work days per 1,000 employees. Lest it be thought that things have improved since 1979, I wish to quote from page 2 of the Australian Financial Review of 18 February. It said:
Australia's industrial relations performance has taken a further dent with the release of figures showing the number of industrial disputes in October was the highest recording since such figures were started in 1959.
There were 363 industrial disputes in progress in October, only marginally above the 360 in September, which was also a record to that month.
The honourable member for La Trobe has just tried to tell us that we do not have many industrial disputes in Australia and that the Government is trying to pretend the situation is worse than it really is. I just do not believe him. It is a woeful record and, quite frankly, I find it depressing that we in Australia should allow stupid industrial disruption to damage our economic growth and prosperity, our standard of living, our capacity to export, our international competitiveness and indeed our national pride.

Since this Federal Government came to power in 1975 it has taken a number of steps in an endeavour to improve our industrial relations system. In, the light of recent increases in strike activity the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner), in his statement to the Parliament, announced further initiatives to be taken by the Commonwealth within the limited powers that it has in this area. Before dealing with some of these proposed changes to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act I want to put on record some of the factors which have unsettled the community. Clearly the community has suffered a great deal in recent times as a result of strikes. The devastating effects strikes have had on the community can be put into three categories-the direct effect, the indirect effect and the consequential effect.
The New South Wales travelling public are well aware of the direct effect of strikes as they have been frequently subject to interruptions to public transport and petrol supplies. Similarly, grain producers in New South Wales, after a serious drought last year, had their first wheat payments held up, firstly by a postal strike which apparently delayed receival documents from country silos and secondly by bans by clerical staff in the New South Wales Grain Handling Authority.
The second category of people affected by strikes are those who are indirectly affected. Many employees, and employers, find themselves in this position when there is no work for them to do because crucial materials are unavailable as a result of a strike in some related industry. Quite often a strike by a few key people in a plant can lead to closure of the whole plant.
The third category of damage caused by strikes is what I have called the consequential effect. Perhaps this is less apparent to many people but it is probably the most damaging in the long term to us all. There is no shortage of examples in this class. One that comes readily to mind is the announcement made late last year that the insurers of ship owners for losses due to strikes had to renegotiate special rates for Australia because of our disastrous history of waterfront stoppages and delays.
Mr Chapman-It is absolutely disgraceful.
Mr PORTER-As the honourable member for Kingston rightly says, it is disgraceful. According to a report in the Australian Financial Review, in 1976 over 78 per cent of the claims on those insurers came from Australia. That excludes strikes by crews of ships and delays resulting from strikes, so it refers only to waterfront stoppages. In 1980 over 61 per cent of the claims on those insurers came from Australia. Our insurance is only 10 per

460 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

cent of the total insurance that those insurers cover. I am informed that in 1981 no single day was completely free of disputes affecting at least some sector of shipping. In 1981 there were 103 significant industrial disputes involving 23 unions. According to the Australian Financial Review, for four years running Australia has been the worst country for industrial disputes in its ports. These disputes occurred despite the fact that since container shipping was introduced in 1969 a typical change in average weekly earnings of waterfront unionists is from 3 per cent above the allindustries average up to 33 per cent above the all-industries average.
Mr Chapman-They are real fat cats.
Mr PORTER-They may well be called fat cats, because waterfront wage levels are around $13.60 an hour compared with the average alIindustries male ra,te of around $7.50 an hour. The consequential effects of stoppages in this one area of the waterfront do not just concern insurance. We face increased costs because of extra freight charges, demurrage charges, air freight for emergency shipments, inventory costs of extra stores and components held to cover, shipping delays, lower prices achieved for our exports because of uncertaintly, and costs to industry of disruption to component imports and to manufacturers in regard to their exports. On top of that comes the loss of export markets because of our inability to supply and because we are seen as an unreliable supplier. This is most evident in the resource industries where problems in shipping coal-again it is most apparent in New South Wales-have cost Australia dearly. It is estimated that up to $175m in coal exports have been lost in the past 18 months.
It is also of enormous significance to the Australian farmer. As I represent a rural electorate I am concerned that the National Farmer has estimated that the cost of disruption to the average exporting farmer is $850. It is a national scandal and I believe it is a loss which should not have to be suffered by farmers, or by the Australian community in general.
Therefore, the Government has announced that it will amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act in an effort to assist overcoming these problems. The changes are threefold. Firstly, it is intended to facilitate industry unions. Clearly where this can be achieved it will be a useful tool in reducing inter-union disputes and it should assist both the employee and the employer. The second change relates to the rolling stikes or guerilla strikes, as they are called, whereby a small number of key workers strike, disrupting work,

and in many cases causing'its cessation, in a plant. They are tile small strikes which the honourable member for La Trobesuggests should not be included in the statistics. They have a devastating effect. The employer can be left paying a work force which has little to do. Therefore, to restore the balance for the employer provision is to be made for the automatic right to stand down.
Finally, through the legislation we have introduced into this House, we have allowed people to object conscientiously to becoming members of unions. The Minister has stated:
We intend to go further and to legislate to incorporate the principle of voluntary unionism in the Conciliation and Arbitration Act and to provide safeguards against intimidation or victimisation for those who exercise their freedom of choice in this matter. Moreover, I will introduce legislation withdrawing from the Arbitration Commission jurisdiction to grant union preference. This will greatly assist in reducing the incidence of the closed shop which is a total negation of voluntary unionism.
I support this move which I have been advocating for some years. In my view it is wrong to refuse to allow the best person for the job access to that job because of a closed shop arrangement.
A case involving preference to unionists recently arose in my electorate in relation to the appointment of a clerk by the District Council of Mount Gambier. Whilst I did what I could to assist the Council resoive the matter under the employment preference provision, I found, to my horror, that because the Industrial Relations Bureau had been contacted, it was to consider whether a prosecution against the Council ought to be launched. In the circumstances of this particular case as I know them, I believe that it is entirely inappropriate for a prosecution to be launched and I have told the Bureau so. I hope that these proposed amendments to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act will assist in preventing this sort of situation arising again.
Finally, in this debate the Opposition has criticised the Government for trying to improve the industrial relations procedures in this country, but it has offered no alternatives. I specifically refer to the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) who led for the Opposition in this debate. After castigating the Government in his usual manner, without suggesting how to improve the situation, he finally said:
. . . it is time to recognise that there is blame on all sides, including the Government. Let us recognise thisfactlet us not think we exhaust our responsibilities by blaming one side only and see that there is a principle whereby the exercising of power by the powerful in this country, whether they be on the side of capital or labour, is brought to an end and those who claim upon the limited resources of this country have to justify those claims before tribunals where the public interest will be represented.

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 461

So said the honourable member for Wills.
Mr Chapman-No substance.
Mr PORTER-'No substance', says the honourable member for Kingston. There is certainly no new initiative in those sentiments. However, more recently there have been familiar rumblings from the Labor Party that it will negotiate a deal with the unions. Quite frankly, I am sure that the public can see through that suggestion. If it can do so, why does not the president of the ALP, Mr Wran, do so in New South Wales, the strike State of the Commonwealth? The record shows that when the ALP was in power in Canberra it tried that tactic. It tried it in 1974 and 6.2 million working days were lost compared with 3.3 million working days lost In 1980. I do not believe that the Hayden-Hawke industrial peace plan will work. It was tried before and it failed dismally.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- The honourable member for La Trobe may proceed.
Mr MILTON-The honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) referred to my making comparisons in relation to Australian strikes. This I did not do. What I was pointing out was that we cannot make comparisons between strikes in Australia and strikes overseas as the honourable member did in relation to the International Labour Organisation report.
MrHOWE (Batman) (5.39)-We are discussing the statement of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner). The statement, I must say, illustrates once again the absence of interest on behalf of this Government in any real policy devoid of political survival considerations. This Government has only one interest and that is its own collective political neck. The Government came to power on the basis of slander, lies, misrepresentation and a ruthless attack on most of the conventions and rules which have governed this Parliament in its history. It has no respect for institutions. It respects and craves for power only. It is a lack of concern for political morality which has characterised this Government since its inception and will be a leading factor in its downfall. However, it is not its most serious failing. This is quite clearly its lack of concentration on even policy areas which it claims to be fundamental to its own political interest.
The Minister's statement is, in my view, a feeble attempt at what I would describe as post hoc thinking. It is an effort to rationalise and caricature events, rather than a serious attempt to

analyse and proscribe. We know of the Government's failures in the industrial relations field. I do not need to go into the facts concerning those failures. The honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) and the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly) repeated the statistics again and again concerning the strikes that have occurred and the industrial relations disruption which has occurred since this Government has been in power; so its failure has been demonstrated by the Government side of the House. Honourable members opposite do not need to look to New South Wales or Victoria. The Government's record in the industrial relations field has been absolutely appalling. It will be my contention that these failures which have occurred flow as much from the failure of the Government's economic policies as they have from the obvious failure of the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations and government policies in that area.
Here is a government which has set out from its inception to attack the living standards of ordinary Australians. It has reduced spending in many critical areas to the ordinary workers ahd their families in Australia. People will remember what it did in health, in education, in public housing and in all areas of social expenditure critical to the ordinary Australian family. People also remember that this was the government that said it would put people back to work, that it would resolve the problems of inflation. We now have double digit inflation and ever mounting unemployment. It was also the Government that said, not that it
would increase interest rates by 3 or 4 per cent,
but that it would redUCe them by up to 2 per cent. Further, this is the government which said it would maintain wage indexation. Yet it is the same government that has appeared at so many hearings of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission arguing for a redUCtion, first of all, to partial wage indexation or anything less than full indexation. It is the same government which has now moved to discard wage indexation as any basis for overall wage fixation. People will also remember, when we speak about wage. indexation, that this is the government which promised tax indexation, then gave half indexation and then moved away from indexation altogether. This is the government whose policies are constantly in the process of change. HoweVer, over its period of office, the changes which have been made have rarely, if ever, been for the benefit of ordinary Australians. The Government has rarely acted in a way which would improve people's real income, nor has it sought to build up the soCial wage that is to improve the services which are provided to

462 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

Australian families or to improve levels of pensions and benefits which are paid to people when they leave the work force. This Government has not established over its six years in office its credibility to bea government of all Australians and it is just so much claptrap when the honourable member for Bradfield claims in this House, in the pious and paternalistic manner that he did, that somehow we can intuit deep in the recesses of this Government's policy some concern for ordinary Australians. That concern simply is not there. The Government cannot on the one hand emasculate every regulatory authority, whether it be the Prices Justification Tribunal, the Trade Practices Commission, environmental authorities or bodies which deal with worker health and then on the other hand insist that it is being objective and unbiased when it wants to strengthen the power of government over unions or tries to order the affairs of the trade union movement.
The trade union movement in this country knows that when it deals with this Government it is dealing essentially with the enemy. That is not to say that the Australian Labor Party is always seen by the trade union movement in the friendliest of terms. But we can be quite sure that this Government, based on its record, has proved itself to be, in terms of its interests, quite antithetical to the trade union movement. With this perspective in mind, no doubt the speech of the Minister can be read to see where .it is seeking to attack the interests of the workers. It is pretty clear that there are a number of points where this is transparently obvious.
The key element in the overall stance is that the Government is determined to use its wages policy as one of the principal means for controlling inflation. However, rather than the Government seeking to restrainwages through indexation, it has now moved to a new strategy which is designed to restrain wages by isolating increases to those industries in which such increases can be achieved by industrial action or negotiation. This strategy is designed to deny workers in general access to any of the benefits which may flow from the Government's emphasis on, for example, resource development. While it is quite clear that this type of development which is occurring threatens distortions in the wage systems overall, it is by no means clear that seeking to avoid overall wage increases and to isolate increases to particular industries is the most effective means of dealing with that problem. What it is designed to do is to ensure that overall wage levels remain depressed while isolated increases occur in those industries in which there exists either high productivity or the strongest bargaining power.

This strategy will clearly fail because there is inherent within the trade union movement some commitment to wage justice. But what this Government is about in terms of its wages policy is the law of the jungle. What it is about is injustice and inequity. What it is about is confrontation. What it is about is producing disputation, not resolving such disputation in the interests of an overall and comprehensive wages policy. Decentralised wage determination is an attempt by the Government not to produce, in terms of the distribution of the resources of this country, some kind of equity but, rather, to divide the trade union movement. That is not simply a matter of wages; it is also a matter of the Government's political survival. This Government cannot survive when the trade union movement is united. The Government knows that and it seeks to divide the trade union movement as much for political reasons as for economic reasons.
I refer briefly to the Minister's comments on the matter of union amalgamation. Has this Government ever done anything to foster the amalgamation of unions? It says-and the Minister is quite explicit about it-that it is frightened of large unions. Of course, it is very frightened of the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union. Yet in terms of this society, while that union may have 170,000 members, which is quite a large number, on a comparative basis it is not a large union. I visited a steel works in Chicago where the local, in South Chicago and Gary, had more members in that union, in that local, than we have within the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union in Australia.
The Government is therefore, on the one hand, saying that it is interested in industry unions, but on the other hand it is not prepared to act to move in that direction because it is frightened that somehow unions, through amalgamation and through the creation perhaps of industry unions, will achieve for themselves some degree of power. So what is it that the Government is proposing? It is not proposing a move towards that, but, rather, that we move towards company unions. To move in that direction, as previous speakers, including the honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) and the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy), have pointed out, is to move in a direction quite opposite to what every serious commentator on the problems of the trade union movement has been suggesting over the last quarter of a century. What is required is not more and more demarcation disPJltes, which may exist between particular craft unions centred in an industry but, rather, to bring unions together within particular industries. But that is not the direction in which the

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 463

Government wants to go. It wants to move in the direction of tame cat unions and the fragmentation of the trade union movement because it says that it is frightened of trade union power. Thl\t approach, in my view, is clearly likely to lead to a proliferation of industrial conflict and confrontation, the very opposite of what the Government says it is concerned about.
Further, the Minister, in terms of what positive suggestions he is able to make, talks again about the need for the introduction of a greater degree of voluntary unionism. Again, as the honourable member for La Trobe has pointed out, that is to take us in a direction which would mean that the gains that have been achieved by a united trade union movement over the last 100 years would be sacrificed on the basis of a principle which is designed not to look after the civil rights of particular workers but primarily to seek to weaken the trade union movement.
In this country we have seen the trade union movement always in the negative. The honourable member for Bradfield again and again preached to the trade union movement as if it represented some kind of class enemy that would have to be fought at every step. When will Government supporters get round to seeing the Australian trade union movement as some kind of asset?
Speeches have been made about Poland and about the importance of an independent and free trade union movement in that country. Does anyone believe that a trade union movement led by Solidarity in Poland would lead to something like company unions? Of course it would not do so. It would lead to a co-ordinated but nevertheless independent and free trade union movement. That goal ought to be supported, just as we should support similar goals in this country. That is what this Government is about. It does not like free trade unions because they mean conflict, debate within the community, and argument about objectives and the share of resources.
We could move in very different directions in this country. We hope to see in Victoria some new directions. We have already seen them in terms of agreements that are being discussed in relation to Loy Yang and the La Trobe Valley. The other direction has been tried. We are all aware of that. We have had all the confrontation that the Victorian Government could muster. We have had the essential service legislation and everything else. Where has it got us? It has got us to a point at which one of the major projects in that State has not been able to proceed in a satisfactory manner.

So it is time for a change. John Cain's initiatives in that area are not to be attacked but, rather, to be applauded. But there are a number of other changes that we can expect to see in Victoria. If we are really interested in a revolution in industrial relations in this country, we will have to begin to talk in this Parliament about economic democracy and industrial democracy. We will have to see workers not as the enemy but as people who are the backbone of the wealth of this country and who can be brought into management and into decision-making processes not as people to be used, as the honourable member for Bradfield would use them, but as people who have understanding and knowledge that could creatively be brought to bear to tackle some of our problems.
You will remember, Mr Deputy Speaker, that we visited Wollongong whilst serving on a committee and we saw there that some of the major industrial disputation in the Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd plant was over safety clothing and showers for workers. It was a simple industrial health matter which could not be resolved because of the obvious obduracy of the management and their lack of concern for the genuine health and well-being of the workers. We have to start at a very low point because we in this country are a long way behind. But if we could get some worker participation simply in the health and safety area, we would begin to make some gains, because workers in this country do not believe that management is interested even in their basic physical welfare, let alone in what they may have to contribute in terms of ideas and thought. That is what we in this Parliament ought to be talking aboutnot about how we can bash the trade union movement, but how we can bring it into some kind of partnership to help to develop our resources.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LUSHER (Hume) (5.54)-Unlike the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe), I do not think that this debate is one that ought to be carried on in terms of enemies and in emotive terms such as the honourable member has been trying to introduce. I do not see the trade union movement as being the enemy. I think that far too often, and far too much throughout all of the debate that has gone on probably for the whole of the twentieth century in Australia, trade unions and the whole question of industrial relations have become too much of a political football. Where expectations have been raised too much on all sides of the debate, where there are entrenched bureaucracies in unions themselves as well as on

464 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 Wage Determination and Industrial Relations

the side of management-political bureaucracyindustrial relations have become a political football. It has suited people to pursue the sorts of policies which have not led to stability. That sort of thing is a tragic indictment of all sides of this debate.
The fault is on all sides. I think it ought to be acknowledged that the fault is on all sides. Because nobody has been able to find solutions-the record under this Government is not good and the record under the previous Labor Government was not good-it is about time that people started to try to inject some sense into this debate and to try not to use it as a political football. We have a country with enormous resources and, despite the industrial problems we have experienced, enormous resilience. It is a country which has been able to withstand the problems and produce the figures we have been talking about this year with a growth of over 3 per cent in spite of the sorts of industrial troubles we have had and regardless of where those problems have had their origin.
It is a sorry record. It is one which I do not enjoy having to consider and contemplate in this Parliament. I do not believe also that there is much sense in throwing around statistics in this sort of debate because the statistics are distorted on all sides. We can talk about the number of days lost, the amount of money lost or the strategic strikes that are now taking place where fewer people are involved but the damage that is done is greater. But, putting all that to one side, the fact of the matter is that the question of industrial relations is something which causes average Australians major concern. People regard it as a major issue. Everywhere I go throughout my electorate and outside my electorate people want to talk about industrial relations as soon as they know that I am connected with politics. It is a sad thing that that should be the case. With the resources Australia has, people ought to be more concerned about how we are going to capitalise on those things and how we are going to produce more wealth in this country rather than having to spend time and effort worrying about industrial relations. In the Parliament we are discussing yet again another ministerial statement on this matter.
I want to say something about the role of government in this area, without detracting from the fact that the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) is bringing forward a series of proposals which the Government believes are designed to help and assist the procedures. I sincerely hope that the proposals will have that effect. I will certainly support them because I believe the. Government is acting in good faith in

bringing forward this paper and the legislation that will follow it to provide improvements in the situation. But I believe we have to get into perspective what is the Government's role in industrial relations.
The Government is not a major player in the game. Putting to one side for the moment the role it has as an employer, and that certainly is an important factor in terms of the philosophy of the debate, I believe the role of government is to provide a framework within which people of good will on both sides are able to resolve the differences they have.
Dr Theophanous-It has to be a fair framework.
Mr LUSHER-I do not dispute that. Let it be a fair framework. Let it be a framework that is agreed to on all sides. But it can only be a framework within which men of good will can settle differences. As soon as either side wishes to move away from a position of good will, obviously the system will break down. I believe governments can and ought to provide leadership in these matters. But I think it is fundamental to the whole argument that there is no power in this land that can force any person to work for any other. Similarly, there is no power in this land that can make anybody employ anybody else. It is that lack of compulsion which leads, inevitably, to a situation where the whole industrial relations framework stands on fairly shaky foundations. If it does not benefit from major injections of good will from both sides of the argument and from government in its framework setting role, obviously it cannot survive and will break down. I think it is largely because of varying degrees of failure in those different aspects of the relationship that industrial relations has proceeded along the sorry course it has over so many years in Australia and that we find ourselves yet again trying to change the ground rules of the system in such a way that it might work better.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr LUSHER-As I said before the sitting was suspended, one of the great problems that exists in industrial relations is the fact that there is no compulsion within the system and no power that will force any person to work for any other person or force somebody to employ somebody else. Apart from any other problems that that might cause, it is perhaps one of the reasons why it is so difficult, if not impossible, to pursue sanctions and penalties in the area of industrial relations. I should like to deal to some extent with the supply and demand argument as far as it affects the work force. I make the point, probably for the untold time in

Wage Determination and Industrial Relations 23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 465

this House, that the labour market is not a free market. It is a market in which the price moves in only one direction. One of the reasons for unemployment in this economy, as in any other economy, is that the price of labour is not permitted to adjust within the market. If the price were not permitted to adjust, obviously surpluses of labour would never be absorbed. It may well be that surpluses of labour become an inevitable aspect of the system simply because price is not allowed to adjust downwards.
One of the big problems that has to be confronted by all of the parties to industrial relations systems in this country is that of trying to come to grips with the price of labour; whether the ramifications of it are such that we have to accept it as an inevitable aspect of the system or whether, in the interests of fuller employment, provision ought to be made for the price of labour to move in both directions. I imagine that the inevitable question that arises is: Will the situation improve? Can we look at industrial relations with any confidence? Two things are inevitable and necessary if industrial relations are to improve. The first is that the workers must check the power of the unions. As we move further and further into unemployment, we approach a situation in which those who are lucky enough to be still in work ask the question: For how long will my job last? They ask whether it is worth pursuing further increases in wage levels, in working conditions or in margins if the ultimate result is that they might lose their jobs as a result of it. It is true to say that at the moment in the United Kingdom there is evidence that the high level of unemployment is having some effect on industrial sanity in that economy. If that is the case, I despair because, if Australia will have to reach unemployment levels of between 9 per cent and 10 per cent of the work force before sanity will start to prevail in the union movement, I think it will be a very sorry day.
The other thing which must happen if the position is to improve is that the community must be prepared to back the Government or an employer in the event of a confrontation. I do not think that will happen. The reason why it will not happen is that the Community will not be prepared to take that risk. We must ask ourselves whether, if we were the frontline troops, if it was our business that was on the line in a confrontation situation, if we were in a position where we could not trade, where our cash flow had stopped and we were facing bankruptcy or foreclosure of one form or another, we would be prepared to be the martyrs for the cause of ultimately busting the unions, to use the terminology so often put forward. It is a lot to ask. It is one of those things that people will

look at coldly and decide that it is a lot easier to survive in perhaps a slightly less profitable situation, but nevertheless to survive rather than to take on a head-on confrontation and perhaps the risk of not being in business at the end of it.
We have all given a lot of thought to what needs to happen and to the fact that industrial relations continues to be a major issue of our economy. Most people have probably come to the view that confrontation is not the answer. I hope that the legislation that the Minister for Industrial Relations will be bringing forward, pursuant to the statement which he made in the House and which we are debating tonight, will achieve improvement in the situation. We have to continue to work towards bringing sanity into the system. If we can pursue the line that it is not a friends and enemies or a goodies and baddies situation, and if it becomes accepted on both sides of the argument that this economy can be advantaged only if there were co-operation and a fair and proper sharing of the resources and the wealth of this nation, this economy can go only from strength to strength.
I admit to a softening in my position in this argument. I would probably be horrified, if I read the Hansard reports of some of my earlier contributions to debates on industrial relations. I have traditionally been as hardline as anybody else in this place but, the more one looks at it, the more one sees the results of confrontations that develop, and the more one considers the tragic waste of resources in Australia as a result of industrial argument, disputation and confrontation, the more one is forced to come back to the view that it must be worth a go, it must be worth a chance, to see whether these problems can be resolved amicably around a negotiating table. That calls very heavily for an injection of goodwill and trust which are all too often lacking in industrial relations in Australia. It also involves leadership from government. I rather suspect that, on a lot of . occasions, the union movement, employers and governments have been guilty of using industrial relations as a political football, as I said in my opening remarks, and of perpetuating positions in some sort of a crazy status quo. We must bite the bullet, take a responsible and adult look at the problem and try to obtain that injection of goodwill. We must try to see that the Australian economy, which has so much promise and so much wealth to make available to the citizens of this country, is not destroyed by continued industrial disputation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

466 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 18 February, on motion by MrViner:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (8.10)-It is likely that tonight the sometimes painful process of the Freedom of Information Bill through this Parliament will come to an end. It could have been hoped that we could have had clear bipartisan support for the concept of open government. Certainly I think it would be agreed that on both sides there would be support for the present Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in his April 1976 statement in which he said:
If the Australian electorate is to be able to make valid judgments of government policy it should have the greatest access to information possible.
This view of the Prime Minister's was echoed in his most significant and revealing essay into philosophy, his speech on 5 December 1980 called 'The Philosphical Basis of Liberalism' in which he said:
The state must remain the servant, not the master of the Australian people.
I think democratic socialists can certainly give wholehearted support to such sentiments. But the problem as always with this Prime Minister is the coincidence between rhetoric and action. Too often there is just simply a lack of any congruence between the rhetoric of the Prime Minister and the actions that he pursues. I think when we examine some of the problems with the Freedom of Information Bill we will find that the Bill falls far behind the rhetoric of the Prime Minister. This whole issue should clearly, if possible, be a bipartisan one because;: it is surely in the interests of all members of this Parliament, or at least all back bench members of the Parliament, to remove the inhibitions on infqrmation that prevent the Government and the Parliament acting in the best interests of all Australians.
When interested members of the public, with or without specialised expertise in the area concerned, can ask for and get information on how a department is functioning, on its future intentions and commitments, then we will have what we do not have now, namely, effective monitoring of the government by the people who pay the bill for that government and in whose interest the government is supposed to function. I hope too that we might have-a better informed public debate both outside and inside the Parliament. Therefore freedom of information is an issue which hopefully

should unite, not divide, both sides of this House, for Government and Opposition members have a common duty to ensure the authority of the Parliament over both the Executive and bureaucracy in order that the Australian community will have adequate access to governmental information which it does not have today.
People need this information for in our kind of society information is power and the power of information is critical to the effective working of a complex, modern democracy. Indeed, I think one can argue that if the information is not available then insofar as it is not available one has an inadequate and a tenuated democracy. But, of course, when we talk about information as power we come to the rub of the whole problem because this power appears a threat and challenge to government. The idea that people-back benchers and the public-will have access to information appears as a threat to government because it recognises, rightly, that information is power. The authority of modern government is based so much on the access to the control of and the manipulaltion of information. For the public to penetrate that monopoly of information is seen as a threat to the authority of the government by those uneasy with the full implications of democracy. Thus, to protect the power of government, parliament and the people are denied the power of information. Where there should be widespread agreement in this House on the principle and detail of this Bill there is at least on the detail a considerable gap between the two sides of the House.
There can be no doubt that this Bill is a peculiarly feeble embodiment of the lofty sentiments of the Prime Minister. One can read most of the editorials in the Press which greeted the final emasculated version that emerged. An editorial in the Melbourne Age of last August stated:
The legislation has been so diluted, largely at the behest of senior officials . . . from what the Senate committee had originally proposed that, if finally passed and proclaimed, it may not do very much to add to Press and public enlightenment.
That is, rather than supporting principled and effective freedom of information legislation, the Government has proposed a Bill widely regarded by both the media and the public as inadequate because it is a freedom of information Bill which is overly deferential to the corporate sector, overly deferential to the bureaucracy and overly deferential to the Government.
The balance in the legislation before the House-let me recognise that there must be a balance in all such legislations; it must be a balance between confidentiality of government on the one side and the rights of public to access on the

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 467

other-is tipped overwhelmingly in favour of the present monopolisers of information. Too little in this Bill is done to challenge the power of information possessed by bureaucracy and government; too little is done to diffuse and spread the authority that springs from access to information. That statement is quite clearly sustained if we look at the history of this Bill. The 1978 Freedom of Information Bill-the predecessor to this BiIlwas referred to the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs. That Committee produced a massive 500 page report proposing 93 improvements to the Bill. The Government response to that report, as embodied in this Bill, was firstly that it grudgingly conceded a few of the minor points and a couple of major ones made by that Committee, but it rejected 51 of the recommendations which were of far reaching significance. In addition it has included in the final product 10 major new restrictions and prohibitions.
Just let me look at the ways the Bill moved in the other direction to tilt even further the balance away from effective freedom of information legislation. There has been a substantial broadening of the exemptions prohibiting law enforcement, trade secrets and business information, the national economy-the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) commented on some of the restrictions in relation to information on the national economy-and internal administrative efficiency. In all of these fields there has been a broadening of the degree of exemption, that is of prohibiting documents coming before the public. There has been the specific adoption, without limitation, of all existing secrecy provisions in other legislation. This is referred to in clause 33 of the Bill. There is an extraordinary new power in agencies to refuse even to retrieve and examine a particular document when the document as described in the request appears to be exempt. There is the complete exclusion from the Bill of 24 specific agencies, many of them without commercial or sensitive intelligence functions, including the Auditor-General, the Health Insurance Commission and the Aboriginal Lands Trust, and 15 other agencies in respect of their competitive commercial activities, and all external territories. There is a new power in agencies to refuse disclosure of the non-exempt portion of a document if it would be misleading and an unappealable power in the Minister to prevent an agency compiling document indexes if this would unreasonably divert its resources from its other operations.
So we can see how far the principles of freedom of information have been watered down by the paranoia of government. We can see this again

clearly if we look at the second reading speech of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner). He said:
It would be inconsistent with the responsibility of Ministers to the Parliament for the proper conduct of government that final decisions on the public release of documents damaging to vital public interests should be in the hands of tribunals not accountable to Parliament.
I know that single sentence is a mouthful. But if one ploughs ones way through what is fairly tortuous prose one will discover that what the sentence is saying is that in many cases a Minister should be the sole authority of whether or not to allow public scrutiny of documents. The Minister indicated in his speech clearly the kinds of cases the Executive had in mind. I will quote the sorts of cases about which he was concerned. He said:
. . . matters relating to defence, national security, international relations and Commonwealth-State relations, the protection of Cabinet and Executive Council confidentiality and the relations between Ministers and their official advisers where disclosure would be contrary to the public interest. In these cases, the Bill provides for a system of conclusive certificates. Such a certificate establishes that a document in respect of which it is given is an ellempt document. In the case of Cabinet and Executive Council documents, such a certificate may be given by the Secretary to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet or the Secretary to the Federal Ellecutive Council, as the case may be. In other cases, the certificate 'may be given by the responsible Minister or the Principal officer of the agency concerned.
Thus, in the final analysis, over a wide range of cases, the decision whether or not a document should be released remains with government. The Bill effectively vests a veto power in the hands of the Executive over a wide range of government activity. This seems a long way from the Minister's stated ideal of striking an appropriate balance between openness and confidentiality.
It is clear on examination that the imbalance of the Bill derives from the fear of this Government that to give information to the people is to cede authority in some way. Thus, tonight Government members have a fairly tough decision to make: Whether to surrender to the paranoia of government and accept this rather lacklustre measure, or whether to act up to the principles they have so frequently espoused and place the needs of Parliament and the people above the rather narrowly conceived needs of government. As the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) put it last year-he put it both simply and eloquently-'Information increases the capacity of people to do their own thing wisely'. This Bill does little to increase effectively the capacity of people to do their own thing wisely.
I agree it is a difficult decision for honourable members on the Government benches to make,

468 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

but I hope that, when they are looking at the details of the Bill, when they come to vote on the Bill, we will see at least some echoes in this House of the bipartisan approach which was taken by many of their colleagues in the Senate. I think it would be stimulating for the front bench of this Government if it found some of the back bench members of the Government parties, on this measure which affects so much the authority of Parliament, playing the kind of bipartisan role that their colleagues displayed at points in debating this legislation in the Senate.
I admit that it is an easier task for the Opposition to vote on this measure because we too have a vested interest in information. It is a relatively easy task for us on this side of the House to try to improve this Bill to provide better access to intormation. If we in Opposition can get more effective information it will improve political debate; it will help us to keep Ministers on their toes and to expose their incapacity. Therefore, there is a very clear political advantage for an opposition in supporting a freedom of information measure. However, I hope that we are supporting the improvements to this Bill not simply for that reason but also because we do consider that the needs of Parliament and the community can both be served by more effective freedom of information legislation than is offered by the Government in this Bill. Let me say that in the not too distant future when we are in Government I hope that we will be able to remember that principle because, as I have suggested tonight, one of the great temptations is the fears that governments have that somehow they will lose authority by giving information, a form of power, to a wider audience.
Several times I have referred to governmental paranoia. I want to take up an issue within my field of special interest just to discuss the kinds of paranoia that figure so prominently' on the front bench of the Government at the moment. I refer to a discussion paper-it was not a confidential document; it was not marked 'secret'; it was a discussion paper-called 'Legal problems and possible solutions associated with prosecutions related to the Health Insurance Act'. It dealt with that vexed and much debated public topic of the wickedness or otherwise of doctors in fraud and overservicing patients. That discussion paper-let me stress, it is a discussion paper-is a superb analysis of the problems faced by government in dealing with what, admittedly, is a difficult and complex problem. There has been a wide amount of discussion on this subject, but I know of no single document on this subject which I have read in the last year which so clearly, precisely and

comprehensively addresses the legal issues in relation to these problems. Yet that discussion paper has been treated as some kind of secret document which the public should in no way have. The document was leaked to the Opposition.
We had decisions to make as to whether we should make the document public. We decided it was very much in the public interest for it to be publicised. Indeed, I believe that whoever leaked that document to the Opposition in fact played a public role in making a contribution to a public debate by providing the kind of information that is necesssary in this society if we are to talk intelligently about these problems. However, as a result of the document coming to the hands of the Opposition, there has been a witch hunt in the Department concerned. The Federal police have been called in. All the authority that can be brought to bear has been brought to bear in an attempt to seek out the individual who leaked a discussion paper-not a secret and confidential document, not something relating to national security, but a document which was intended as a discussion paper, an informative document. Now we have this witch hunt in process to try to hunt out the culprit responsible for providing in fact not just the Opposition but the public with informed information in relation to this debate. That seems to me to be simply a case of governmental paranoia about information.
If Ministers in this Government were prepared to provide this kind of information to the Opposition and to the public so that a proper debate could take place such incidents would not occur. Some Ministers are so prepared. I single out the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee), who I think is a classic example of the preparedness of a Minister to encourage active and informed debate by providing both the Opposition and the public with the details of policy making. I am afraid that the Minister for Health (Mr Mackellar) does not fall into that category. His reaction to the availability of this document to the public confirms what I have said about the kind of paranoia that too often occupies those on the front bench of this Government.
There is no doubt that on the principles of open government, on the freedom of information principles embodied in this Bill, we on both sides of the House are basically agreed, no doubt with a few silent exceptions on the Government front bench. The bulk of members of this Parliament agree on the principles. I hope that when we come to examine the details, when we move the range of

Freedom ofInformation Bil/1981

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 469

amendments to this Bill that the Opposition proposes to move this evening-they are aimed at improving those principles to which we are all committed, at making more effective the access of Parliament and the public to information-a few Government members on the back benches will be prepared to stand out against the paranoia on the front bench, this obsession that any leaking of information somehow will lead to a decline in governmental power. What it will do in fact is contribute towards a much healthier, a much more efficient and a much more respected democracy in this society.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
Clauses I to lO-by leave-taken together.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.28)-by leave-The amendments the Opposition proposes moving to the Freedom of Information Bill are quite numerous-34 in all. They have been printed and copies of them have been circulated. I move the following amendments to clause 9 of the Bill:
(I) Clause 9, page 8, after sub-clause (2), insert the following sub-clause:
U(2A) Nothing in paragraph (2) (c) is intended to prevent or discourage an agency from causing a statement bringing up to date information contained in a previous statement or statements to be published, whether in the Gazelle or otherwise, at intervals of less than 12 months, and for this purpose it is the intention of Parliament that such statements will be published, where practicable, at intervals of not more than 3 months.".
(2) Clause 9, page 9, omit sub-clauses 5 to 7 (both inclusive) .
If honourable members look at the Bill before us they will see that clause 9 relates to 'Certain documents to be available for inspection and purchase'. That is the whole tenor of previous debate on this Bill. In our view the taxpayers, the citizens of Australia, are entitled to as much information as they can get. They are entitled to know what is available. The scheme of things with this legislation is to make certain documents available for inspection and purchase. The intent of this legislation is to relate the documents to decisions or recommendations in respect of an enactment or a scheme. The clause refers to manuals or other documents containing interpretations, documents containing particulars of a scheme, documents containing statements of the manner, or intended manner, of administration and documents describing the jJrocedures to be followed. In other words, the documents which are to be available for inspection and purchase are set out in clause 9 (1).

The Bill provides in clause 9 (2) that the principal officer shall cause copies of the documents to which the clause applies to be made available for inspection and purchase by members of the public. But the same sub-clause provides the limitation that not later than 12 months after the commencement of Part II the officer shall cause to be published in the Gazette a statement of the documents of which copies are available.
The Opposition would love to see this Bill passed and brought into law in a much better form. In fact, if it were in the form of the amendments we will be moving tonight it would be
applauded by the public. It is not helpful to have the technicalities, restrictions and inhibitions on which my colleague the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) addressed this chamber earlier this evening. In other words, the principle of freedom of information is being inhibited and confined and is unable to flow because of all sorts of restrictions.
If people are to know which documents are available, as much publicity as possible should be given to their availability. It is not really the most exciting thing in the world to have to read the Gazette to find out what documents are available. In other words, we think it might be better if departments and agencies were encouraged continually to keep up to date the information that is available to the public. Perhaps this could be done at intervals of not more than three months. This Bill provides that during the year commencing 1 January next following the pUblication of a statement and during each succeeding year there will be published in the Gazette statements bringing up to date the information contained in the previous statement. Technically a statement could be made in January of one year and no further statement would be made until December of the following year. In other words, there could be a twoyear gap in the giving of information by way of an advertisement in the Gazette as to which documents are available. We think this is not good enough. It adds up to what we have been saying about the Government's whole approach to the question of freedom of information. It is a question of the Government not allowing information to be made available. We want to encourage all departments and agencies to make known as soon as possible the information that is available-for example, by advertising every three months instead of people having to wait up to 24 months to read in the Gazette of its availability. As I have already said, information published in the Gazette does not get the widest circulation. Consideration ought to be 'given, for example, to publishing information in newspapers and magazines so that

470 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

the public can quickly find our what is available. What is wrong with that suggestion? Alternatively how about making available a freedom of information booklet through the Australian Government Publishing Service bookshops?
I make the point that the Opposition does not intend to oivide on these amendments, despite its contention that as much information as possible should be made known to the public as soon as possible. The way the legislation is worded will bring about more inhibitions than are necessary. We want to encourage by our amendments as much publicity as possible being given to the availability of documents. We think it will encourage better domocracy and better government if we can get people to become really interested in this subject. It is for that purpose that the amendments have been moved in the terms set out.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (8.35)-1 shall speak firstly to the first amendment and explain the Government's opposition to it. The amendment seeks to state a parliamentary intention that the statements published in the Gazette listing the manuals which are available for inspection and purchase be updated at three-monthly intervals. Whilst the proposed new sub-clause does not impose a statutory obligation on agencies, their compliance with the stated parliamentary intention may well involve agencies in an unmanageable work load. This is a modification which can be noted and, as the Attorney General (Senator Durack) so often said in another place in debating this Bill, if experience proves it desirable and practicable it could be introduced at the first major review of the legislation. We simply feel that it is proper that we should test the work load in an area such as this before agreeing to the amendments.
The second amendment put forward by the Opposition is also proposed on the ground that it would impose a quite unmanageable work load on the resources of the departments concerned if the amendment were agreed to. The provisions of the Bill which are sought to be deleted by the second amendment-that is, sub-clauses (5) to (7) of clause 9-were particularly inserted to cover the special situation of the Australian Taxation Office. The Attorney-General, in rejecting this amendment in another place, referred to the kind of work load. As he pointed out, it was estimated in regard to the Taxation Office that no fewer than 250 man years would be involved in per-. forming the task if the amendment were agreed to. Whilst it may be a desirabe objective to see to the publishing of the internal law of departments,

I am sure the House would understand the proposition that a proper balance must be struck between that objective and the Hse of departmental resources. The present volume of instructions, manuals and the like in the Taxation Office which would require 250 man years of work if this amendment were agreed to has about 2.7 million pages of such instructions, manuals and the like.
I will detail to the Committee the kind of documents to which I refer. They include head office documents comprising training manuals, circular memoranda for income tax, sales tax and payroll tax, central taxpayer system manuals, specialised systems manuals, pay-as-you-earn manuals and a statistical manual. There are subject files and individual series files with interpretations of the laws and various procedures for administering the law. Head office produces 16 training manuals. The central taxpayer system manuals total 29 substantial volumes. Branch offices in the states also produce manuals, handbooks and various specialised instructions. Like head office, they have their own subject files. Just by elaborating, not in great detail, on those matters I think the Committee can judge what an enormous burden upon resources would be involved if this amendment were agreed to. The Attorney wondered when he heard this amendment being put forward whether those who were proposing it were living in the world of Alice in Wonderland.
The objectives of the Freedom of Information Bill are fine objectives but it is fair enough that we strike a balance at some point and in the end the extent to which that balance has to be struck will rest with the judgment of the Executive-that is, the Minister concerned-and, of course, the Minister is answerable to this Parliament for any decision that he makes within the provisions of clause 9 as they stand. So the Opposition, let alone any honourable member interested in this subject of freedom of information, will have an opportunity to question Ministers concerning their administration under the provisions of sub-clauses (5) to (7). For these reasons, the Government accepts neither the first nor the second amendment.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.41 )-Fortunately, I have a second chance to speak on these amendments. Remarkably enough, the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) has replied to something that I have not even stated yet. I had moved both amendments but had addressed only the first. The Mimster has already objected to our proposal to omit sub-clauses (5) to (7) of clause 9. That astounds me because he would know, being a lawyer, that even under the discovery process one would have access to many

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 471

documents. To use as an excuse that it will take something like;: 250 man years or light years to get any work out of the Australian Taxation Office is incredible. The fact is that the documents exist, have been prepared and relate to sOinething. What is the Government trying to hide? Surely we are not to be so bogged down by bureaucratic procedures that it will be impossible to deliver what was intended by the Bill.
The whole idea of the second amendment is that Ministers shall not be able to give extensions of time, which negate the whole concept of making information available. I wonder whether the United States had the same difficulty in making available information of the kind that we are asking be made available to the Australian people; I think not. The United States has been able to do it. Let us compare that with what has happened here. We have before us a Bill which has been in the offing for some years. In fact, it was rushed through the Senate in the first session last year on the basis that we might be able to have satisfactory legislation. That did not happen. There were delays and intelligent discussion took place in the Senate in an attempt to improve the Bill. All we are trying to do here is make the information available to the Australian people. Ministers are good and bad. Some work hard. Some find it difficult to grapple with the situation. Are we to be left in a position in which Ministers might take the view that, because they are of conservative nature, they will continue to extend the time in which information will be made available to the public? I emphasise we are trying to make this information available not to the Opposition but to the Australian people. The whole intent in seeking the removal of sub-clauses (5) to (7) was to delete provisions which would enable a Minister to extend the time within which the information was to be published. In other words, we believe that already there has been too long a delay in getting the Bill before the Parliament. If an agency cannot publish at least once a year information that is required there must be something wrong with it. That is the simple position. The agency may need to enlarge its staff. The Minister has referred to the Australian Taxation Office. I can tell him that that Office wants to increase its staff, not for the purpose described here but for the sheer purpose of trying to be more efficient in the collection of tax.
Mr Viner-It has been increased.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Yes, but not to the extent that the Taxation Office wants. We are making what is a relatively insignificant requestthat Ministers not be permitted to hide behind a right to give an extension. The legislation began

by stating that something would be done but that is weakened, in the latter part of clause 9, by the provision that, of course, Ministers may extend the time involved.
I know that the Minister has already made up his mind. I do not wish to hear him again on the subject. The merits of the case surely rest in the fact that an efficient department will be able to comply with the purpose of the legislation. Plenty of time within which to publish information is allowed, but to permit that time to be extended completely negates what we are about.
In summary, the first of the two amendments relating to clause 9 was for the purpose of ensuring that information be published within a number of areas and as quickly as possible. The second would provide that no extension Qf time be given by a Minister.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (8.45)-Briefiy, so that there can be no misunderstanding of the obligation that the Government accepts in respect of this clause, if there are to be extensions, or if there is to be less than complete compliance with section 93, the Minister responsible for the legislation must first grant such extension in writing, or relieve the functional Minister from compliance. Any such extensions or relief must be reported to the Parliament by the Minister rrsponsible for the legislation, as charged unde;r the reporting requirements of section 93. Thus there is to be complete accountability to the Parliament for what, I repeat, is intended to be the striking of a reasonable balance between the obligation to provide information and the workload thereby imposed upon a particular agency.
Amendments negatived.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 11 to 18-by leave-taken together.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.47)-1 move:
(3) Clause 12, page 10, omit sub-clause (2), substitute the following sub-clauses:
"(2) Subject to sub-section (2A) where a request is made by a personJor access to a document under this Part-
(a) if the request is mac/e before the expiration of 12 months after the date of commencement of this Part-he is not entitled to obtain access to the document under this Part unless the document became a document of an agency or an official document of a Minister on or after the date of commencement of this Part; and
(b) if the request is made on or after the expiration of 12 months after the date of commencement of this Part-he is not entitled to obtain access to the

472 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

document under this Part unless the document became a document of an agency or an official document of a Minister at a date within 5 years before the date of commencement of this Part.

"(2A) person is

Notwithstanding anything in entitled to obtain access to a

dsuobc-usmecetniot no(r2t)~

a a

part of a document under this Part-

'

(a) if the document or part of the document contains information relating to the personal affalrs of that person; or

(b) if access to the document by that person is reasonably necessary to enable a proper understanding of a document of a Minister to which that person has lawfully had access.".

Proposed sub-clause (2) provides that if the request for information is made by a person before the expiration of 12 months after the date of commencement of the Act that person shall not be entitled to access to a document unless it had become a document of an agency, or an official document of a Minister, on or after the date of commencement; but if the request is made after the expiration of 12 months one shall not be entitled to access unless the document became a document of an agency, or an official document of a Minister within the five years preceding the commencement of the legislation.

Proposed sub-clause (2A) relates to a document which contains information relating to one's
personal att:airs or is one of which originally one had possessIOn. Let me explain it in this way: At
pr~sent, ~he retrospective application of the legislatIOn wIll be confined to information of a personal nature that is not more than five years old. The Opposition believes that any information of a personal nature should always be available. The withholding of information can quite easily lead to his~ory judging people wrongly. If such a person wIshed to have information disclosed he or she should be able to have that done.

The amendment would also provide that after the Act had been in operation for 12 months any
information or do.cument not more than five years
old would be avaIlable. The purpose of providing the 12 months period is to enable departments to
organis~ themselves to be able to handle requests.
There IS no reason at all why this amendment
which merely provides for a restricted period of retrospective operation should not be accepted. It might be pointed out that, in common with most
of o.ur proposed amendments, these were
unanul?ously agreed to by the Senate Standing
CommIttee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs. Everybody of an unbiased view would agree that
what we are proposing will help in the provision ~f .informati~n, will provide for some retrospectIvlty and wIll be in accordance with the whole
~enure of providing as much information as possIble for as long a period as possible.

Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (8.48)-The Government opposes the amendment which, as the honourable gentleman has said, would have the effect that, after the legislation had been in force for 12 months, there would be right of access to non-exempt documents which had come into the possession of a Minister or agency not more than five years before the legislation had come into force. Additionally and importantly, the amendment proposes that there be unlimited access to prior documents relating to the applicant's personal affairs. That amendment is to be contrasted to the present provision under the Bill for access to personal affairs documents which have come into the possession of a Minister or agency not more than five years before the legislation has come into force, and for access not to be given to other prior documents, except where reasonably necessary to the understanding of a further document to which lawful access has been had. The Government believes that to extend greater access at this stage to prior documents would be to commit agencies to a workload of unknown dimensions which could
disrupt substantially their normal operations.

We do not have an utterly inflexible attitude on this question and, as the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) did in another place, I can inform the House that the Government is prepared to undertake to review the question of access to
prior documents after the legislation has been in force for 12 months. Sub-clauses 12 (3) and (4) provide a regulation-making power to enable greater access to be provided if it proves to be possible having regard to that review. So, I think the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr
Lionel Bowen) would understand that the Government simply wants to give this part of the legislation an opportunity to operate for some time before passing final judgment on the reasonableness of the proposal in the amendment. It is for that reason that the Government does not
accept the amendment.

Question put:

That the sub-clause proposed to be omitted (Mr Lionel Bowen's amendment) stand part of the clause.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr J. L. Armitage)

Ayes

61

Noes

47

Majority

14

Adermann. A. E. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J.

AYES

Hunl. R. J. D.
Hyde.J. M. Jarman, A. W.

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 473

AYES
Bourchier. J. W. BradlieJd. J. M. BraiLhwaite, R. A. Burr.M.A. Cadman. II. G. Camt:ron. Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron. Ian Carlton.J.J. Chapman. H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean.II.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife. w.e. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles. G. O-H. Good luck. B. J. Groom.R.J. Hall. Steele Harris.G. MeD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. e. (Teller) Hodgman. W. M. Howard.J. W.

Jull.D.F. Kaller. R.e. Killen. D.J. Lusher. S. A. Lynch. Sir Phillip McLean. R. M. Moore.J.e. Newman, K. E. Nix.on. P.l. O-Keefe. F. L.
Peacock. A. S. Porler,J. R. Robinson, hm Rocher. II. e. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair. J. MeC. Spender.J. M. Street.II.A.
Tambling. G. E. J. Thompson. D. S. Tuckey. e. W.
Viner. R.I. While. P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. e.

NOES

Beazley. K. e.
Blewell. N. Bowen. Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell.G. Cass.M.H. Charles. D. E. Child.J. Cohen. B. Cross. M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling. E.E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy.M.J. Everingham. D. N. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke. R. J. L. Holding. A. e. Howe. B. L. Humphreys. B. e. (Teller) Hurford. e. J. Innes, U. E.
Jacobi. R.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson. Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones. Charles
Keating. P. J. Kelly. R. J. Kent. L. Kerin. J. e. Klugman. R. E.
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les
Millon. P.
Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford. J. G. Scholes. G. G. D. SCali. J. L. Theophanous. A. e.
Uren,T. Wallis. L.G. West. S. J. Wiliis.R. Young. M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Amendment negatived.

Clauses agreed to.

Clauses 19 to 23-by leave-taken together.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.58)-by leave-I move:

(4) Clause 19, page 14; sub-clause (I), lines 9 and 10, omit
"as soon as practicable but in any case not later than 60 days", substitute "(including a decision under section 20 to defer the provision of access to the document) as sOOrl as practicable but in any case before the expiration of the relevant period".

(S) Clause 19, page 14,Iines 12-16, omit sub-clause (2), substitute the following sub-clauses:

"(2) In sub-section (I), the reference to the period in relation to a request received by or on behalf of an agency or a Minister shall be construed as a reference-

(a) in a case where the request is received before-

(i) the expiration of 2 years after the date of commencement of this Part; or
(ii) if, before the expiration of 2 years after the date of commencement of this Part, a regulation takes effect prescribing, for the purposes of this subparagraph, a date after the expiration of 2 years after the date of commencement of this Part-the date so prescribed-
to a period of 60 days;
(b) in a case where a request is received on or after the expiration of 2 years after the date of commencement of this Part but before-
(i) the expiration of 4 years after the date of commencement of this Part; or
(ii) if, before the expiration of 4 years after the date of commencement of this Part a regulation takes effect prescribing, for the purposes of this subparagraph, a date after the expiration of 4 years after the date of commencement of this Part-the date so prescribed-
to a period of 4S days; and
(c) in any other case-to a period of 30 days.
"(3) A regulation prescribing a date for the purposes of sub-paragraph (2) (a) (ii) or (2) (b) (ii) shall not take effect until each House of the Parliament has resolved that it take effect.
"(4) Sub-sections 48 (4), (S), (SA) and (6) and section 49 of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 do not apply to regulations prescribing a date for the purposes of sub-paragraph (2) (a) (ii) or (2) (b) (ii).".
Amendments 4 and 5 relate to clause 19. Clause 19 of the Bill makes the point that where a request is made, a decision on the request will be made as soon as practicable but in any case not later than 60 days after it is received. We think the 60 days period is far too long and should be shortened. The amendments we have moved would shorten the period to 45 days after two years and to 30 days after four years, and there would still be a provision for the period to be further shortened by regulations provided there was an affirmative resolution of each House. The point we make in regard to clauses 4 and 5 is that the time factor should be reduced from 60 days to 45 days after two years and to 30 days after four years.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.0)-Again, the Government does . not accept these amendments, the purpose of which are to introduce a progressive reduction of the time in which an agency is required to deal with a request for access. The Government has given an undertaking in its response to the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs that the period of 60 days provided for in the Bill would be reviewed in the light of experience in the working of the legislation. The Government has already indicated its view that it considers it would be appropriate for that full review of the legislation to take place after it has been in operation for three years. So it

.474 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

is another of those situations where the Government thinks we should allow some time for the legislation to operate and in the light of experience to review the situation covered by these particular amendments.
Amendments negatived.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.01)-1 move:
(6) Clause 22, page IS, omit paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of sub-clause (I), substitute the following paragraphs:
U(a) a decision is made not to grant a request for access to a document on the ground that it is an exempt document;and
(b) it is practicable for the agency or Minister to make a copy of the document with such deletions that the copy would not be an exempt document,".
Amendment 6 relates to clause 22. Clause 22 at the present time refers to exempt matter. The decision is made not to grant a request for access to a document on a number of grounds. Our amendment is designed to remove the provision whereby an agency or a Minister can decide not to make documents available which are partly exempt because of the work involved. This is an absurd requirement because the work involved is normally about 30 seconds, to delete any part of the document that is deemed to be exempt. That can be done very quickly indeed. There is no cost at all involved in the exercise. Under the American Freedoin of Information Act documents have quite often been published with the exempt material excluded in Australian publications. It is on that basis that we see no reason at all why documents are not being made available to the Australian people simply because there are not sufficient resources available for the work to be done to make a copy.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.3)-The adoption of this amendment would add very considerably to the resources required to administer this legislation. The Attorney-General (Senator Durack) in another place, when debating this particular amendment, observed that similar provisions in the United States freedom of information legislation had been construed as requiring a line by line examination of documents. This of course involves a very heavy demand on agency resources, particularly in this case the more senior and experienced personnel.
As with other amendments that the House has heard me comment upon, this amendment also is one in which the Government believes the situation should be considered in the light of experience. We think that is the appropriate course to take, it being a matter of the resources that would have to go into satisfying the amended legislation

against the desirability to provide access to infor.- mation. We consider that we should see how the legislation operates and then make a final judgment. Accordingly, the Government does not accept this amendment.
Amendment negatived..
Clauses agreed to:
Clauses 24-32-by leave-taken together.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.5)-1 move:
(7) Clause 24, page 17, lines 3-12, omit sub-clause (2).
We are dealing with amendment 7 to clause 24. It provides for the omission of sub-clause 2 of that clause. If we look at sub-clause 2 we will see where, if because of the nature of the request referred to the Minister is of the view that the document should not be made available, that virtually means that the Minister's decision is final. Our amendment is to remove that prohibition. Clause 24 (2) at the present time allows for a blanket exemption to be made by Ministers or agencies simply on the basis of the nature of the request that is being made, without any need to examine individual documents. In other words, if a request seeks documents of a sensitive nature, the Minister or the agency can simply refuse a request for all of the documents, regardless of the fact that at least some of the documents could be made available in full or in part. It is a ridiculous situation to think that because of the nature of the request itself it will be refused in to to because the Minister so determines.
I make the point again that we are very anxious to give as much information as possible. Ministers, no matter who they may be, or what their experience is, have a tendency to restrict information. It is quite counterproductive to have information restricted simply because of the nature of the request. Our amendment would overcome that problem by deleting that sub-clause.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.7)-The purpose of the amendment is to delete sub-clause (2) of clause 24. The effect of that sub-clause is to permit a request for access to be refused if it is plain on the face of the request that all of the documents covered by the request would be exempt documents and that none of those documents would contain matter which is not exempt and which might be made available separately. .
In such a case the request might be refused without the agency concerned having to undertake the work of searching for and identifying all of the documents covered by the request. If I

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 475

might give an example to the Committee, a request for access to all Cabinet decisions on a particular subject would plainly be a case where all of the documents covered by the request are exempt documents and none of them would contain matter which is not exempt. The official record of a Cabinet decision is, as such, an exempt document. There would therefore be no point in the department concerned having to search out all of the relevant Cabinet decisions. The work involved would simply be wasted.
It should be noted that the tests which have to be satisfied before a request can be refused under the provision which the amendment would omit are quite exacting tests. In the first place, it must be plain on the face of the requests that the documents covered by the requests would be exempt documents. Secondly, it must also be clear that none of the documents concerned contain exempt matter. Moreover, there is a right of appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal against a refusal on these grounds. I think the House will therefore appreciate that there are specific protections built into the legislation against abuse and that for that reason there is no need to accept the amendment now proposed.
Amendment negatived.
Clauses agreed to.
Clause 33 (Documents affecting national security, defence, international relations and relations with States).
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.9)-1 move:
(8) Clause 33, page 22,lines 13-42, and page 23, lines 1-9, omit the clause, substitute the following clause:
Documents affecting national security, defence and international relations
"33. A document is an exempt document if disclosure of the document under this Act could reasonably be expected to cause damage to-
(a) the security of the Commonwealth; (b) the defence of the Commonwealth; or (c) the international relations of the Commonwealth.".
We move amendment 8, to omit clause 33 and to substitute another clause. At present clause 33 deals with documents affecting national security, defence, international relations and relations with States. The structure of our amendment is to deal firstly with documents affecting national security, defence, and international relations. It will be noticed that the Bill itself states:
33. (I) A document is an exempt document if disclosure of the document would be contrary to the public interest-
We say that a document is an exempt document if disclosure of the document could reasonably be expected to cause damage to the security of the

Commonwealth, the defence of the Commonwealth or the international relations of the Commonwealth.
At this stage we are dealing with the deletion of existing clause 33. We will be picking up our insertions with the new proposals in amendments Nos 9 and 10. But I had better make the explanation that whilst we are seeking to dt<lete clause 33, we are proposing new clauses. The reason for the deletion sought will be spelt out on following clauses.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.1O)-Mr Deputy Chairman, for convenience, I might leave my remarks until the Opposition introduces the later amendments and just foreshadow the fact that the Government does not accept this amendment or the others to which the honourable member for Kingsford Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) will refer.
Amendment negatived.
Clause agreed to.
Proposed new clauses 33A and 33B-by leavetaken together.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.l3)-by leave-I move:
(9) Page 23, after clause 33, insert the following new clause:
Documents affecting relations with States and the Northern Territory
"33A. A document is an exempt document if disclosure of the document-under this Act-
(a) could reasonably be expected to substantially impair relations between the Commonwealth and any State or the Northern Territory; and
(b) would be contrary to the public interest. ".
(10) Page 23, after clause 33, insert the following new clause:
"330. (I) Where-
(a) a request is received by an agency or Minister in respect of a document that has originated with, or has been received from, or contains information that originated with, or has been received from, the Government of a State or the Northern Territory; and
(b) it appears to the officer or Minister dealing with the request, or to a person reviewing under section 44 a decision refusing the request that the Government of the State or the Northern Territory might reasonably wish to contend that the document is an exempt document under section 33A,
a decision to grant access under this Act, to the document or to that part of the document that'contains the information referred to in paragraph (a) shall not be made unless-
(c) the agency or Minister has given to the Government of the State or the Northern Territory, as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity of making submissions in support of a contention that the document is an exempt document under section 33A; and
(d) the person making the decision has. had regard to any submission so made.

476 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

(2) Where, after any submissions have been made in accordance with sub-section (I), a decision is made that the
document or that part of the document that contains the in-
formation referred to in paragraph (1) (a), is not an exempt document under section 33A-

(a) the agency or Minister shall cause notice in writing of the decision to be given to the Government of the
State or the Northern Territory, as the case may be, as well as to the person who made the request; and

(b) access shall not be given to the document, or to that part of the document that contains the information referred to in paragraph (I) (a), unless-

(i) the time for an application to the Tribunal by the
Government of the State or the Northern Territory in accordance with section 59A has expired and such an application has not been made; or

(ii) such an application has been made and the Tribunal has confirmed the decision. ".

Amendment No.9 is to insert a new clause 33A,
which makes the point that a document is an exempt document if damage can be expected to
be caused. That is the test. It relates to the secur-
ity of the Commonwealth and to the defence of the Commonwealth or the international relations
of the Commonwealth. Then we have a separate
clause 33B which relates to the States and the Northern Territory. At present, there is the pro-
vision that the States and the Northern Territory
can virtually exempt themselves. We put in a test
here that the exemption must be on the basis that it would be contrary to the public interest. In
other words, we think that is important. Our pro-
vision also allows an appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal should there be any refusal.

,We are aware of the fact that there can be
appeals to what is called the Document Review
Tribunal, which of course will only be able to make recommendations to a Minister, and that
means that such appeals may well be useless. At present documents are exempt conclusively if they divulge any information which the Minister
considers would reasonably be expected to cause
damage to the Commonwealth or divulge information communicated in confidence in respect of
Commonwealth-State relations.

We wish to make the point that the Opposition

believes, as 'do even some Government senators,

that all exemptions should have a public interest

criterion. We are dealing with governments. It is

important that the people who make governments

have their interests protected. Our amendments

would greatly restrict the scope of the exemption

relating to Commonwealth-State relations and

add the public interest criterion.

'

Amendment No. 10, which has also been de-
scribed, would provide that a State government or
the Northern Territory could appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in order to prevent
access to a document if it considered it ought to be

exempt. In other words, while the scope of the exemption would be greatly narrowed, the position of the State governments and the Northern Territory would still be adequately protected. At present there could be the difficulty that they could well prevent any access to documents because they could say that it was a matter that concerned them, that it was a matter of confidentiality. Our test is one of public interest, with an appeal provision both for the public and for the States or the Northern Territory. I think it is an admirable amendment. It in no way weakens the whole concept of what the Government was anxious to do, that is, to guarantee security, defence and relations which ought to be confidential, but it is essential to get the public involved in the test as to whether the exemption is valid or otherwise.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (9.1S)-As I interpret the present proposal in the Bill and the amendments moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) on our behalf, in some ways we are widening the restrictions, because under our proposal we are saying that a Minister of one of the States or the Northern Territory can make an application to a tribunal saying that disclosure would not be in the public interest. As I see it at present-I have looked only quickly through the Bill-there is no way for a State Minister to say to a Commonwealth Minister that it is not in the public interest, because it may cause damage to relations between the Commonwealth and any State or the Northern Territory to prevent publication.
I should like the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) to comment on that aspect. If a Commonwealth Minister has decided that it is not contrary to the public interest to disclose a document, but one of the States feels it is contrary to the public interest, is there any provision for the State to take any action to prevent the Commonwealth from publishing the document?
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.16)-1 can cover the point raised by the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) in answering generally the amendment moved by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). Amendments Nos 9 and 10 have as their purpose to create a separate exemption for documents received from the States or the Northern Territory and to require consultations before a decision is made to grant access to such documents where it is considered that the particular State or Territory concerned may wish to contend that the document is an exempt document on the ground that its release would damage

Freedom ofInformation Bill.J 981

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 477

Commonwealth-State relations or relations between the Commonwealth and the Territory. The consequential amendments would entitle the State or the Northern Territory to appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal against a decision that the document concerned was not an exempt document.
The Government considers it inappropriate that relations between governments in these matters should be regulated in this way. The particular point raised by the honourable member for Prospect is answered by informing him that the Commonwealth has assured the States and the Northern Territory that consultation will in practice take place. Moreover, where there is a contest between the Commonwealth and a State on the issue whether disclosure of a document would harm Commonwealth-State relations, the Government believes that it is inappropriate that this issue should be submitted to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. Our contention is that issues of this kind are likely to be highly political and therefore should be resolved at the political level rather than at the administrative level or before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. So the relationships between the Commonwealth and the States or the Commonwealth and the Northern Territory will take place on the basis of the Commonwealth's assurance that there will be consultation in practice and that any contest as to the exemption of these documents will be dealt with at the political level.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (9.18)-Does that mean that the power of veto resides purely with the Minister of the Commonwealth? I take it that the Minister referred to in the legislation is a Minister of the Commonwealth Government, and that no matter what a State government submits, it will have no say in that particular aspect.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.19)-1 support my colleague the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman). The Bill says that the only P?rson who will decide this matter is the Commonwealth Minister. Apparently only some agreement has been made which is not in the Bill. In other words, irrespective of what a State Minister might do, the Commonwealth Minister will make the decision. Although the Minister for Industrial Relations has said that a guarantee has been given, that is not in the Bill. My colleague the honourable member for Prospect is right. Our amendment would give the opportunity for a State to talk about objecting even to the decision of a Commonwealth Minister.

I think the Minister had better have another look at this matter, because it is not in accordance with what he thinks it is. There is no guarantee in the Bill that there is any obligation to consult or to take any notice.

Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.20)-The Government's assurance is on the record.

Dr Klugman-How binding is that?

Mr VINER-I would have thought that Hansard is as good a record as any. The assurance is there. The States and the Territory understand the position. Of course the Minister referred to in the legislation is the Commonwealth Minister. I cannot take the explanation any further than I have. The Opposition can take a different view as to whether it should be a matter for legislative requirement or whether the issue, if there is an issue between the Commonwealth and the State, should be one that is capable of going to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.

I think the House readily appreciates that the granting of access to a document that has passed between the States and the Commonwealth or the Territory and the Commonwealth is more than likely to be a political matter. By that I do not mean to take a fine point on it. But those members of the Opposition who have been in government would know the kind of correspondence that passes between governments. Therefore, we feel that the appropriate way for this to be handled is
on the basis of an assurance that IS squarely on the
record. If any State or the Territory has a complaint about the way in which a Commonwealth Minister has made a decision in this area there are plenty of avenues by which the State or the Territory can take it up. It can do so publicly, on a Premier or Chief Minister to Prime Minister basis or in the parliaments of the State or Territory. So I think there would be ample publicity if a State or the Territory were upset by a decision that was made by a-Commonwealth Minister against the wishes of that State or Territory after there had been consultation.

Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect)-by leave-I may even agree with the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) that 'political questions'
should not be-dealt with by tribunals, but clause 33 (2) states:

Where a Minister is satisfied that the disclosure under this Act

of a document would be contrary to the public interest for a

reason referred to in sub-section (I) . . . and, subject to

the operation of Part VI, such a certificate, so long as it re-

mains in force . . .

..

Part VI in fact refers to reviews of the deoisions by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. Apparently

478 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

one can make an appeal to the Tribunal on a political issue if the original decision was a positive decision by the Commonwealth Minister, but one cannot do it on any other basis. To me it is ridiculous that the States have no powers whatever to prevent publication. I am talking about things such as documents which refer to the sorts of charges the States may make for railways, electricity, ports, minirig, coal levies or whatever it may be. The Commonwealth can decide not to allow access but the States cannot prevent access to this information which may have been given to the Commonwealth on a very confidential basis at some previous time.
Proposed new clauses negatived.
Clauses 34 and 35-by leave-taken together.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.25)-by leave-I move:
(II) Clause 34, page 23,lines 22-43, omit sub-clauses (2) to (5) (both inclusive).
(12) Clause 35, page 25,lines 16-37, omit sub-clauses (2) to (5) (bothinclusive).
The amendments provide for the deletion of subclauses (2) to (5) in each case. Clause 34 relates to Cabinet documents. It sets out the circumstances in which a document is exempt. In subclause (2) it states:
For the purposes of this Act, a certificate signed by the Secretary to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet certifying that a document is one of a kind referred to-
That is, an exempt document-
... establishes conclusively ... that it is an exempt document ...
In other words, the certifcate from the Secretary to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet conclusively says that the document is exempt and nobody can do anything about it. We object to that and we have accordingly moved an amendment that the exemption provision by way of a conclusive certificate be removed. That relates to sub-clauses (2) to (5) in clause 34.
The amendment is similar in respect of clause 35 of the Bill, which relates to Executive Council documents. The clause describes what are exempt documents. But in sub-clauses (2) to (5) it virtually states that a certificate signed by the Secretary to the Executive Council is conclusive once it has been signed by that person as being an exempt document. This is no way to legislate and we are absolutely opposed to the use of conclusive certificates. The creation by the Attorney General (Senator Durack) of what he calls a Document Review Tribunal does not overcome our objections for the reasons I have stated. All that a Document Review Tribunal can do is give

advice. In other words, whatever it does is not able to be enforced.
It is a fundamental principle of justice that legal questions, and whether a document is exempt is a legal question, ought to be determined by legal tribunals and not by Ministers. The mere giving of a certificate will encourage Ministers to hide behind the fact that by giving a certificate nobody can test the validity of that certificate. It is for that reason that we press amendments Nos 11 and 12. As I have said, they seek to delete the appropriate subclauses in clauses 34 and 35, which relate to Cabinet documen ts and Execu ti ve Council documents.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for .Industrial Relations) (9.27)-ln commenting upon amendments Nos 11 and 12 I will comment also on an earlier amendment, No.8. Honourable members will recall that in commenting on amendment No.8 I foreshadowed that the Government would be opposing these three amendments. The intention of the amendments is to remove the conclusive discretion vested in a Minister to deny access to certain classes of documents and to give the Administrative Appeals Tribunal power to review the claims made when exercising that discretion and to substitute its decision for that of the Minister. It is as well'to remind the chamber of those classes of exempt documents in respect of which the legislation presently allows a Minister to exercise a conclusive discretion against giving access to them. Those documents are, firstly, documents that could reasonably be expected to cause damage to the security, defence or international relations of the Commonwealth and, secondly, documents containing information communicated in confidence by a government of . another country or a State. The House will note the discussion we had on amendments Nos 9 and 10 relating to Commonwealth-State relations.
Amendments Nos 11 and 12 seek to remove like conclusive discretions vested in the Secretary to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet in respect of Cabinet documents and in the Secretary to the Executive Council in respect of Executive Council documents. In these sensItive areas the Government believes that the ultimate decision granting or denying access should be made by a Minister or a senior official directly responsible to a Minister. The Government also believes that the traditional confidentiality accorded to Cabinet and Executive Council documents should be maintained. That is, Cabinet and Executive Council documents are not made available to an incoming government. That is a well established and well-known principle.

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 479

The ultimate responsibility of Ministers and senior officers directly responsible to Ministers is preserved by the review processes of the Document Review Tribunal. Those processes were introduced into the legislation by an amendment moved by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) in the other place. The Document Re-
view Tribunal can look at the sensitive documents and decide whether, in its opinion, there are reasonable grounds for the claimed exemption. It is important to point out to the House, as did the Attorney to the Senate, that the decision of the Document Review Tribunal is one of recommendation only and is not binding on the Minister. Thus, the Minister's ultimate power to decide, and, I think, significantly his ultimate responsibility to the Parliament to justify his decision are preserved. That is an important principle with respect to the accountability of a Minister to the Parliament for his actions. Also it allows to reside with the Minister the power to make a decision whether a document is of such a character that access should be denied. Against that background, I am sure the House will see clearly enough that, to give effect to the Opposition's amendments,
would be to destroy the very mechanism of conclusive certificates upon which the review of the Document Review Tribunal is founded. For those reasons, the Government cannot accept the amendments.

Question put:

That the sub-clauses proposed to be ommitted (Mr Lionel Bowen's amendment) stand part of the clauses.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr Jarman)

Ayes

59

Noes

48

Majority

11

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume. M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier. J. W. Bradlield. J. M. BriJithwOJite. R. 1\. Cadman. A. G. Cameron. Domlld
Cameron. Ewen Cameron. Ian Carlton,J.J. Chapman. H. G. P.
Coleman. W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean. A.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife. W. C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H.

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jull, D. F. Kalter, R. C. Killen, D.J. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip
McLean. R. M. Moore,J. C. Newman, K. E.
Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock. A. S.
Porter,]. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair. I. McC. Spender, J. M.

AYES
Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey. C. W. Viner, R.J. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel
Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,!. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N.
Free. R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, c.!. Innes, U. E.

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kealing, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L.
Theophanous, A. c.
Uren,T. Wallis, L.G. West,S.J.
Willis,R. Young. M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Clauses agreed to.

Proposed new clause 3SA.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith) (9.38)-1 move:

(13) Page 2,4, after clause 35, insert the following new clause:
Exceptions to Cabinet and Executive Council documents

"35A. Sub-section 29 (I) and sub-section 30 (I) do not apply to a document that has been submitted to the Cabinet for its consideration, or is proposed by a Minister to be so submitted, or is submitted to the Executive Council for its consideration, or is proposed by a Minister to be so submitted, by
reason that-

(a) the document contains only factual or statistical material and not opinion, advice or recommendation;

(b) the document is a report (including a report concern-
ing the results of studies, surveys or tests) of scientific
or technical experts, whether employed within an agency or not, including reports expressing the
opinions of such experts on scientific or technical matters;

(c) the document is a report prepared for a Minister or an agency by a consultant who is not a member of the
staff of that Minister or agency, or a member of, or an
officer of that agency; or

(d) the document is a report, or a statement containing the advice or recommendation of a government advisory body or organisation, being a body established by or under an enactment, or by the Governor General or a Minister, that has the.function of providing advice or making recommendations to an agency or Minister.".

480 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

The Committee will note that in my amendment I if it is proper for them to do so. In other words,

have corrected an error. The distributed copy of exemption does not compel the withholding of a

the amendment refers to 'Sub-section 29 (1) and document. It enables withholding at the Minis-

sub-section 30 (1)'. As my amendment reads, ter's discretion. In other words, by the legislation

those sub-sections are 34 (1) and 35 (1). This it gives certain documents the character of being

amendment seeks to define a Cabinet or Execuexempt from the disclosure requirements of the

tive Council document. The exemptions do not Bill because they are Cabinet and Executive

apply to documents of the category that we have Council documents. It is for those reasons that the

described. In other words, not everything, simply Government does not accept this amendment.

because it is said to be a Cabinet submission or an Executive Council submission, is entitled to exemption. For example, in our view the following categories are not entitled to exemption: A

Proposed new clause negatived.
Clauses 36 and 37-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

document containing factual or statistical Clause 38 (Documents to which secrecy pro-

material, a report or a scientific result, a docuvisions of enactments apply).

ment prepared for a Minister or an agency by a consultant and a document, a report or a statement containing the advice of a government advisory body. We believe that all those docu-

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.43)-1 move:
( 14) Clause 38, page 26, omit the clause, substitute the following clause:

ments should be available to the public and not
hidden by being deemed to be Cabinet documents. Cabinet documents relate to the exact position of

Documents to which secrecy provisions of enactments apply
"38, (I) A document is an exempt document if it is a document in respect of which a provision of an enactment that is

the Cabinet. In other words, the document relates ' specified in Schedule 3 prohibits or restricts the disclosure of

to what the Cabinet considers to be its decision. the document or of information or other matter contained in But all the supplementary matter, all the factual the document.

matter, all the statistical matter and all the advice "(2) The regulations may amend Schedule 3-

is certainly not confidential. It would hardly be when we think of all the people who would have been involved in preparing information or preparing a document or a report or advice. They have access to all that knowledge. They would have had this access even before Cabinet received it. So in the name of fortune how could one say that

(a) by inserting an additional provision or additional provisions in the Schedule, being a provision or provisions of an enactment that prohibits or restricts the disclosure of documents or of information; or
(b) by omitting from the Schedule a provision or provisions contained in the Schedule.
"(3) A regulation made for the purposes of sub-section (2) shall not take effect until each House of the Parliament has re-

simply because the Cabinet had a look at it, nosolved that it take effect.

body else could consider it. That is certainly not in "(4) Sub-sections 48 (4), (5), (SA) and (6) and section 49

accordance with what we would want to see hapof the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 do not apply to regupen. Accordingly, our definition is in the terms exlations made in accordance with this section.".

pressed in our amendment.

Clause 38 of the Bill relates to documents to

Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.41)-This amendment seeks to insert a new clause which provides a list of exclusions from the exemptions already provided
for in clauses 34 and 35 of the Bill in respect of Cabinet and Executive Council documents. Most of the documents listed in the proposed new clause would not fall within the exemptions contained in clauses 34 and 35 as they would not have been brought into existence for the purpose of
submission to Cabinet or the Executive Council. However, if they had been brought into existence for that purpose it is proper that they should be exempt. Therefore, it is important that that distinction be understood by honourable members.

which secrecy provisions apply. At the present time all pieces of Commonwealth legislation
which have secrecy provisions override this Bill. The Opposition believes there should be a thorough review to determine whether the secrecy provisions are appropriate in what one might call the present age of freedom of information. We propose at a later stage that only the provisions specified in Schedule 3, which the Committee will notice is the subject of our amendment, should override freedom of information. Those pro-
visions would have to be agreed to by both Houses of Parliament before they took effect. If we look at the present provisions in the Bill we find that a document is an exempt document if there is in force another Bill which virtually says that that

The other important point that I bring to the information is prohibited. In other words, that

attention of the Committee is that merely because legislation overrides the whole of the freedom of

t~ose documents are exempt does not prevent information. We want the Freedom of Infor-

Ministers or agencies from making them available mation Bill itself to specify what documents are to

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 481

have that category of exemption, We would put that in Schedule 3. I think what I am saying is selfexplanatory. We would seek to insert the following new clause:
A document is an exempt document if it is a document in respect of which a provision of an enactment that is specified in Schedule 3~
That is in this Bill--
Prohibits or restricts the disclosure of the document or of information or other matter contained in the document.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.45)-This amendment was proposed in the other place and answered by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack). As the Attorney-General said then, the Government undertakes that it will complete a review of all existing secrecy provisions within three years from the date on which the freedom of information legislation comes into force. It will undertake that review with a view to repealing or amending those provisions which are inconsistent with the basic objective of the freedom of information legislation. The Government therefore does not accept the amendment.
Amendment negatived.
Clause agreed to.
Clause 39 (Documents affecting financial or property interests of the Commonwealth).
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.46)-1 move:
(15) Clause 39, page 26. omit the clause. substitute the following clause:
Documents affecting financial or property interests of the Commonwealth
"39. A document is an exempt document if its disclosure under this Act~
(a) would have a substantial adverse effect on the financial or property interests of the Commonwealth or of an agency; and
(b) would be contrary to the public interest.".
Clause 39 in the Bill talks about documents affecting financial or property interests of the Commonwealth. It says that they are exempt. We do not think that is good enough. Our amendment seeks to oelete and virtually reinstate the clause with a further proviso that there has to be the test that disclosure is contrary to the public interest. In other words, we just cannot have a clause saying that because disclosure is going to be deemed to affect the financial or property interests of the Commonwealth that itself is exclusive in exempting the document. We want the fact established that disclosure is contrary to the public interest. We think the public interest ought to be involved in all exemptions and that the public interest test ought to apply to all exemptions. Accordingly, I

have moved that a document certainly can be exempt if its disclosure is deemed to be contrary to the public interest. I need not delay the Committee any further.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (9.47)-1 would like to support the remarks made by the Deputy Leader Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) on this Freedom of Information Bill because I think this is the type of situation of which all members of parliament would be aware. We would all be familiar with cases involving leasing arrangements with the Commonwealth. A case was brought to my attention recently by a person who is in disagreement with the Department of Defence over land leased from that Department. I would have thought that it is precisely in that kind of situation in which there would be disagreement, where judgment is being made by the Department about whether a person is fit to continue a leasing arrangement, that the person concerned ought to have access to the rationale behirid the Government's decision as it affects him. I cannot see, provided that we accept the proviso that the Opposition has suggested be incorporated in the legislation, that any major damage will be done to the Commonwealth by the Government accepting the amendment. The Opposition's amendment would ensure that in any major activities of the Commonwealth financial and property questions which are of a very serious nature will still be effectively exempt. But the type of situation that I have outlined could not be put in this category. I think it would be perfectly safe for the Commonwealth in the very restrictive way that it has handled the legislation to this point, to accept our amendment and go home still quite pleased with itself.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (9.48)-1 would like to give very strong support to the Opposition's amendment. I think most parliamentarians ought to be concerned with matters concerning individuals and the State. I am not so much concerned with the question of property rights as described by the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley). I am more concerned with information contained in documents in the possession of a government department. Let me give the Committee an example. I refer to a person who is given the wrong information, for example by the Department of Social Security, and that information has caused that individual financial damage. Disclosure of that document will have an adverse effect on the financial interest of the Commonwealth or an agency. I think it is in the public interest that it should be shown quite clearly that a particular government department gave the wrong information and that that information is on the record.

482 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Freedom ofInformation Bill 1981

Let me give the Committee an example of what has actually happened. The health care benefit provisions came in, I think, on 1 September last year. Certain financial restrictions were imposed. The Department of Social Security started to issue health care benefit cards early in August of 1981. I am aware of at least one case in which a woman had charge of two children with significant medical problems. She had a permanent part time job at a hospital. Her total income from her part-pension and her part time job was less than the amount of money which would have disqualified her from receiving a health care benefit card. She went to the Department of Social Services and received information to the effect that she would not be able to get the health care benefit card because she was receiving too much money. She queried that. It is on her records that she was given the information after querying it on two separate occasions. She was given the wrong information.
On the information given her she decided that she had to resign from her part time job at the hospital. Afterwards it was confirmed that she did not have to resign from that job, that she could have received the health care benefit card. But it was too late by then. She is now a pensioner. She is losing out by about $102 to $104 a week to which she would have been entitled. She is not able to sue, I think, under the sorts of guidelines that were recently established by the High Court in a case against, I think, the Parramatta City Council-in what is known as the Shaddock case. She would have had a case against the Commonwealth but, because she has no access to the relevant document, she cannot prove that she was given the wrong information. I think that person ought to be entitled to get that information. I think no court would uphold a decision that, in the public interest, she should not have access to that document. Under the proposed legislation it would be quite easy for a Minister to say that it would adversely affect the financial interests of the Commonwealth to provide her with that document.
My argument is, quite clearly, that as members of parliament one of our main duties is to try to protect our constituents and others in their battle against not only the Commonwealth Government but also the State governments-governments as a whole. I share the view-it is not particularly novel-which I noted the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) expressed recently, namely, that the three great lies are: 'The cheque is in the mail; I will still love you in the morning; and I am from the Government, I am here to help you'. I would have hoped that that view was shared by the majority of members in this chamber-even by the

vast majority of members on the Government

benches. Therefore, I ask the Minister for Indus-

trhll Relations (Mr Viner) to reconsider the situ-

ation. Quite clearly, it ought to be not only in the

financial interests of the Commonwealth Govern-

ment but also in the public interest that a docu-

ment is made available to a person who is seeking

to gain access to it.

.

Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.54)-If one were to read clause 39 of the Freedom of Information Bill and then to read the proposed amendment, on the face of it one might think there was no distinction between the two and that, therefore, the Government ought easily to acquiese in the proposed amendment. But we do not. That is because we think the distinction does have substance which does not re-
quire acceptance of the proposed amendment. Clause 39 of the Bill as it stands provides that a disclosure which would have a substantial adverse effect on the financial or property interests of the Commonwealth or of an agency is contrary to the public interest; in other words, by definition it is deemed contrary to the public interest.

The proposed amendment does not define or provide any criteria of what is the public interest. Either the proposed amendment assumes that disclosure which has a substantial adverse effect on
the financial or property interests of the Commonwealth or of an agency is not against the public interest and therefore it intends to add a requirement of the public interest in order to justify exempting such a document; or it presumes that disclosure which would have a substantial adverse effect on the financial or property interests of the Commonwealth or of an agency would be against the public interest and seeks to add a further
undefined public interest requirement before exemption can be granted. The view taken by this Government is that a disclosure of this kind is by its nature against the public interest. Therefore, we see no reason to add a further undefined public interest requirement to the provisions of this
clause.

I will make some comments in regard to the contribution made by the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley). I am advised that in the
example given by him, a statement of reasons would be available under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act. Likewise, reasons must be given on request for decisions under the Social Services Act or under a wide range of other statutes as required under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act. Those reasons must show the findings of fact on which the department concerned acted. As I think the honourable member would be aware, there are also

Adjournment

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 483

extensive rights of appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal under the Social Services Act. When an appeal is lodged the department concerned must make all relevant documents available. As can be seen, under Commonwealth legislation various avenues of redress to which an aggrieved citizen might turn are already in existence. One other avenue I have not mentioned is the Commonwealth Ombudsman, a very important watchdog of the interests of citizens. For those reasons the Government does not accept the proposed amendment.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (9.58)-1 make the point that the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) has taken the view that because the clause in the Freedom of Information Bill states that something is against the public interest it is against the public interest. We want a separate test of whether it is against the public interest. I remind the Minister that when this matter was debated in the Senate a number of Liberal senators, including Senator Alan Missen, agreed that there ought to be a separate test of public interest. The Attorney-General (Senator Durack) said that he might consider the matter and take it back to Cabinet for instructions. Obviously the instructions were to the effect that what the Liberal back benchers wanted and what intelligence demanded were not agreed to; so what the clause states is against the public interest as against a test of public interest are to be separate concepts.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (9.59)-The Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) in his reply referred to the fact that under the Social Services Act reasons for decisions must be given. What I was referring to was advice given. No decision was made. A certain kind of advice was given to a person. That advice was wrong. It is to be hoped that that advice was noted on the lady's pension card. She does not have access to that card. She does not have access to the document. As I undeJ;Stand it, there is no provision under the Social Services Act for such a person to have access to such a document. It is a matter of advice given. It has nothing to do with reasons which were given or which may be given later.
Amendment negatived.
Clause agreed to.
Progress reported.

ADJOURNMENT
War Pensions-Automotive Industry-Proposed Staff Changes at Australian
Taxation Office, Parramatta-Small Businesses: Import
Quotas-Housing-Pensioners-Eritrea
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) -Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifiey) (10.0)-1 wish to raise a matter regarding war pensions. Correspondence between the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) and Mr B. G. Bashford of Woy Woy has come to my attention. In the correspondence Mr Bashford pointed out that when a war pensioner asks for his pension to be paid into his account with a bank, building society or credit union he should receive these funds in advance in the same way as a person who receives a war pension payment by cheque. In reply the Minister said:
. . . all recipients of Repatriation pensions have been provided with the choice of being paid fortnightly by cheque in advance, or, if they prefer, by direct deposit to their accounts at banks, building societies or credit unions on a twelve weekly basis in arrears.
Consideration has been given to introducing fortnightly payments direct to accounts with the above mentioned organisations, however, the, magnitude of the financial
implications~
I am quoting the words of the Minister-
in making such a change has prevented this action being taken in the context of the present Budget.
In other words, the Government is using the pensions of war pensioners to cut down its Budget deficit. If a war pensioner asks for his pension to be paid by cheque he will get it a fortnight in advance. If he asks for it to be paid into a bank account he will get it a quarter in arrears. The Government says that it cannot alter the system because of the financial implications for the present Budget. In other words, it is using funds of pensioners and in particular war pensioners to try to cut down its current Budget deficit. I think this is a disgraceful state of affairs. When the present Minister, Senator Tony Messner, took over this portfolio everyone thought that he would improve the situation in the Department because for heaven's sake it needed improving. Already vascular disease cases are a year and more behind. Applications by people for a pension on the grounds of vascular disease are being held up indefinitely by interminable court cases. They are going through the President of the Repatriation Review Tribunal. They are going from there to the Federal Court and then to the High Court of

484 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Adjournment

Australia. This is causing grave concern to pensioners, many of whom will not be alive by-the time their cases are determined.
I think it is time that this Department or the Repatriation Act itself was cleaned up. I believe that the Department, under the current staff ceilings, is doing everything it possibly can but it is simply not being given adequate staff. The failure to determine court cases is very unfair to the staff of the Department. It is grossly unfair to use the pensions of war pensioners to back up the Budget deficit of this Government. I repeat, if a war pensioner gets his pension paid by cheque it is paid fortnightly in advance but if he elects to have it paid into an account at a bank, a building society or a credit union it is paid in three months in arrears. That is a ridiculous situation and one that needs to be corrected. I appeal to the Minister to reconsider seriously this policy, which is of very great disadvantage to a large number of war pensioners today.
Mr CHAPMAN (Kingston) (10.5)-Earlier today the Australian Labor Party's spokesman on Industry and Commerce, the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) announced the latest version of the Labor Party's motor vehicle policy. The policyas announced by the honourable member for Adelaide would smother the industry with another bureaucracy. Labor's approach is worse in almost every respect than the post-1984 motor vehicle policy announced last December by the present Government. The creation of an Automotive Industry Authority, as recommended by Labor, is yet another example of its regulation mania. The Labor Party has failed to analyse the real nature of the problems facing the industry and future technological developments in it. Hence, Labor's policy reveals a complete absence of detailed thought. Labor has simply offered its old and failed panacea for all problems-more government intervention.
Mr Good luck-They never learn.

Rather the industry would be choked with monitors, regulations and controls.
Mr Milton-It is better than monopolies.
Mr CHAPMAN-Labor's new policy is isolationist, and inflexible and would discourage technological development in the industry. One of the more likely developments of the policy would be in fact the development of a monopoly, a government monopoly. When internationally the industry is becoming interdependent and outward looking, the Labor Party seeks to lock the Australian industry away on its own.
The industry already shares components where design specifications and economics allow. Would the Automotive Authority proposed by the honourable member for Adelaide undertake the design function which is properly the role of competing manufacturers who have the engineering expertise? Would the Authority establish new economic forces? Of course not. So there would be no more component sharing than would occur without this unnecessary bureaucratic intervention and direction.
The real failure of Labor's policy is its failure to address the hard issues in relation to the motor industry. It completely ignores the central aspects of motor industry policy, which are levels of tariff protection, quota levels and employment levels. For all its faults, the Government's policy makes some attempt to address these issues. The statement by the honourable member for Adelaide does not make any judgment on appropriate tariff or quota levels. I assume this will be left to the Authority. Thus it will be unnecessarily duplicating the work and staffing of the Industries Assistance Commission. The honourable member for Adelaide assured us earlier that under a Labor government, with its policy towards this industry, employment levels in the industry would be maintained. But Labor's proposals for joint production by consortia of manufacturers and sharing of production facilities must inevitably mean a lower labour requirement and hence fewer jobs.

Mr CHAPMAN-They never learn, as the
honourable member for Franklin said. One of the major contributors to the current problems in the industry was its failure to respond quickly to market forces in the form of changing consumer preferences. The proposed Authority would insulate the industry even further from consumer preferences. There is no way a government authority could ensure that manufacturers respond more quickly to changes in consumer demand than the companies' own marketing experts.

We need only recall what happened to the
motor industry during the period when Labor was in office-from 1972 to 1975-to see very clearly what would happen under these new policy proposals. The Labor Party when in government adopted a stop-go approach to the industry, which caused a runaway boom in 1974 that was followed by a major decline in sales. Labor attempted to overcome this decline by a temporary cut in sales tax. This temporary boom led once again to a decline in sales in the latter half of 1975.

Adjournment

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 485

It is clear from the announcement today that Labor has learned nothing from that debacle. Instead of formulating a long term policy after public hearings, as the Government has done, Labor wants to go back to the ad hoc days of 1972 to 1975 with the industry being subject to the passing whims of a new Automotive Industry Authority.
In marked contrast to that approach, the Government has pursued a consistent policy towards this industry over the last five years. First and foremost, through its management of the economy it has ensured that demand in the industry has increased significantly over what it was during the period when Labor was in office and especially over the last 12 months when there has been a significant increase in the sale of motor vehicles. After considerable study, the Government announced last December a policy well in advance of its proposed operation in 1985, to give the industry time to plan for and adjust to that new policy. With all its faults, that policy is far superior to the policy that was announced today by Labor's spokesman on industry and commerce, the honQurable member for Adelaide who has designed a clumsy horse and buggy for the computer age.
Mr, DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (10.10)-1 wish to address tonight the question of proposed staff changes at the Australian Taxation Office at Parramatta. First, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two letters, one from Mr J. Daly, Senior Assistant Commissioner of Taxation to the Federated Clerks' Union of Australia and a reply from Mr Chris Tosevic, the industrial officer of the Taxation Officers' Branch of that union.
Leave granted.
The letters read as follows-
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
Mr P. Tregillis, Branch President, Taxation Officers' branch, Federated Clerks' Union of Australia, 5th Floor, 53 Queen Street, MELBOURNE. VIC. 3000 Dear Mr Tregillis,
Staffing-Parramatta Office
In the six years since its establishment in 1975, Parramatta Office has grown to a stage where it now employs just under 900 personnel and problems in housing the staff within the one building are now beginning to arise. With the increased staff necessary to. handle the workload flowing from the proposed new Sales Tax Legislation, and the on-going requirement for staffing increases to satisfy the needs of one of

Australia's fastest growing population centres, Parramatta's accommodation difficulties will rapidly worsen.
One problem of a larger Parramatta office establishment would be the need to locate staff in more than one building. Whilst this is an option which we are pursuing, it is obviously undesirable to fragment the various functions of a branch office over a number of locations if there exists a viable alternative. A further point, and one that is perhaps more pressing, is that at this stage there is no known appropriate additional accommodation available in the Parramatta district.
The most satisfactory immediate means of solving Parramatta Office's accommodation problem is seen to be the transfer of some income tax work that would otherwise be handled at Parramatta to other branch and regional Taxation offices, thus achieving a reduction: rather than an increase, in Parramatta's current staffing levels.
To this end it has been decided to commence work on a proposal to introduce postal address for service of notices as the main determinant of office of lodgement for all taxpayers currently lodging income tax returns at Parramatta. For some time now the Taxation Office has been concerned about the complexity of the rules relating to the selection of the office at which taxpayers should lodge their returns. Unless the rules are changed greater complexities will arise as further decentralisation occurs. The revised lodgement policy being considered for Parramatta is intended to establish a rule that can be simply stated, readily understood by the taxpaying public and is administratively effective. If, as expected, the exercise in Parramatta proves to be a viable proposition, consideration will be given to its extension nationally.
Confining the change for the 1982-83 processing year to Parramatta Office will result in a substantial number of taxpayers currently lodging at Parramatta being requested to lodge elsewhere with no offsetting flow of lodgements to Parramatta from other processing centres. Preliminary figures show that around 95% of the taxpayers affected by this change will be requested to lodge their 1982 and subsequent returns at Sydney Office.
While a detailed analysis is yet to be completed of the consequential effects on the workloads of the two offices, it appears that the reduction in workload for Parramatta, after allowing for the additional workloads referred to in the first paragraph, is likely to result in a net reduction in Parramatta's staffing to a level of just over 800 personnel. Naturally, it is proposed to bolster Sydney Office's staffing to allow for the additional workload that will flow to that office.
The reduction in lodgements for Parramatta will not have a uniform impact on all sections of the office and it will be possible to stage the necessary changes over an extended period of time. Adjustments to Parramatta's staffing levels will be achieved in the main through natural wastage with the Sydney Office increases being attained via normal recruitment channels. Current criteria to be met by staff seeking transfer from Parramatta to Sydney will be relaxed until such time as 'the appropriate staffing levels are achieved. However, you may be assured that no officer will be required to compulsorily transfer from Parramatta to Sydney Office.
You will be kept informed of progress. In the meantime any comments you may wish to forward on the proposal will be welcomed.
Yours faithfully,
J.DALY Senior Assistant Commissioner

486 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Adjournment

Federated Clerks' Union of Australia TAXATION OFFICERS' BRANCH
Registered under the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Act

Telephone: 231-2622

155 King Street, Sydney
Address all mail to: BOX E 166, P.O.
St James, N.S.W. 2000 Reference: CT:FCC

16th February 1982

MrJ. Daly,
Senior Assistant Commissioner of Taxation,
Treasury Building, Langton Street, Parkes, A.C.T. 2600

Dear Mr Daly,

Re: Staffing-Parramatta Office

In your letter to Branch President, Paul Tregillis, dated 14th December 1981, you outlined the proposed transfer of
work loads between the Parramatta and Sydney Offices and
the consequent effect on staffing levels. You also stated that any comments on the issue would be welcomed.

Let me first state that this Branch views the proposal with great concern, a concern which is reinforced by your letter referred to above.

Your letter stated that the Parramatta Office employs 'just
under 900 personnel' whereas in fact, as at 7th January, 1982 it stood at 976. Further on in your letter you declare that the
result of the implementation of the proposal would be a 'net reduction in Parramatta's staffing to a level of just over 800 personnel'. Thus, what was made out to be a reduction of
under 100 positions, turns out to be a reduction of over 150.
There are serious doubts as to whether such a reduction is achievable through the largely benign process suggested.

You drew attention to the accommodation difficulties at the Parramatta Office: to quote from your letter;

'With the increased staff necessary to handle the workload
lIowing from the proposed new Sales Tax legislation, and the
on-going requirement for staffing increases to satisfy the needs of one of Australia's fastest growing population centres, Parramatta's accommodation difficulties will rapidly worsen.'

We agree that they are already bad enough. But your proposed solution, removing staff from the office servicing the
needs of 'one of Australia's fastest growing population centres' seems to offer respite from one problem at the expense of the tax-payers of the Western Sydney region. Put
simply, you propose to mee,t the on-going requirement for staffing increases to satisfy the needs of the area by reducing staff.

Your letter goes on to claim that any further accommo-
dation in Parramatta would necessarily result in an 'undesirable' fragmentation of the functions of the Branch Office 'over a number of locations'. There would appear to be no further
need than one more building to solve the problem of housing.

If the fragmentation of an office is undesirable then appar-
ently it is less undesirable for Sydney which is currently split between three locations-Centrepoint, the Commonwealth Savings Bank Building and Engadine Chambers (not to mention the stores annexe at Pyrmont). Melbourne Office is divided between two widely separated buildings.

One questions the reality of any supposed 'problem' of fragmentation when serious dispersal has not greatly inhibited the
operation of the Sydney Office, nor Melbourne's. Indeed, some sections, such as sales tax, are inherently suited to operate with a large degree of autonomy (again as in Sydney).

Indeed, at Parramatta itself, mail processing and Index have previously been located in a separate building without affecting efficiency.
Sydney Office is facing its own accommodation crisis. The taxation Office's lease on the Savings Bank Building has expired and will not be renewed by the Bank. Indeed, the Bank has sought to have Taxation vacate the premises in order to carry out much needed renovations to a building which not only lacks modern facilities, but which is a positive public safely risk, with reports of windows falling into the busy city streets below. At the moment the Taxation Office is on a monthly tenancy in the building. One can only question the wisdom of proposing any significant transfer of staff to an office which has such uncertainty surrounding its own accommodation.
But Sydney's housing faces problems over and above these already outlined. It must locate the hundred or so extra Sales Tax positions to be created shortly: Despite this, it is proposed to locate another 150 or so Parramatta positions in Sydney.
You appeared to place particular emphasis on the fact that 'at this stage there is no known appropriate additional accommodation available in the Parramatta district'. This fact, you said, was a 'pressing' point. Real estate agents James, Lang, Wooton of Parramatta, in response to the investigations of this Branch, supplied the following information:
I. As at the beginning of the year, there was available for leasing in Parramatta, in buildings constructed since 1970 (so presumably modern enough), 6,566 sq. mtrs of office space.
2. In buildings to be completed this year there will become available.\6,415 sq. mtrs of lIoor space. Of this 5,766 sq. mtrs is already committed leaving 10,649 sq. mtrs free.
3. In known buildings expected to be completed in 1983, 21,452 sq. mtrs of office space, will come on stream.
4. The corresponding position in 1984 is 15,790 sq. mtrs,
Moreover, agents for the new McNamara Centre building almost completed in Parramatta informed this Branch that if they were approached by a party seeking 5 whole lIoors of the structure, they will negotiate immediately. The agents are leasing now. Each lIoor is 8,200 sq. ft, so the Taxation Office has available 41 ,000 sq. ft. of modern office accommodation in a building close to its existing Parramatta premises.
From what has already been put forward above it would seem that there is, in fact, no problem. Alternative viable options present themselves: namely expand the Parramatta office or, to more accurately rellect the situation, allow it to continue its natural growth.
But some attention was directed to the proposed vehicle of reduction, viz., the adoption of postal address for service of notices as the main determinant of office of lodgment. As we understand it, the current "main determinant" is residential address. This Branch can't discern that the proposed lodgments rule is more simply stated or more readily understandable by the tax-paying public (we contend just the opposite) or more effective administratively. Officers are well aware that returns are lodged at the 'wrong' office no matter what rule is in vogue. Tax payers may do so innocently or deliberately for their own purposes, but to lay the blame at the feet of the existing lodgments rule is misconceived.
You concede that staffing at Sydney Office would have to be bolstered if the proposed change is implemented. We can only reiterate what was said about Sydney's accommodation problems above, and add that, as at II January, this year, the Sydney Office employed 3,435 people.
This Union is concerned that the present size of the Sydney Office is already undesirable from the point of view of job satisfaction and morale.

Adjournment

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 487

Your letter, in stating that the Parramatta reductions would be achieved "in the main" through natural wastage concedes that there may be situations where this won't be possible. You specifically rule out compulsory transfers between Parramatta and Sydney but do not make a similar averral about redundancy or re-deployment elsewhere. We are unequivocably opposed to any such re-deployments or retirements. Our concern over this issue is heightened when it is remembered that the Parramatta Office is a very "young" one overall, including the areas of income tax investigations and assessing, those likely to be affected most by the proposal. Your claim of primary reliance on natural wastage is therefore doubted. Our feeling in this regard is doubly reinforced by the fact that it is not under 100 positions to be reduced as you suggest but over 150.
Opposition to your scheme also springs from the Branch's concern for the position of those employees remaining at the Parramatta Office after any reductions. Clearly, the imposition of any "ceiling" on that office's growth means a virtual end to promotion prospects within Parramatta. Yet it is just those prospects within a highly structured career organisation that encouraged many people into the Australian Public Service.
Most employees at the Parramatta Office live close to or west of Parramatta, and the extra travelling time, expense and overall inconvenience of working in Sydney will further strain many persons' capacity to continue in employment.
It is often forgotten that regional offices perform more than just a processing function, but provide a real service to the tax-payers of their area. Parramatta is a prime example of this.
Many tax-payers seeking assistance personally now have relatively convenient access to a Branch of the Australian Taxation Office which offers help expeditiously and without intimidation. Someone familiar with the Sydney region may easily comprehend the inconvenience and apprehension an individual in the outer suburbs or fringe cities faces in coming into the centre of Sydney on a tax query. That is, this Union sees merit in the concept of a local office, and any restriction or reduction on such offices can only be seen as a retrograde step.
If, as you concede, the areas serviced by the Parramatta Office is one of Australia's fastest growing population centres, the change in taxpayer lodgments to postal address will almost certainly only temporarily reduce the number of lodgments in Parramatta.
It would be appreciated if this Branch could be kept informed about developments of this issue.
Yours faithfully, CHRIS TOSEVIC,
INDUSTRIAL OFFICER.
Dr KLUGMAN-I thank the House. Some of the proposals that are referred to in the letter from Mr Daly to the union result from the impact of the proposed new sales tax legislation. That of course is currently in limbo-I do not know what happened in the Senate today. It mayor may not become law. It is more than likely that it will not, in which case there may not be any need for the additional personnel to which reference is made. Basically, at present some 900 people are working in the Australian Taxation Office at Parramatta. Mr Daly, on behalf of the Commissioner of Taxation, indicates that he feels the extra people who would be needed could not be accommodated in

Parramatta; that the sales tax work would be done there but much of the income tax work would revert to Sydney.
The reply by the union is, to my mind, much more reasonable. It refers to the fact that at present there are in the Parramatta office some 970 positions and denies the suggestion regarding accommodation difficulties in that area. It gives examples and quotes from real estate agents in Parramatta in claiming that sufficient space is available. Reference is made to the fact that the McNamara Centre, which is soon to be completed, will be available, in part, for lease by the Taxation Office.
Reference is also made to the fact that in Sydney there is a shortage of accommodation for taxation offices:
Sydney Office is facing its own accommodation crisis. The Taxation Office's lease on the Savings Bank Building has expired and will not be renewed by the Bank. Indeed, the Bank has sought to have Taxation vacate the premises in order to carry out much needed renovations to a building which not only lacks modern facilities, but which is a positive public safety fisk, with reports of windows falling into the busy city streets below. At the moment the Taxation Office is on a monthly tenancy in the building.
This reference is to the building at the corner of Castlereagh Street and Martin Place.
One can only question the wisdom of proposing any significant transfer of staff to an office which has such uncertainty surrounding its own accommodation.
I do hope that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) will put some pressure on the Commissioner of Taxation on this issue, which is one of general public interest rather than merely one involving taxation, to enable the people of Parramatta and the surrounding area to retain their own taxation office. Mr Tosevic's final point, which I believe is important is made in this way:
Most employees at the Parramatta Office live close to or west of Parramatta, and the extra travelling time, expense and overall inconvenience of working in Sydney will further strain many persons'capacity to continue in employment.
He is there referring to his own members. He adds:-
It is often forgotten that regional Offices perform more than just a processing function, but provide a real service to the tax-payers of their area. Parramatta is a prime example of this.
Many tax-payers seeking assistance personally now have relatively convenient access to a Branch of the Australian Taxation Office which offers help expeditiously and without intimidation.
He also points out the great distances that must be travelled by people in the area in order to attend interviews with taxation officers in the city of Sydney. I urge the Government to take some notice of the reply made by the Federated Clerks' Union of

488 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Adjournment

Australia to the Taxation Office and to review the proposal contained in Mr Daly's letter.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (10.15)-If is disappointing to find that, despite government policies designed to promote private enterprise, many small businesses are still placed at risk by apparently arbitrary official decisions, particularly where the granting or withholding of import quotas is concerned.
I want to illustrate this by referring to the firm of Star Shoes Pty Ltd which, under the proprietorship of two constituents of mine, Mr and Mrs Imre Szenes, commenced trading as a manufacturer of shoes in 1951. In 1973, after 22 years of trading, the Whitlam Government's policies in regard to local industry impelled the company to invest in an overseas shoe manufacturing venture in the Philippines. I need not remind honourable members that the then government exhorted Australian businesses to expand into the Third World. Despite this move, the company found itself in what is called a Catch 22 situation. On the one hand, the then Government's tariff policies, particularly its 25 per cent across-the-board tariff cut, meant that the company, which was once a leading Sydney shoe manufacturer found that its products were undercut by imports. On the other hand, the products of the Filipino venture were denied access to the Australian market on the grounds that the company had not the required import performance. It was a case of damned if you do, damned if you don't. The upshot was that Mr Szenes was forced to close down his business after 23 years of successful trading.
I will not take up the time of the House by giving precise details of the battle that Mr Szenes embarked upon to gain equitable compensation. Despite assurances, no closure compensation was ever paid and the struggle was sustained for some four years before anything like a result was achieved. At last, in 1978, the company was granted an anomalies quota to cover the import of products of the Filipino venture, the amount involved being 60,000 pairs of shoes per half year.
In practice, all this meant was 'too little, too late'. During the four year limbo up to 1978, to which he was consigned by official policy, Mr Szenes not only became bereft of cash supplies, but also faced with a marked decline in the quality of the product from the Filipino enterprise. The reason was that during the four-year hiatus, when the Australian market was closed to Mr Szenes, skilled workers left the Filipino factory to find work elsewhere and, with any possibility of a future demand for the factory's product being in

doubt, Mr Szenes could not replace them. The result was that the lack of any nucleus of Skilled workers in the enterprise meant an inevitable deterioration in the quality of his products when the Australian market was finally opened to them under the anomalies quota.
It must be stressed that the downturn in the quality and quantity of the factory's product finds its origin not in market forces but in the vagaries of officialdom. There was in addition, it must be acknowledged, a typhoOtl in 1978 which played havoc with delivery schedules. The upshot of all this was that, when some gesture towards equity was forthcoming in the form of an anomalies quota, the company's resources were so depleted that it was unable to benefit from the quota granted it so belatedly. In fact, by 1978, neither the company nor Mr Szenes had any more funds to spare. Moreover, Mr Szenes had suffered ill health as a result of the strain he had undergone.
Now, after some eight years of struggle, Mr Szenes seeks to have his anomalies quota converted to a global quota. If he can obtain a global quota, he will no longer be tied to the increasigly unviab~e Filipino project and will have freedom of choice as to the source of the shoes that he imports. However, officialdom has continued to thwart Mr Szenes' attempts to make a success of his business and adjust it to the demands of the market place. His application for a global quota has been refused. So, once again, this Australian businessman has found his ventures strangled by red tape.
This case has several disturbing aspects. A company has been driven to the wall by conflicting offical policies and attempts by the proprietor to recoup his losses have been thwarted at every turn. The goal of protecting home industries has been most emphatically not achieved in this case. In fact, officialdom's efforts have caused the closing down of an Australian manufacturing concern. A similar irony has attended officialdom's efforts to achieve the laudable goals of encouraging imports from developing countries, especially those in South East Asia, and encouraging Australian participation in those countries' development.
To sum up, over eight years of official itervention in this case have been remarkable for their consistently bad effects and their consistent failure to achieve the goals proclaimed. The price of all this muddle has been paid by an Australian small business. I fear very much, Mr Deputy Speaker, that this case is not untypical.
Mr LES McMAHON (Sydney) (10.20)-1 would like to address the House tonight on the

Adjournment

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 489

most pressing issue of housing and offer a possible remedy to this problem, at least as far as the inner city of Sydney is concerned, by combining it with a proposal for the Australian bicentenary celebrations. As I mentioned in my adjournment speech to this House last week, cheap housing is a critical issue for low income earners generally, in particular, in the inner city area of Sydney. With pension benefits and wages failing to keep pace with rising living costs, it is becoming increasingly difficult to find housing at a price that low income earners can afford. In New South Wales alone 40,000 people are on the waiting list for Housing Commission accommodation and the list is continually growing.
At the same time there is a considerable amount of unused Federal and State Government property that could be easily converted to housing for low income earners. This property includes Department of Main Roads land resumed for previously proposed expressways, the former Australian National Line terminal at Mort Bay, unused land within Rozelle Hospital, Maritime Services land in Balmain, Glebe and Annadale, Department of Defence land and the old Balmain power station at Rozelle.
Early in 1980, I proposed to then Minister for Housing and Construction, the honourable member for Braddon (MrGroom), that as part of Australia's bicentenary celebrations, housing for low income earners and recreational facilities should be provided along the foreshores of Sydney Harbour. This proposal was then referred to the Minister for Administrative Services, the former honourable member for Boothby, who referred it in turn to the Australian Bicentenary Authority. The result was that the proposal was well received by the Authority and by the Bicentennial Committee for New South Wales. However, as yet no decision has been made regarding the future of this proposal or for that matter, any other proposal because the Federal Government has not decided on its contribution to the celebrations. If no such decision is made soon, proposals requiring a great deal of planning and construction time and having a lasting benefit-such as the housing proposal-will not be considered. I believe this would be a very great tragedy.
My proposal was that all land on the waterfront from Woolloomooloo to Leichhardt not required for port purposes be returned to the people as open space, recreational facilities and housing for low income earners. This would be a major task involving the Commonwealth and State governments, and the City of Sydney and Leichhardt councils, but I could think of no better way of celebrating an event like the Australian

bicentenary celebrations. After all, the inner city of Sydney was the place of the first European settlement and has suffered the most from lack of planning. It has inadequate open space and recreational facilities, lacks access to the waterfront and has a shortage of housing for low income earners. This would be an opportunity to redress these problems and start the next century of Australian history on an improved footing. Even the present Leichhardt Council and a few other proopen space groups are realising that the pressing need for open space and waterfront access has to be balanced with the more urgent need for cheap housing. After all, it does smack of injustice for working class residents of many generations standing to be priced out of the area only to be replaced by young professionals who get to enjoy the improved living conditions. I therefore believe there is strong and growing support within the electorate for my housing and open space proposal, but before the proposal can get to first base it will require a definite financial commitment by the Federal Government for the Australian bicentennial celebrations. This will have to happen without further delay.
Another important matter I would like briefly to raise tonight is also another example of the Federal Government's procrastination. It is the matter of a second airport for Sydney. As early as 1972, the then Department of Civil Aviation had examined the need for a second Sydney airport. Since 1977, the Major Airport Needs of Sydney Committee has also examined this need. Yet, after 10 years of submissions, hearings, reports and countless thousands of dollars, we are still no closer to any decision being made than we were in 1972. Meanwhile, the lives of thousands of constituents in my electorate, not to mention the electorates of Kingsford-Smith, St George and Grayndler, are continually in danger because of the ever-crowded conditions at Kingsford-Smith airport. Will it take an air disaster for the Federal Government finally to bite the bullet and make the decision to build a second airport? I hope not.
In addition to the danger, my constituents are being increasingly subjected to the air and noise pollution caused by the low flying jets. How much more of this are the residents supposed to tolerate? Then, on top of this, there is talk by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) of reducing the curfew or exempting more jets from it, so that a few more flights can be squeezed into the airport. It does not seem to matter to the Minister that residents' sleep and health may be affected. I call on the Government now to put an end to the speculation and worry of residents surrounding the airport, and also the residents living near the

490 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Adjournment

sites of the proposed airport, by making now a decision regarding a second airport for Sydney.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (l0.25r---I would like to bring forward a couple of points tonight. A couple of elections are in the air and all of a sudden the pensioners have again become the target for certain things for which I do not think they should be the target. Many seem to use the pensioners for cannon fodder. They seem to use them every time there is an election by making false promises. The pensioners who are able to go to meetings and listen to the wireless, et cetera, seem to be able to cope with this but those who are very vulnerable, those who are sick or in need of constant attention, are sometimes placed in very difficult situations as a result of some of the things that are said by politicians of both persuasions, not just those on one side. This is very regrettable.
I attended a pensioner meeting not so long ago and a couple of points came to mind after I heard a few of the speakers at the function. Time and again we hear of new groups starting up; we heard of one starting up in Victoria last week. 1 think these groups make the fatal mistake of drawing comparisons. The gentleman who organised the meeting-he was probably a very wellintentioned person-made comparisons with what the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) gets and what we should get. 1 believe that is a negative attitude for the pensioners of Australia to take. Rather than make comparisons 1 think that they should be more constructive. Of course they should talk to politicians and tell them what they want. They should tell them of their needs and hope that the politicians will bow to their wishes and introduce programs that will assist them. But, to start off in a negative way, by making comparisons, is unnecessary.
The other point that came to mind when I was listening to a few of the speeches concerned the word pension. 1 think it has had its day. The word 'pensioner' should be dropped. We should start talking about the elderly citizens rather than the pensioners. Elderly citizens should be divorced from the word 'Pensioner'; there should be a concentration by government on the elderly citizens. We should take the word 'pensioner' away from supporting mothers and all other recipients of benefits and concentrate on the variuos groups of citizens of Australia. I believe we could introduce a new ministry with a portfolio concentrating entirely on the senior or elderly citizens of Australia. By the year 2001, 14.5 per cent of the population will be elderly citizens. Many will be on pensions and benefits for a long time.

The situation is changing every day and 1 am afraid we are not keeping pace with those changes. Governments-not just federal governments but State governments-will have to change their attitudes. There is a terrible mess in Australia in regard to nursing homes, and the people who need to get into them are unable to do so. Whether the nursing homes are public or private, they just cannot get in. That is one example of change. Women are living a lot longer than men so they are left alone and must encounter difficulties such as looking after their homes and trying to sell their homes, et cetera, when men probably have been responsible for those sorts of things. The point 1 would like to make is that changes are occurring every day and we should be in tune with those changes. Governments should introduce different policies because changes are occurring all the time. I hope that not just my Government but also State governments will take note of these few remarks and introduce changes that will help the elderly people of Australia.
Dr EVERINGHAM (Capricornia) (10.29)-1 wish to draw the attention of the House to the problems of Eritrea. We hear a lot about the problems of Afghanistan, with Soviet intervention; we hear a lot about the problems Vietnam has haa and that El Salvador is having with the intervention of American interests. But, we do not hear very much about Eritrea, a nation which is suffering from enormous massacres, displacement, deprivation and the burning out of villages. Now the reports are that nerve gas is being used in mortar shells near the Sudan border where most of the refugees-over half a million of themhave crossed into Sudan. Eritrea has written to the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street), to the United Nations and to the World Council of Churches asking for intervention, particularly at a United Nations level. This is an excellent example of where the Government could start to implement for the first time, as no government in history so far has done, our obligations under the United Nations Charter; namely, to insist that in all cases there be conciliation, mediation and arbitration before the use of force. We should be pressing for the use of those mechanisms as the only sensible and sane way to settle disputes instead of the antihuman activity that is going on all over the world.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 1.45 p.m. tomorrow.

Adjournment

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 491

House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.
PAPER
The following paper was deemed to have been presented on 23 February 1982, pursuant to statute:

Public Service Act-Public Service Board Determination 1982/1.

492 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Concessional Rates in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 776)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) What level of concessional rates (a) was paid in the past and (b) are payable at present by community groups in the Australian Capital Territory.
(2) What groups qualify for concessional rates in the Australian Capital Territory
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions ar.e as follows:
(I) Statutory concessions which have, in general terms been in force since rating was introduced in the Australian Capital Territory are as follows:
General Rales-
By virtue of Section 6 of the Rates Ordinance (1926) sites of cemeteries, public hospitals, benevolent institutions, buildings used exclusively for public charitable purposes and sites of churches and other buildings used exclusively for public worship and free libraries are not rateable.
Provision exists under Section 28 for the Minister to exempt any owner from payment of rates due, .or, under Section 28A, remit or refund any rates payable or paid if he is satisfied that such action is just and equitable.
Waler Rales-
By virtue of Section 6 of the Water Rates Ordinance (1959) a school or church or ecclesiastical establishment pays an excess water charge equivalent to 50% of the normal excess charge.
Section 29 of the Ordinance gives the Minister discretion to refund or remit rates if he considers it just and equitable so to do.
Sewerage Rales-
By virtue of Sections 6 and 8 of the Sewerage Rates Ordinance (1968) a school, church, hospital, benevolent or charitable institution pays 50% of the normal charge for additional sanitary fixtures.
Section 23 provides for remission or refund of rates if the Minister considers this just and equitable.
Pensioner Concessions-
By virtue of Section 21 B of the Land Rent and Rates (Deferment and Remission) Ordinance (1970) a 50% concession on general rates, sewerage rates and water rates has been available to Social Security pensioners and most Repatriation pensioners since 1973. (Benefits were extended to TPI pensioners and their spouses in 1979).
There are instances where general rates concessions outside the ambit of the legislation have been provided to organisations pursuant to special leasing arrangements. Some examples are:
(a) those of an historical nature where partial exemption from" rates was offered" as an incentive for setting up sporting facilities in the early days of Canberra's establishment. These concessions terminate on expiry of the lease;
(b) concessions for some organisations which have taken over the management of certain municipal assets;

(c) some permissive occupancy arrangements on sites used for scout and guide halls and where no formal lease exists.
In August 1976, the Minister invoked his authority under Section 29 of the Water Rates Ordinance and agreed that due to financial difficulties then being experienced by bowling clubs and non-commercial golf clubs in meeting excess water charges, these clubs pay only 50% of the statutory excess water charge. This concession was discontinued as from I July 1980.
(2) Concessions on Australian Capital Territory rates are available to institutions specifically referred to in the legislation, to organisations or groups which qualify as a benevolent or public charitable body and in some special circumstances remissions are available at the discretion of the Minister as outlined in (I ).
Chemical Plant Control in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 839)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(I) What herbicides and other chemicals of a plant control nature ~re used by his Department anywhere in the Australian Capital Territory.
(2) For each chemical (a) what is the purpose for which it is used, (b) how is it applied, (c) what quantities were used (-i) in each year from 1970-71 to 1979-80 and (ii) during the period I July 1980 to 10 March 1981, (d) what precautions and safety measures are recommended by (i) the maker and (ii) other legislative or administrative controls, (e) what steps are takert to advise the general public when spraying or other application is to occur, (f) what occupational health monitoring programs does his Department maintain to ensure that the health of workers involved is throughly protected, (g) how many employees have been involved in application of chemicals in the A.C.T. for the periods referred to in part (e), (h) what quantities are stockpiled and what safety precautions are taken to ensure no accidental or deliberate misuse of these stockpiles and U) what has been the (i) purchase price and (ii) other costs of the program for the periods referred to in part (c).
(3) Which companies have supplied chemicals to his Department at any time during the periods referred to in part (2) (c) and what were the quantities in each case.
(4) What chemicals were sprayed in the area surrounding the Department of Defence offices at Russell Hill in the months of February and March 1981.
(5) Have many chemicals been sprayed, or otherwise applied, for herbicidal or other plant control purposes by his Department in areas surrounding other Defence establishments iIi the Australian Capital Territory at any time during the periods referred to in part (2) (c); ifso, what are the details.
(6) Have any workers employed by his Department reported any illnesses or medical symptoms which may be due to exposure to chemicals at any time since 1970-71; if so, what are the details.
(7) Does his Department require employees engaged in spraying to sign any statement absolving the Government from any future responsibility for claims which may arise; if so, what is the content of that statement.

Answers to Questions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 493

Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) Herbicides and other chemicals of a plant control nature are used by three sections of the Department namely, Conservation and Agriculture, Forests, and City Parks Administration. Because most herbicides are sold under trade names containing various chemical blends, trade names are used exclusively below. Over the years some herbicides have been used experimentally and depending on the success of the spray for the particular purpose may not have been used in subsequent years. All herbicides used since 1970 are listed in the attached Table. Those currently in use are indicated by an asterisk.
(2) (a), (b) The purpose for which each herbicide is used and the method of application is indicated in the attached Table.
(2) (c) (i) The quantities used in each year from 1970 are not available without very extensive checks that in view of other pressures on staff are not considered warranted.
(2) (c) (ii) The quantities used during the period I July 1980 to 10 March 1981 are included in the attached Table.
(2) (d) (i) All herbicides used are registered under the provisions of New South Wales legislation and carry labels setting out the purpose for which the herbicide is intended and safety measures. These include statements such as: 'Avoid contact with the skin and .eyes to prevent possible irritation. Wash concentrate from skin and eyes immediately. Avoid working in or breathing spray (or dust). Wash exposed parts of body after use and before eating, drinking or smoking' and 'Keep out of reach of children'.
(2) (d) (ii) There is no specific legislation in the Australian Capital Territory covering the use of plant control chemicals. Most herbicides listed are inclllded in schedules of the Australian Capital Territory Poisons and Narcotic Drugs Ordinance 1978, and are subject to conditions of sale specified in the Ordinance.
The Department adheres to specific, internally applied management procedures to protect operators, the public, and the general environment. No legislative basis or requirement for this control function exists. Occupational health and safety specialists in other Oepartments are consulted in the

development of these procedures. Field staff involved are thoroughly trained in public and personal safety and all operations are carried out under the supervision of trained officers. Protective clothing is provided.
A paper on 'Safety Precautions' is provided to personnel involved in the use of herbicides. Selection of pesticides, the method of application, and detailed training of pest control operators is carried out by qualified officers.
(2) (e) Consideration has been given to giving advance notice to the public of spraying programmes in urban areas but because the operation is dependent upon variable weather conditions, this course has not proved feasible.
(2) (f) Because of the considerable usage of potentially hazardous plant control chemicals by City Parks Administration, personnel are subjected to a lung function test annually. There is no necessity for other staff to have such tests. The Commonwealth Medical Officer is available for any operator requiring medical evaluation.
(2) (g) About 500 employees have been involved over the years specified. Detailed records are not available.
(2) (h) The amount of herbicides stored is variable but the objective is to maintain a minimum quantity in store consistent with the rate of use at anyone time. Stocks as at April 1981 for each chemical held is included in the attached Table. All chemicals are kept in special purpose locked and ventilated storerooms.
(2) (j) (i) The price paid for the various herbicides since 1970 is not available without an extensive search of records in several parts of the Department. The prices paid for herbicides held in stock are listed in the attached Table.
(2) (j) (ii) The main other cost is labour. An accurate costing figure is not available because of the various other duties of the personnel involved.
(3) The suppliers of herbicides are listed in the attached Table but the quantities supplied each year are again not readily available.
(4) 'Roundup' was the only chemical used in the period specified.
(5) The chemicals used to control herbaceous and shrub weeds and to poison unwanted trees in the period 1970 to 1981 are:

Date
Jan. 1970 Jan. 1971 Feb. 1971 Mar. 1971 May 1971 Nov. 1971 Jan. 1972 Feb. 1972 Apr. 1972 Dec. 1973 Jan. 1974 Mar. 1974 Apr. 1974 Apr. 1974 Dec. 1974 Jan. 1976 Feb. 1976 Apr. 1976 Feb. 1977 Mar. 1977 May 1977 Aug. 1977 Dec. 1977

Location
RAAFBase RAAFBase Duntroon RMC RAAFBase RAAF Base Duntroon RMC Duntroon Duntroon RMC Duntroon RMC RAAFBase Duntroon RMC Campbell Park Offices Campbell Park Offices Duntroon RMC Duntroon RMC Duntroon RMC Duntroon RMC Campbell Park Offices Duntroon RMC Harman Naval Station Campbell Park Offices Campbell Park Offices Campbell Park Offices

Chemical used
Tordon (type not recorded) Yorox 80 Tordon (type not recorded) Tordon (type not recorded) Yorox 80.and Tordon 50D 2,4,5-T Tordon (type recorded) Yorol'.80 2,4,5-T Tordon 50D Tordon 105 Yorox 80 Yorox 80 Yorox 80 Tordon 105 Tordon 105 Passtox Weedazol Total Weedazol Total Dalapon plus Diuron Tryquat Tryquat Weedazol T1 and Tryquat

Reason used
Brush control Weed control Poison I tree Poison I tree Weed control Blackberry control Poison I tree Weed control Blackberry control Poison 2 trees Poison 3 trees Weed control Weed control Weed control Poison 7 trees Poison 5 trees Paspalum control Weed control Weed control Weed control Weed control Weed control Weed control

494 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Answers to Questions

Date
Jan. 1978 June 1978 Nov. 1978 Dec. 1978 Dec. 1978 Dec. 1979 Dec. 1979 Jan. 1980 Mar. 1980 Aug. 1980 Dec. 1980 Feb. 1980 Mar. 1981

Location
Campbell Park Offices Campbell Park Offices Campbell Park Offices Campbell Park Offices Harman Naval Station Campbell Park Offices Harman Naval Station Campbell Park Offices RMC Field Firing Range Campbell Park Offices Campbell Park Offices Campbell Park Offices RMC Field Firing Range

Chemical used
Tryquat Tryquat Weedazol Total and Roundup Roundup and Vorox 80 2,4-DB and 2,4-D Roundup 2,4-D Weedazol TI Dalapon Tryquat Roundup Roundup Frenock

Reason used
Weed control Weed control Weed control Weed control Thistle control Weed control Thistle control Weed control Tussock control Weed control Weed control Weed control Tussock control

(6) Employees have occasionally reported symptoms that
may be attributed in some cases to exposure to chemicals. A complete list from 1970 cannot be provided without an exten-
sive search of Departmental records. Some complaints received since 1976 are listed.

Date of incident
30.1.76

Alleged symptoms
Swelling of jaw and weeping eyes from use of Tryquat

Circumstances
Continual use of sprays for 8 out of 15 days

Date of incident Alleged symptoms 16.11.79 Breathing difficulty
and weakness, hoarse voice 14.5.80 Tryquat poisoning
(7) No.

Circumstances
Exposed to Tryquat fumes when transferring from one container to another
Claimed to have inhaled fumes of spray through face mask

TABLE

(I) Herbicide

2 (a)
Purpose for which held

2 (b)
Method of application

2 (c) (ii) Quantity
used I July 1980
to 1 March 1981

2 (h) Quantity presently
held

20)
Current price of stock held

(3) Supplier of stock
held

Ammate* Asulox* Banex* Dacthal* Dalapon* Ditrapex Diuron* Eraze Erodone Frenock* Gesamil* Gesaprim Gesatop* Gramoxone* Hyvar* Passtox

Control of tree suckers
Control of bracken fern
Control of scotch thistle
Weed control in Forests nursery
General weed control
Weed control in Forests nursery
Residual weed control
Control ofSt John's wort
Total weedicide
Control of serrated tussock
Weed control in Forests nursery
Residual herbicide in pine plantations
General weed control
General weed control
Control of briar and box thorn
Control grass

hand spray
hand spray
boom spray
boom spray
boom and hand spray soil injection
boom and hand spray dry spread by hand boom spray boom and hand spray boom spray
boom spray
boom and hand spray boom and hand spray hand spread pellets hand spray

27.5 kg 40 litres 60 litres 25kg 695 kg
548litres
9litres 10kg
92.5litres 21litres 50 kg

198 kg 40 litres 55litres 41 kg 702 kg

$ 2.35/kg 6.78/1
7.00/1 9.76/kg
2.07/kg

1020 litres

3.60/1

14litres 20kg

16.70/1 7.50/kg

800litres 360 litres 50 kg

4.60/1 7.70/1 l.92/kg

DuPont
May & Baker
ICI
AG Chemicals Flick and others Schering,
Ciba-Geigy
Ciba-Geigy
Ciba-Geigy ICI
Ciba-Geigy
Ciba-Geigy
Ciba-Geigy
ICI
Roche Maag
Lane

Answers to Questions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 495

(I) Herbicide

2 (a) Purpose for . which held

2 (b)
Method of application

2 (c) (ii)
Quantity used I July 1980
to I March 1981

2 (h) Quantity
presently
held

Reglone' Roundup'
Steriweed 2,4-0' 2,4,5-T' Tuloxone' Tordon 242'

.General weed

boom spray

control

General weed, tree hand and boom

sucker, bitou bush spray

and blackberry

~9ntrol

Soil sterilant

hand spray

Control of thistles hand and boom

spray

Controlof briar and hand spray

blackberry

---Controlweeds in turf boom spray

Tree sucker control brushed on

Tordon 105

Tree sucker control brushed on

Tordon 500' Tropotox* Tryquat* Valiant' Velpar*
Vorox AA Vorox 80'
Weedazol Total' WeedazolTI Plus' White Spirit'

Tree of Heaven, briar control Weeds in turf General weed control Weeds in tuff Control of briar and Forest weeds Weed control in pine plantations Soil sterilant
General weed control General weed control, control of blackberry Weedicide in Forests nursery

hand spray
boom spray hand spray
boom spray hand and boom spray hand and boom spray hand and boom spray, pellets by hand spray
hand spray
boom spray

21litres 675litres
92.5litres 20litres 80 Htres 36litres 121itres
8litres 178litres 80 Htres
48 kg 640 kg 565litres 2250 litres

360litres 635litres
80 lit res 420litres 20 Htres
40 litres 305 Htres 1551itres 55litres 500 kg
1000 kg 1475 kg 2140litres 400 litres

2m Current price of stock held $ 9.90/1 18.00/1
7.50/1 1.50/1 7.28/1
3.60/1 5.90/1 7.20/1 2.60/1 35.00/kg
1O.00/kg
4.60/kg 3.50/1
0.40/1

(3) Supplier of stock held
ICI
Ciba-Geigy
ICI Various
Lane
Ciba-Geigy Oow Chemicals Oow Chemicals ICI
May & Baker ICI
Roche Maag Du Pont
Ciba-Geigy
Ciba-Geigy
Ciba-Geigy
Ciba-Geigy
Various fuel distributors

Superannuation Liability of Statutory Authorities under the. Minister for the Capital
Territory
(Question No. 1331)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) 'What statutory authorities under his aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for superannuation which have not been paid or which have not yetbeen determined.
(2) If these contributioris have not been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is paymenUo be made.
(3) If the contributions have not yet been determined, when is the liability expected to be assessed and how is payment expected to be made.
Mr Hodgman-I refer the honourable member to the reply supplied by the Minister for Finance to Parliamentary Question No. 1320 which appeared in Hansard of 10 September 1981, pages 1269 and 1270.

Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 1549)
Mr Bungey asked the Mini.ster for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How'many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No such vehicles were operated'by my Oepartment within the Commonwealth of Australia.

496 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Answers to Questions

Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1565)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr Hodgman-I refer the honourable member to the answer given on 10 June 1981 by the Minister for Administrative Services to Question No. 1563 (Hansard pages 3579-80).
Recycling of Paper: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 1575)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper, if so, what action.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Foreign Affairs recycles non-classified paper under the contracts let by the Department of Administrative Services.
Arts Development Program
(Question No. 1818)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Did the Annual Report of his Department for 1979-80 state that a comprehensive arts development program had been introduced along similar lines to those operating in the States; if so, is he able to supply details of grants given by State Government to organisations comparable to the (a) Blue Folk Community Arts Association, which received a grant of $17,800, (b) Arts Council of Australia (Australian Cap'ital Territory Division), which received a grant of $29 500, (c) Canberra Repertory Society, which received a grant of $31,000, (d) Reid House Theatre Workshop, which received a grant of $32,500, (e) Canberra Symphony Orchestra, which received a grant of $53,750 and (f) Canberra Opera Society, which received a grant of$71,900.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Annual Report of the Department of the Capital Territory for 1979-80 did state that a comprehensive arts development program had been introduced along similar lines to those operating in the States. The reference was to a grants program broadly comparable in its implementation and features to those operating in the States. Strict comparability of organisations and grant levels between the Territory and the States is of course .almost impossible to establish, since the organisations and their activities vary considerably. However, using N.S.W. as an example, grants under that State's programmes included the following:

(a) Pipi Storm Parks Program $7,000.
This arts program has a community focus and provides similar activities to those provided in Canberra by Blue Folk Community Arts Association at Sunday in the Park. However Blue Folk is a unique community arts project' in that its activities are based on a farm property near one of the outer suburbs. Its Sunday in the Park activities are only one part of its total program.
(b) The Arts Council of New South Wales $296,000.
This organisation has 61 branches and provides broad based arts activities for the entire State.
(c) Riverina Trucking Company $30,000.
Murray River Performing Group $30,000.
Each of these groups also received grants from the Australian Council and other sources. The Reid House Theatre Group as a whole is not directly comparable to these groups or other groups in the States. However, one of its components, the Jigsaw Theatre Company, is reasonably comparable to the above mentioned groups.
It is not possible to compare Australian Capital Territory and State funding arrangements in respect of:
(a) Canberra Repertory Society-This is an amateur drama company which, in the past, has received both Territory and Federal funding. Its direct counterparts in the States are not usually funded by State Government grants programs.
(b) The Canberra Opera Society-This is a semiprofessional company. The principal opera companies in each State are either fully or substantially professional and financed by the Commonwealth and the States.
(c) Canberra Symphony Orchestra-The Canberra Symphony Orchestra is a semi-professional organisation. All other capital city orchestras, which are fully professional, are funded by grants from the State Government, the City Council and the Australian Broadcasting Commission. For example, in 1980 the Sydney Symphony Orchestra received grants of $250,000 from the State Government, $30,000 from the Sydney City Council and a grant from the A.B.C. The level of the A.B.C. grant for 1980 is not known, however, in 1979 it was $1.664m.
Sale of Recreation and Cultural Facilities, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2095)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
In relation to the Government's decision to examine the leasing or sale of recreation and cultural facilities in the Australian Capital Territory, will commercial viability be the only criterion to be applied to the continued operation of these facilities; if not, what criteria will be applied.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Commercial viability will not be the only criterion to be applied to the continued operation of these facilities. Because the facilities concerned vary considerably in their nature and purpose it is not appropriate to apply general criteria to each facility. The criteria applied will depend on the facility being considered.

Answers to Questions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 497

Erindale Centre, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2114)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Does the Government propose to sell
(a) the Erindale Centre, Australian Capital Territory or parts thereof, and
(b) the Canberra Theatre.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to both parts of the honourable member's question is no.
Mandata System: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 2230)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in his' Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDATA System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MANDATA System.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(a) (i) Nil (ii) $140 (iii) Nil (iv) Nil (v) $1,560--overtime necessary for purification of
files and data pickUp. (b) $34,000-three officers involved in planning for data pickup, actual data pickup and file purification.
Note: For further information refer to the answer provided in response to Question No. 2209 and which appeared in the Hansard of29 October 1981.
(2) No.
(3) Neither staff savings nor increases are expected as the staff previously engaged on MANDATA functions will be transferred to alternative recording systems.
(4){a) $13,500-purchaseofword processor.
(b) Nil.
Government Housing, Canberra
(Question No. 2412)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) How many Government houses have been vacant for each of the last 12 months in the Australian Capital Territory.

(2) What was the average length of time that Government houses were left vacant in the Australian Capital Territory for each of the last 12 months.
(3) How many staff have been employed on maintenance of Government houses in the Australian Capital Territory for each of the last 12 months.
(4) Do emergency housing applicants receive priority over Government employees on transfers, normal transfers, urgent medical cases, refugee and/or group applicants; if not, why not.
(5) Has he given consideration to the provision of rent subsidies for private accommodation to alleviate the serious shortage of housing for emergency applicants; if not, what is the reason.
(6) Has he given consideration to providing a social worker in the Housing Branch of his Department in order to alleviate some of the personal and social problems experienced by many emergency housing applicants.
(7) Has he given consideration to the provision of a small pool of houses with a maximum stay time, in order to alleviate the serious shortage of emergency housing; if not, why not.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(1)-
VACANT STOCK
Number of vacant stock on last day of each month

Month

Family House Flat

Bachelor Flat Total

30 September 1980 31 October 1980 30 November 1980 31 December 1980 31 January 1981 28 February 1981 31 March 1981 30 April 1981 31 May 1981 30June 1981 31 July 1981 31 August 1981

71

70

50

58

67

82

76

62

47

59

64

47

54

58

60

41

67

32

66

36

44

48

65

45

45 186 43 151 51 200 41 179 33 139
39 150 42 154 41 142
37 136 36 138 25 117 24 134

Footnote: Vacant stock is those units without a legal tenant. It includes units undergoing repairs and maintenance or upgrading, units scheduled for demolition; units on offer to tenants but not yet accepted. On anyone day, the bulk of vacant stock is undergoing maintenance.
(2) Figures are not kept, but turn-around times vary from a few days to a number of weeks depending on the amount of work required to prepare the house for reletting. The Department considers six weeks to be a reasonable maximum turnaround period; shorter turn-around periods are achieved in the vast majority of cases.
(3) The Department of the Capital Territory has no staff directly engaged in repairing and maintaining government owned dwellings. The Department of Housing and Construction has advised that approximately 75 of its staff are engaged on this work together with approximately 80 employed by contractors. The Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority has advised that approximately 20 of its staff are engaged on electrical maintenance of government dwellings. Month by month figures are not readily available, however they have varied only for seasonal reasons.
(4) Yes, true emergency housing applicants (those who genuinely have no accommodation available to them) receive priority over all other applicants for government rental housing. However, most applicants for emergency housing are not

498 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Answers to Questions

in a real emergency situation and in effect they seek to obtain a priority allocation. Where such applicants are successful they are granted priority over people in the normal (nonpriority) housing waiting lists but not necessarily over other priority applicants such as public service compulsory transferees and urgent medical transferees. (See also answer to parts 6 and 7).
(5) No. Further I do not believe the suggestion that there is a serious shortage of housing for genuine emergency applicants can be supported.
(6) Yes. A Social Worker from the Welfare Branch has been seconded to work in the Housing Branch on a full-time basis.
(7) A small pool of housing with a maximum stay time is now available, not to meet any alleged shortage of emergency housing, but to meet a particular need for short-term crisis housing.
Character Clearances, Applicants for Australian Citizenship
(Question No. 2983)
Mr Les Johnson asked the MinIster for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) How many Officers of the Australian Federal Police Force are employed (a) on a full time and (b) on a part-time basis to process character clearances of applicants for Australian citizenship.
(2) How many applications are in the process of obtaining clearances as at 1 September 1981.
(3) What percentage of the applications referred to in part (2) have been awaiting clearance for (a) less than one month, (b) between one and two months, (c) between two and three months and (d) longer than three months.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 4; (b) nil.
(2) 29,885.
(3) (a) 34 per cent (10,154); (b) 31 per cent (9,257); (c) 24 per cent (7,032); (d) 11 per cent(3,442).
The Government has been concerned to alleviate the impact of a backlog that has built up over the last year or so. The Australian Federal Police, having regard to the allocation of necessarily limited police resources, has moved during 1981 to grapple with this backlog build up. In the latter part of 1981 the Australian Federal Police, which works with the national criminal records office run by the New South Wales Police, has considerably reduced the backlog down to a position where in December last over 50 per cent had been awaiting clearance for less than one month and none longer than three months.
Residential Leases in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2998)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the article in the Canberra Times of 3 October 1980, where the question of the extension of residential leases in older suburbs is discussed.
(2) Are residential leases to be renewed for a further 99 years, at no cost.
(3) If so, has the necessary amending legislation been drafted.

Mr Hodgman-The following answers are provided to the honourable member's questions:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) Consideration is currently being given to the necessary amending legislation.
Australian Capital Territory: Floral Emblem
(Question No. 3147)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Does the Australian Capital Territory have a floral emblem; if not, why not.
(2) Was any approach made or received to have the Australian Capital Territory represented in the new series of prepaid envelopes which will include floral emblems of all Sta~es and the Northern Territory but not the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Capital Territory does not have a floral emblem. However, I have already instructed my Department to provide me with proposals for a suitable emblem.
(2) No.
Australian Capital Territory: Environmental Pollution
(Question No. 3214)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the investigations being carried out on the plant and soil at Koppers of Bungendore under instruction from the New South Wales Pollution Control Commission.
(2) In view of the proposal to establish the Koppers plant in the Australian Capital Territory, has he instructed his Department to (a) liaise with New South Wales officials in their investigations at the Koppers Bungendore plant or (b) monitor the results of these investigations; if not, why not.
(3) If the soil on the present Koppers site at Bungendore is found to be toxic at depth, will he give an unqualified assurance that any soil to be disposed of at a future Kopp'ers plant in the Australian Capital Territory will be treated in a manner which will not pollute land and lake or water systems.
(4) Has his attention been drawn to the Victorian guidelines on soil disposal (Appendix-Soil pollution Section 2.4, general considerations, paragraph 5) which states that land contaminated by or used for disposal of C.C.A. wastes will be permanently affected; if so, will he explain in detail what legislation and departmental inspection procedures exist in the Australian Capital Territory, to prevent land and water systems being permanently affected by the proposed Koppers plant.
(5) Has a lease been granted to Koppers to establish a plant in the Australian Capital Territory; if not, will such a lease be granted and on what date.
(6) Will an Environmental Impact Statement be required; if not, why not.
(7) If Koppers does establish a plant in the Australian Capital Territory, will he advise the proposed disposal area for all toxic waste; if not, why not.

Answers to Questions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 499

(8) Has his attention been drawn to evidence given at the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Australian Capital Territory hearings in 1981 by Dr Hogg, that wastes from the proposed Koppers plant will be treated at the Mugga landfill.
(9) Does the Mugga landfill drain into Jerrabomberra Creek and From there into the Molonglo and lake area.
(10) Does the National Capital Development Commission Technical Paper No. 34, pages 63-65, state that Jerrabomberra Creek should be protected because of its aquatic significance and because of its importance in supplying stock and Feed water.
(II) Can he give an unqualified guarantee that these Canberra water systems will not be polluted by the proposed Koppers development. -
(12) Is it a Fact that Canberra is situated in a natural basin which could collect air pollution in a similar fashion to frequently observed Fog phenomena; if so, what (a) legislation and (b) inspection procedures exist to protect Canberra's citizens From air pollution as a result of proposed industrial development such as the Koppers plant.
(13) Has his attention been drawn to a noise pollution in: vestigation carried out on Koppers Factory noise levels in December 1976, under instruction From the New South Wales State Pollution Control Commission.
(14) What noise pollution legislation exists in the Australian Capital Territory.
(15) Can he guarantee that proposed industrial development such as the Koppers plant will not emit noise pollution which would adversely affect nearby residents.
(16) Further to the answer to question No. 2328 (Hansard, 15 September 1981, pages 1352-3) will he make available the minutes or records of meetings held between Mr Bernard Morrison, NCDC and representatives of his Department in April 1980 and February 1981.
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No. When Koppers applied for a site in Canberra tests of soil pollution levels at the Bungendore plant were carried out by the Department Of the Capital Territory with Koppers' consent, on the condition that the results were kept confidential. The results of these tests were used in setting the standards for the proposed Canberra operation and no Further inFormation of this nature is required. While discussions have been held with officers of the New South Wales State Pollution Control Commission the investigations now being carried out are a matter between the New South Wales Government officials and Koppers, and the Department is not in a position to intervene.
(3) Irrespective of the results of the Bungendore tests, in the event that soil in the Australian Capital Territory is found to be contaminated it would be disposed of in a manner which will not pollute Australian Capital Territory land, lake or water systems.
(4) Yes. Legislation covering environmental pollution is receiving high priority in its preparation and Koppers have agreed to meet the proposed legislative controls. IF the legislation is not in Force when a lease is granted to Koppers, as an interim measure., the lease itselF will apply exactly the same controls as the legislation.
The legislation will make it an offence to discharge pollutants into the water system and provide for the imposition of penalties iF the plant is operated in a manner which leads to pollution of land or water systems. If the lease control is required it will require that the plant be operated in a manner so that pollutants are not discharged into the water system.

Failure to observe this requirement will constitute an unauthorised activity and be subject to Section 9A of the City Areas Leases Ordinances 1936. The Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court, pn application, may then order that the unauthorised activity cease. However, legislation, lease controls or inspection procedures do not themselves prevent pollution of land or water systems. The most effective control is the requirement that the plant be designed in a manner to ensure no pollutant escape from the site. Periodic inspections will be undertaken to assess the effectiveness of this requirement.
(5) An offer of a lease of a site at Hume was Forwarded to Koppers on 13 January 1982 after advice was received that an Environmental Impact Statement was considered unnecessary. The offer has not yet been accepted.
(6) The Minister for Hoine Affairs and Environment advised on 23 November 1981 that aFter carefully considering the matter he has concluded that the preparation and public review of an Environmental Impact Statement will not be necessary.
(7) Approximately 400 Iitres of waste in the form of chemical sludge is expected to be generated annually and will be transported to the Koppers chemical factory at Trentham, Victoria, for treatment before disposal. The treatment chemicals are liquid and any drips and spills will be safely contained and then recycled with makeup water as necessary. All chemicals will be transported in bulk so that no contaminated drums will be produced.
(8) Yes. Non-toxic wastes may be disposed of at the Mugga Landfill area, however, this Department does not propose to treat or dispose of any toxic wastes at any landfill site. Disposal of toxic waste is the responsibility of the person or firm generating the waste (see answer to Question (7) ).
(9) Yes.
(10) Yes.
(II) Unqualified guarantees of the nature sought can never be given. The controls under which Koppers would be required to operate are accepted as the most advanced in Australia and are more stringent than those applying to any other industrial plant in the Australian Capital Territory. These controls will ensure that any risk of pollution from the site is remote and well within the levels accepted for other industries.
(12) Yes. Two pieces of existing legislation cover aspects of air pollution:
The Building Ordinance 1972 allows the Building Controller, in considering plans and specifications, to take into account whether the proposed structure makes adequate provision for the disposal of smoke, gas, fumes and ash;
the New South Wales Smoke Abatement Act 1902, in its application to the Australian Capital Territory, provides that it is an offence for a person to use a furnace which has not been constructed so as to prevent the formation of smoke therein.
The proposed air pollution ordinance wiII control the concentration of toxic substances emitted into the air and wiII prohibit open burning. Inspectors will be appointed under the ordinance to enforce the regulations and suitable inspection procedures implemented in this regard. In the meantime inspections wiII be carried out under existing leasing and building legislation.
(13) No.
(14) The Animal Nuisance Control Ordinance 1975 provides protective measures against animal noise.
The Inspection of Machinery Regulations set noise levels above which the use of hearing protection devices is compulsory in the workplace.

500 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Answers to Questions

The Motor Traffic Ordinance 1936 allows for the refusal of registration for a motor vehicle which emits excessive noise and provides that it is an offence to drive a motor vehicle
which emits undue noise.

The Police Offences Ordinance 1930 provides that noise which causes undue disturbance is an offence.

The Small Claims Ordinance 1974 allows individuals to seek orders from the Court to have noise nuisance caused by neighbours' activities abated.

A proposed noise pollution ordinance will control the level

of noise emitted from industrial sites such as the proposed

Koppers plant. Inspectors will be appointed to police the pro-

visions of the Ordinance.

.

(15) Again, guarantees of the nature sought can never be

given. In the case of Koppers specific limits relating to noise

levels at the lease boundary will be contained within the lease.

Where breaches of these lease conditions or legislation are

detected, these violations will be pursued to the fullest practi-

cable extent either by way of injunction or through the legis-

lation. The ultimate sanction could be the determination of

the lease but such action could only be contemplated when all

other avenues failed to achieve compliance.

.

(16) Minutes were taken of meetings held between Mr Bernard Morrison and officers of my Department and the National Capital Development Commission in April 1980 and
February 1981. Personal discussions of this nature are treated as confidential, however Mr Morrison has agreed that the records of the meetings can be made available to you and I am
arranging for copies to be forwarded.

Australian Capital Territory: Touris~

(Question No. 3215)

Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:

(I) How many overseas visitors came to Canberra in each of the last three years.

(2) How many tourists visited the Tralee Station Inter-

national Tourist Complex which provides a unique view of

Australian life including shearing demonstrations, in each of

the last three years.

.0

(3) Is he committed to encouraging tourist attractions in order to increase the number of overseas visitors to Canberra.

(4) What safeguards exist to prevent excessive (a) noise, (b) air, (c) water and (d) land pollution from proposed indus-
trial development, such as the proposed Koppers plant, adversely affecting the operations of the Tralee Station International Tourist Complex.

Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:

(I) 1978-94,000; 1979-118,000; 1980-135,000.

(2) Tralee Station is in New South Wales and visitor figures

are not made available to the Australian Capital Territory

Government Tourist Bureau. However, the Queanbeyan Age

of 18 September 1981 in a special supplement issued in,con-

junction with the 1981 Tourist Conferen<;e in Queanbeyan re-

ferred to a 1978 figure of about 15,000 international visitors.

The Australian Capital Territory Government Tourist Bu-

reau believes the annual figure would be now in the vicinity of

20,000.

'

.(3) Yes.

(4) Appropriate environmental safeguards for proposed industrial development will be included in the conditions of lease. The conditions are generally modelled on the require-
ments which will be prescribed in the proposed Australian Capital Territory Environment Protection legislation.

Australian Capital Territory: Residental Blocks

(Question No. 3375)

Mr Fry asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:

(I) How many single residential blocks were sold by the Government in the Australian Capital Territory during the
period I July 1975 to 30 June 1981.

(2) What was the cost of servicing the single residential blocks.

(3) What revenue was received from the sale of the blocks:

(4) What was the gross profit from the sales, that is to say, the profit over cost of acquisition and servicing of the land.

(5) What has been the average cost of servicing single residential blocks and what has been the average sale price of the blocks.

Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:

(I) 12,017.

(2) Because the 'Government required the total cost incurred by the Commonwealth to be recouped, the land servicing costs used in the calculatiqn of reserve prices include the
costs of providing a suburb with:

roads, kerbs and guttering;

water supply, sewer and stormwater lines;

footpaths;

entrance drives to residential sites;-

street lighting;

undergrounding of electricity where appropriate (pro-

vision of electricity overhe.ad is accepted as a .normal re-

sponsibility of the Australian Capital Territory Electricity

Authority);

0

street name signs;

fire hydrants;

car parks and paving around shopping centres, commercial offices, clubs and other commercial development;

landscaping of parks, shopping centres and car parks;

land surveys;

NCDC administration costs;

cost of acquisition of land and of purchasing improvements on rural leases withdrawn for develoPlllent purposes;

interest at the long-term bond rate in respect of a nine-
month period, being the average time between expenditure and the first sale ofleases in the suburb.

In the period referred to, the total cost incurred' was $91,400,000.

(3) Approximately $\02,800,000.

(4) Approximately $11,400,000.

(5) The average cost of servicing a single residential block has belm approximately $7,600. The average sale price for the
blocks has been approximately $8,550.

Australian Capital Territory: Motor Racing Circuit
(Question No. 3653)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 17 November 1981: .

Answers to Questions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 501

(I) Is there to be an international Grand Prix motor racing circuit in Australia but not the Australian Captital Territory; if so, where is it to be located.
(2) Is he able to say why this site was chosen in preference to a site in the Australian Capital Territory.
(3) What sites were considered in the Australian Capital Territory and why was each rejected.
(4) What efforts has he made to fulfil the Prime Minister's election promise that an international Grande Prix motor racing circuit would be located in the Australian Capital Territory and what reasons have been given for the decision not to fulfil this election promise.
Mr Hodgman-I refer the honourable member to a join~ statement issued on 16 October 1981 by my colleague the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and the Victorian Minister for Youth, Sport and Recreation about an international standard motor racing circuit to be established in Melbourne.
Department of Enwloyment and Youth Affairs: Advertising
(Question No. 879)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(I) What advertising agencies are used by his Department to publicise its programs and policies.
(2) What sums are paid to these agencies for the purpose of this advertising.
Mr N. A. Brown-I refer the honourable member to my answer to Parliamentary Question No. 2670, Hansard, 16 February 1982, pages 170-172.
Domiciliary Nursing Care Benefit
(Question No. 2006)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 29 April 1981 :
(I) Is Domiciliary Nursing Care Benefit (DNCB) available only from date of application.
(2) Have cases occurred where applicants, patienis, relatives, attending nurses, doctors, clinics and officers of the Department of Social Security supplying application forms and pamphlets for DNCB are unaware of this time limit and have delayed application on account of the desire of the patients to have the applicants at home with them for as long as possible.
(3) What proportion of applications are (a) refused and (b) accepted as applying from a date later than eligibility would have indicated had application been earlier.
(4) What estimates are available of numbers of persons eligible who fail to apply. because they are unaware. of the DNCB.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Section 58E(6) of the National Health Act provides, in relation to the Domiciliary Nursing Care Benefit, as follows: .

'An approval under this sectiol] shall specify the date on which it is to take effect, which may be a date earlier than the date on which the approval is given but shall not be a date earlier than the date on which the application to which the approval relates is received.'
(2) Some cases have been brought to my attention where applicants have been unaware of the need for early submissio.n of applications. However my Department tries to ensure that both potential applicants and those likely to be in a position to advise them are fully aware of this requirement. The publicity pamphlet for the benefit and the official application form both currently emphasise this matter in several places, in prominent print and have done so for several years.
The question suggests that the act of applying for the benefit could, in some way, shorten the time that a patient has an applicant at home with him or her but the reason for this suggestion is unclear. In fact one of the requirements for the benefit is virtually full time attendance by the applicant on the patient with short absences only, such as business or shopping trips, being allowable. Where the applicant feels unable to leave the patient at all, the visiting nurse will usually undertake to actually submit the application.
(3) No statistics are available on requests for, or rejection of, retrospective payment.
(4) No relevant statistical data are available on which to base such an estimate. However, I am concerned that the existence of the benefit may not be as widely known as should be the case and my Department is currently examining means of ensuring wider knowledge of the benefit.
Lease or Sale of Properties, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2098)
Mrs Kelly-Asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
With respect to the (a) Community Hall at Corroboree Park, Ainslie, managed by the YMCA of Canberra, Inc., (b) hostel at Ainslie managed by the Ainslie Village Pty Ltd, (c) room in Scullin Health Centre, Belconnen, managed by the Belconnen Community Service, (d) ex prototype/site office in Cameron Offices, Belconnen, managed by the Belconnen Activities Information Centre, (e) shop in Chapman, presently empty, (f) room under the shops in Chapman, managed by the Weston Creek Playgroup Association, Inc., (g) room under the shops in Chapman, managed by the Weston Creek Soccer Club, Inc., (h) army huts at Macgregor Hall managed by the Canberra Pensioners Social and Recreation Club, Inc., (i) two~storey complex at the Griffin Centre, City, managed by the Australian Capital Territory Council of Cui. tural Societies, U) army huts at Childers Street man\lged by the Australian Capital Territory Council of Cultural Societies, (k) ex-change room (south) at the City Olympic Pool managed by the Australian Umlerwater Federation, (I) exchange room (north) at the City Olympic Pool managed by the Royal Life Saving Society, (m) hostel at Gorman House, City, managed by the Interim Gorman' House Committee, (n) office of the Wales Centre, City, managed by the Arts Council of the Australian Capital Territory; (0) hall at Theatre 3, City, managed by the Canberra Repertory Socieiy, (p) community centre at Downer, managed by the Monaro Folk Music Society, (q) Hall at Griffith managed by the Girl Guides Association,. (r) ex-City Parks Depot, at Hackett, managed by the Canberra City Band, (s) community centre at Hughes, managed by the Australian Capital Territory Council on the Ageing, (t) community centre at Jamison, managed by thr YMCA of Canberra, Inc., (u) rLiral homestead at

502 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Answers to Questions

Kambah-Athlon, presently vacant, (v) site office at Thiess

The majority of the detailed properties are either already

Cottage, Kambah, managed by the Kambah Playgroup Asleased or leases are being negotiated with the organisations

sociation, (w) urban home at the Community House, Kamwhich currently manage them. Therefore, the intentions of

bah, managed by the Tuggeranong Family Associatin, (x) the Review of Commonwealth Functions are being fulfilled.

sports pavillion at Kingston, managed by the Australian Capi-

tal Territory Table Tennis Association, Inc., (y) site office at

It should be noted that the circumstances of various groups

Latham, presently vacant, (z) ex-City Parks Depot at Lyons, and buildings is not static and the usage of the following build-

managed by the Sport Aircraft Association of Australia, (aa) ings has been changed since the question was raised.

temporary shop at Macgregor managed by the Scout Associ-

ation of Australia, (ab) sports pavilion at Narrabundah

(c) Room in Scullin Health Centre-Belconnen-Whole

managed by the Creative Leisure Movement (Childrens), of Health Centre is now used by the Capital Territory Health

(ac) ex-City Parks Depot at Reid, under ad hoc use by a comCommission.

munity association, (ad) hostel at Reid House managed by his

Department and about to be demolished, (ae) temporary

(e) Shop in Chapman-Leased by Weston Creek Soccer

shop at Spence/Evatt managed by his Department and to be Club.

demolished, (af) hall at Tharwa owned by the local com-

munity, (ag) rural homestead at Tuggeranong, presently

(y) Site office at Latham-Sold on 16.11.81 and' to be

vacant, (ah) village hall at Uriarra, managed by his Departmoved from site.

ment, (ai) urban Rats (Baringa Gardens) at Melba, managed

by the Baringa Gardens Community Association, Inc., (aj)

(z) Ex City Parks Depot at Lyons-Used for storage of

community hall at the Causeway, managed by the Causeway Heritage artefacts.

Progress Association, (ak) purpose-built centre plus tempor-

ary hall at Charnwood (Tillyard) managed by the Tillyard

(aa) Temporary shop at Macgregor-Sale to the Scout As-

Community Centre Association, Inc., (al) modified Govern- . sociation of Austr!llia-Australian Capital Territor~ Branch

ment house at Fraser, managed by the Croajingalong ComIncorporated being negotiated.

munity Association, Inc., (am) modified Government house

at Giralang managed by the Giralang Community Centre As-

(ac) Ex City Parks Depot at Reid-Occupied by the City

sociation, Inc., (an) community hall at Hall, managed by the Parks Administration. Hall Progress Association, Inc., (ao) temporary hall at Hig-

gins managed by the Higgins Community Hall Association,

(ad) Hostel at Reid House-Demolished.

Inc., (ap) modified Government house at Kaleen, managed

by the Kaleen Community Centre Association, Inc., (aq)

(ae) Temporary shop at Spence/Evatt-Building is to be

rural homestead at Kambah, unmanaged, (ar) Nissen Hut at disposed of by Department of Administrative Services. Kambah, unmanaged, (as) urban home, modified, at Kainbah

managed by the Tuggeranong Family Action Group, (at)

(ag) Rural homestead at Tuggeranong-Commercial

temporary hall at Melba (Nellie Hall) managed by the North operat'ion-sheepraising and tourism. Belconnen Community Hall Association, Inc., (au) village

hall at Oaks Estate, managed by the Oaks Estate Progress Association, (av) temporary hall at Scullin (Humpy Hall)

(aq) Rural homestead at Kambah-Demolished.

managed by the South Belconnen Community Association, (aw) senior citizens centre at Turner, managed by the Can-

Family Planning Organisation: Federal Funds

berra Senior Citizens Club, (ax) senior citizens centre at Woden Town Centre, managed by Woden Senior Citizens
Club, (ay) community hall at Spence/Evatt, managed by Spence/Evatt Community Hall Association, Inc., (az) tem-

(Question No. 2711)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:

porary hall at Torrens, managed by the Torrens Development

Association, Inc., (ba) modified urban home at Wanniassa,

(I) What federal funds have been allocated to family plan-

managed by the Wanniassa Community Association, Inc., ning organisations in each State and Territory for each of the

(bb) community centre within the shopping complex at Weslast 5 years.

ton Creek (Cooleman Court), managed by the Weston Creek

Community Association, Inc., (bc) Child Care Centre at

(2) How many new family planning centres have been

Woden Town Centre, managed by the Woden Community opened in each State and Territory in each year.

Service, (bd) rural homestead, (Strathnairn) at Holt,

managed by the Blue Folk Community Arts Association, (be),

(3) Has the annual attendance at family planning centres

old 'horse era' museum at Watson, managed by the Craft increased in each year; ifso, by what percentage.

Council of the Australian Capital Territory and (bf) rural

buildings at Bruce managed by the Canberra Opera, is each fa-

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable

cility to be leased or sold to the private sector and will the organisation concerned have to pay commercial rentals; if so,

member's question is as follows:

what level of rent will be payable in each case.

(I) Commonwealth funds are provided to family planning

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable organisations through two channels, namely-

member's question is as follows:

Family Planning Program-to assist with the provision

For the most part, the leasing and rental policy covering the

of non-clinical services, i.e. education, training and in for-

properties listed by the honourable member remains un-

mation;and

changed, but where activities of a business nature are con-

ducted, commercial rentals are charged. However, rents have

Health Program Grants-to assist towards meeting costs of

usually been assessed on the basis of the purpose clause in the

clinical services.

lease. These charges range from full commercial to pepper-

corn rentals (Nominal rents are charged to community lessees

The following tables show the allocations provided under

which act as managing agents in the hiring of their facilities to these two programs to family planning organisations for the

other community bodies).

past five years.

Answers to Questions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 503

(i) FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAM Allocations to Family Planning Organisations (1976-77 to 1980-81)

Organisation

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

Family Planning Associations-
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia Tasmania
Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

$
101,021 49,138 46,198 72,533 43,000 32,588 19,870 12,885

$
149,095 60,640 40,000 18,232 32,000 19,429 22,907 20,000

$
149,095 72,379 41,034 71,458 32,000 11,800 22,907 20,000

$
149,000 76,000 50,000 24,000 37,500 17,800 28,750 20,000

$
154,960 79,040 56,800 37,440 45,360 20,000 29,900
*

Total
Australian Federation of Family Planning Associations (AFFPA)
Australian Catholic Social Welfare Commission
Adolescent Counselling Treatment and Information (ACTION) Centre
Action for Family Planning

377,233
125,916+ 139,500
40,285

362,303
93,700 153,560
80,000

420,673
66,700 153,560
60,000

403,050
55,000 159,700
70,000 10,000

423,500
58,850 166,450
79,780 20,000

* ACTFPA had an approved carry over of unexpended funds from 1979-80 amounting to $36,432: a notional grant of $26,000
for 1980-81 was offset against that amount. .
+ Includes an amount of$50 916 as an additional allocation, paid through AFFPA, to the States and Territories Family Planning Associations.

(ii) HEALTH PROGRAM GRANT Allo(ations to Family Planning Associations (1976-77 to 1980-81)

Association
Family Planning AssociationsNew South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Australian Capital Territory Northern Territory
Total

1976-77
$
693,820 169,627 286,237 252,746 129,947 31,809 59,673
18,837
1,642,696

1977-78
$
856,867 209,489 353,502 312,141 165,509
39,284 85,578 23,263
2,045,633

1978-79
$
791,001 266,259 340,997 318,004 193,786
42,996 107,092 35,994
2,096,129

1979-80
$
792,818 202,543 389,089 308,981 169,471
55,503 40,376 28,087
1,986,868

1980-81
$
834,750 242,744 349,999 344,322 290,169
69,165 77,207 34,359
2,242,715

(2) Since 1976-77, five new family planning clinics were opened, three in New South Wales (one in 1977-78 and two in 1979-80) and one each in South Australia (1976-77) and Western Australia (1977-78). Since that time six clinics were closed or amalgamated with other clinics-three in New

South Wales (two in 1978-79 and one in 1980-81), and three in Tasmania in 1977-78.
(3) The following table gives details of the percentage variations in annual attendances of clients seen by clinic doctors at Family Planning Association centres during the period 1976-77 to 1980-81 for each State and Territory.

FAMILY PLANNING ASSOCIATION CLINICS Client Attendances 1976-77 to 1980-81

State
New South Wales Victoria Queensland South AustraliaWestern Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

1976-77 No. of visits
47,206 14,104 27,812 20,174 12,865 2,998 2,143

1977-78 changeover previous year
percent +2.7
+22.3 +31.7 + 10.2 +25.2 +27.4 + 11.2

1978-79 changeover previous year
percent +34.0 +23.0 +18.9 +9.6 -4.1 -4.8 +6.4

1979-80 changeover previous year
percent +7.3
+12.9 + 10.9
-2.4 -7.1 +24.8 -6.0

1980-81 changeover previous year
per cent +2.9 +6.8 +2.9 + 1.9 -0.2 + 10.5 + 1.0

504 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Answers to Questions

State

1976-77 No. of
visits

1977-78 changeover previous year

1978-79 changeover
previous year

1979-80
changeover previous year

1980-81 changeover previous year

Australian Capital Territory

6,883

percent + 11.4

percent +7.6

percent +6.5

percent +1.4

Australia

134,185

+15.2

+19.0

+6.4

+3.1

* Aggregated on a calendar year basis.
Vietnam: Effects of Chemicals on Personnel
(Question No. 2732)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) What provision has been made by the Commonwealth Institute of Health (CIH) in determining the methodology for its epidemiological study into the effects of chemicals on personnel who served in Vietnam, to ensure that the former spouses of Vietnam veterans will be included in that study, despite divorces or other separations which may have occurred, since the cessation of hostilities.
(2) How many persons fall into this category.
(3) Has he, or any other relevant Minister, received any representations from persons in this category; ifso, how many, and what was the substance of each representation.
(4) If no provision has been made by the CIH to include this category of person in the study, what is the reason, and will he now give an assurance that the evidence from this category of person will be properly taken into account.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The questionnaire employed in the pilot survey, which covered a sample of 600 Vietnam veterans, included questions on current spouses, former spouses and children. Questions relating to still births or miscarriages in previous marriages were also asked.
The object of the pilot survey was to test the methodology to be applied in the main study. Hence a decision as to the most effective way of collecting information on former spouses and children will be made once the results of the pilot study have been assessed.
(2) Not yet known.
(3) Neither I nor the Minister for Veterans' Affairs has been advised of any representations on this subject, from persons in the category referred to.
(4)See(I).
Lead Toxicity Research Unit
(Question No. 3255)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the recommendations of the recently released report of the Australian Academy of Science 'Health and Environmental Lead in Australia', in particular those proposing the (a) establishment of an ongoing national environmental lead toxicity research unit, as a National Health and Medical Research Council Unit, (b) identification of populations at risk from environmental lead, by the conduct of national surveys of venous blood levels, (c) adoption of the 1978 European Economic Community response levels for blood lead distribution and the notification to

health authorities for examination of persons with a confirmed blood lead level above 35 ug per dl, (d) nationally coordinated environmental monitoring for ambient lead, especially in areas of potential risk, (e) progressive reduction of lead levels in petrol and (f) appointment of Australian reference laboratories to institute recognised standard methods for blood lead estimations.
(2) If so, what action has he instituted to examine and implement these recommendations.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's ques~ion is as follows:
(I) Yes, my attention has been drawn to the recommendations of this report, which has been studied carefully by officers of my Department.
(2) With respect to the recommendations referred to in the question:
(a) The proposal for the establishment of an ongoing national environmental lead toxicity research unit as a National Health and Medical Research Council (NH and MRC) unit will be considered by the Public Health Advisory Committee of Council at its next meeting and its recommendations conveyed to the Council. To date the establishment of such a unit has not been proposed by the NH and MRC.
(b) The NH and MRC would consider the merit of any well designed research proposal to survey blood lead levels, for funding.
(c) The responsibility for monitoring the distribution of blood lead levels in the population rests with the States. Nevertheless, the NH and MRC has considered the EEC response levels and rejected these as being inadequate in the light of present knowledge because they are considered to be set too close to the blood level (40 ugj 100ml) at which clinical signs of lead toxicity may become apparent. It should be borne in mind that the most competent laboratories, as is pointed out in the Australian Academy of Science's report, may get a variation of up to 15 per cent in examination of blood samples.
(d) I note that the Commonwealth allocated $60000 in the 1980-81 Budget to augment air quality monitoring facilities in capital cities. A co-operative program with the States and Territories would improve knowledge of ambient lead levels in areas of concern. Any further information in relation to this point should be referred to my colleague, the Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment. (e) This portion of the question falls within the portfolio
of my colleague, the Minister for Transport. He has advised me that this is one of the many areas of the report which had been overtaken by events by the time it was published. On 20 February 1981 the Australian Transport Advisory Committee (ATAC) recommended the progressive reduction of lead levels ill petrol prior to 1986 as a corollary to the phasing out of lead in petrol, beginning I July 1985. The matter has been referred by ATAC to the relevant bodies for consideration, action, and advice, as appropriate.

Answers to Questions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 505

(f) The appointment of Australian reference laboratories to institute recognised standard methods for blood lead
estimation is concomitant to the establishment of a lead toxicity research unit and has been referred therefore to the Public Health Advisory Committee for con-
current consideration. In the meantime, five Aus-
tralian laboratories are currently registered with the National Association of Testing Authorities (NATA) for the determination of lead levels in blood.

Resident Medical Officers: Overtime Rates of Pay
(Question No. 3320)

Mr Fry asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:

(I) what are the overtime rates of pay for Resident Medical Officers and Registrars in (a) New South Wales hospitals, (b) Royal Canberra Hospital and (c) Woden Valley Hospital.
(2) If there is a difference between the rates in New South Wales hospitals and the 2 Austr'alian Capital Territory hospitals why does it exist.

(3) Will he take action to end this difference; if so, what action does he propose.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) Overtime in New South Wales hospitals is paid at

time and a half actual salary for all time worked in excess of

40 hours per week. (b) and (c) The Public Service Arbi-

trator's Determination No. 46 of 1978, under which Resident

Medical Officers (RMOs) and registrars at Royal Canberra

Hospital and Woden Valley Hospital are employed, does not

provide for the working of overtime but when rostered as

'duty medical officer' such staff receive remuneration at rates

which were considered by the Arbitrator recently. The Arbi-

trator found the 'RMOs and Registrars employed by the

CTHC are not detrimentally treated in comparison with their

counterparts in other institutions.'

.

(2) The terms and conditions of service of RMOs and Registrars in New South Wales public hospitals are set by the
New South Wales Industrial Commission whereas in the Australian Capital Territory such matters are under the jurisdiction of the Public Service Arbitrator. Remuneration is only
one part of an overall package of terms and conditions and a
comparison between the Australian Capital Territory situation and New South Wales is only meaningful if made on an overall conditions of employment basis.

(3) The Capital Territory Health Commission has received a submission from the Australian Capital Territory Medical Officers Association in which that Association seeks changes to the conditions of service of RMOs and Registrars. This submission is being considered by the Commission and will be the subject of discussions between the Commission, the Australian Capital Territory Medical Officers Association and the Public Service Board.

Nunyara Nursing Home, New Farm, Queensland
(Question No. 3359)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 20 October 1981 :
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the proposed sale of Nunyara Nursing Home in New Farm, Queensland.
(2) Do the proprietors have to seek departmental approval for its sale.
(3) Who are the owners.

(4) What attitude will his Departll).ent take towards any fee increase proposal made by the new owners, to cover purchase costs of the home within the next 12 months.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that Nunyara Nursing Home was sold on 5 November 1981. It is understood that the sale was subject to the present lease which expires on 31 December 1986.
(2) Departmental approval is not necessary for the sale of a nursing home or nursing home business.
(3) The new owners are Dr. J. J. Isoardi and Armen, Larmer and Jaldelli Pty Ltd. The previous owner was Nunyara Pty Ltd. The premises have been leased to Berlasco Pty Ltd which has sub-leased them to the present proprietor, Venane Pty Ltd.
(4) Applications by new owners for increases in fees to cover purchase costs would not be approved.
Communications Equipment of Vessels
(Question No. 3441)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 28 October 1981:
I. What criteria are used to determine which vessels undergo (a) annual surveys and (b) routine inspections of radio and communications equipment and at what frequency.
2. What role does the Department of Transport have in determining the criteria for annual surveys and routine inspections.
3. What nationalities of vessels are subject to the authority of his Departmental officers to surveyor inspect radio and communications equipment.
4. Has there been any change in Departmental practice on the frequency or criteria of routine inspections of vessels' radio and communications equipment during the last 2 years; if so, for what reasons.
5. If changes have been made, will they have any employment and cost effects and, if so, what is the expected extent of the changes.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I. (a) Surveys are carried out by officers of my Department on behalf of the Department of Transport on all Australian registered ships which ate subject to the Navigation Act. This Act applies to cargo and passenger ships which engage on interstate and overseas voyages. The Act requires these vessels to have their radio equipment surveyed at least once in each twelve months. Such surveys are conducted at the request of ship owners to the Department of Transport. Overseas registered ships are also surveyed at the request of the country of registration.
In addition my Department conducts annual surveys on behalf of the Western Australian, Victorian and Tasmanian Governments of intrastate trading vessels. These vessels are subject to State Government Regulations which are based on the Uniform Shipping Laws Code.
(b) Routine inspections are undertaken at the initiative of my Department under guidelines suggested by the Departc ment of Transport. Inspections of a non routine nature are conducted by my Department at the request of the Department of Transport, OTC or ship owners when circumstances indicate that a special inspection is warranted.
Special safety inspections are carried out on Australian registered tankers at three monthly intervals on request from the Department of Transport. Overseas registered tankers are

506 REPRESENTATIVES 23 February 1982

Answers to Questions

automatically inspected on first arrival at Australian ports and thereafter at three monthly intervals if engaged on regular voyages to Australia.
2. The Department of Transport has the overall responsibility for determining ~nnual surveys and routine inspections under the provisions of the Navigation Act.
3. Australian registered vessels are surveyed or inspected under the conditions previously outlined. Surveys and inspections may be carried out on any ship upon request from the Administration of the country in which the ship is registered. This provision includes requests from the appropriate Consul of High Commission.
Additionally, ships registered in countries which are contracting parties to the Safety of Life at Sea Convention, 1960, are inspected on a routine basis. Those ships which are registered in countries which have ratified the 1974 Convention are inspected upon request from the Administration concerned.
4. Officers of my Department who undertake radio survey and inspection duties on behalf of the Department of Transport are required to carry out other work in the course of their normal duties. Public service staffing constraints have, of late, limited the Department's ability to conduct as many routine inspections as were conducted in previous years.
5. There are no current plans to vary the present levels of employment in this area. However, all activities in my Department are subject to periodic review and the Marine activities are currently being reviewed.
Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions: Findings on Departments
(Question Nos. 3544-3569)
Mr Young asked all Ministers, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the findings of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions in relation to the Minister's Department and authorities under the Minister's control were based on recommendations provided by senior officials of the Minister's Department.
(2) If so, on what basis did these officials consider the services provided by the Minister's Department were inefficient or redundant and so recommend that these services be cut, reduced or be given to the private sector.
(3) Who were the officers involved in these recommendations and what positions do they occupy in the Minister's Department.
(4) Is it considered political activity to recommend to one party or another what policy options they should take.
(5) If certain services within the Minister's Department were inefficient or overstaffed as the recommendations seem to suggest, what is the reason that action was not taken by these officers before now.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-With the concurrence of other Ministers concerned I provide the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (5) I announced the results of the Review of Commonwealth Functions to Parliament on 30 April 1981. This followed a comprehensive review by the Government of the total range of its activities and functions in the course of which discussions were held with all Ministers on aspects of the review affecting their Departments and related statutory authorities. Ministers would have received advice and briefing on relevant issues from their Permanent Heads and senior departmental officers as they normally do on matters affecting their Departments.

Treatment of Casualties from Future Overseas Wars

(Question No. 3718)

Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:

(1) Has his attention been drawn to attempts by the United States of America Government to enlist the aid of hospitals in
that country in planning treatment for casualties from future
overseas wars, including possible nuclear conflicts;

(2) In the view of Australia's announced participation in the Middle East, a potential theatre of conflict, does he intend to provide for similar planning operations with Australian
hospitals:

Mr MacKellar-The ansWer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) ~ am aware of action undertaken by the Government of

the United States of America in seeking to enlist the aid of

hospitals in that country to care' for wounded from future

overseas conflicts.

,...

..

,

In fact the National ,Times newspaper, during early

November 1981, carried an article on .this very subject.

(2) The Commonwealth Department of Health is responsible for ensuring that a proper balance between defence and
civilian need is maintained in the use of medical personnel and facilities. Since the 1939-45 war, provision has been made for
the Department to examine and report on the position and to advise me of any action necessary to maintain the medical ser-
vices to the whole community. Three committees have been
involved.

Central Medical Planning Committee-1950 National Medical War Planning Committee-I 966 National Disaster Relief (Health) Committee-I 977

I cannot envisage any special hospital arrangements being
necessary as a result of the recent announcement concerning Australia's proposesd participation in the Middle East. Any casualties would be handled within the normal operations of
appropriate Australian hospitals should continued treatment
be necessary.

Housing Loans Insurance Corporation: Foreclosures on Loans
(Question No. 3738)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:
(1) How many foreclosures on loans covered by the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation were made in each year from 1970-71 to 1980-81.
(2) In each case, (a) what were the proportions of preclosures on first home buyers, (b) what was the (i) median and (ii) average prices of homes purchased in (a) metropolitan and (b) non-metropolitan areas in each State and (c) what were the proportions of loans attributable to each of the major sources of housing finance.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There were no foreclosures on loans insured by Housing Loans Insurance Corporation from 1970-71 to 1980-81. Foreclosure is a legal process involving the transfer of title to a mortgagee and is rarely invoked in Australia. The general means of enforcing a mortgage security is for the mortgagee to sell as mortgagee-in-possession. The essential difference is that under the second approach any surplus proceeds of sale are returned to the mortgagor and not retained by the mortgagee.

Answers to Questions

23 February 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 507

Numbers of cases in which mortgagees entered into possession in respect of HUC-insured loans over the period 1970-71 to 1980-81 were:

1970-71

77

1971-72

103

1972-73

82

1973-74

77

1974-75

109

1975-76

132

1976-77

183

1977-78

246

1978-79

610

1979-80

805

1980-81

952

Claims have arisen (or will arise) against HUC in respect of most of these cases but the claims are not necessarily met in the same year as the mortgagee entered into possession because of delays in sale. For this reason the numbers of claims paid in a financial year are not directly comparable with the number of mortgagee-in-possession cases in the same year.

(2) The information sought 'is not available. Some information is available in respect of claims paid by HUC but is not dissected between first hoine buyers and others or between metropolitan and non-metropolitan securities or major . sources of housing finance.

Claims paid

in year

home

ownership

Average

Median

Year

loans(a) valuation(b) valuation (b)

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$

$

30

9,995

8,800

64

11,298

10,650

47

12,404

12,300

33

14,007

14,400

50

15,311

14,700

70

22,924

22,850

107

25,861

25,000

153

26,747

25,500

332

27,840

26,500

564

30,490

29,500

746

31,895

30,000

(a) Excludes mortgages acquired by HUC.
(b) Values relate to the valuation of properties at the time the loans were insured by HUe. These may not necessarily be the same as the purchase price.


