House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 129, 1982 Tuesday, 19 October 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Questions without Notice

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2163

Tuesday, 19 October 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
COMMONWEALTH CROWN SOLICTOR: RELEASE OF DOCUMENTS
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Will the Acting Attorney-General confirm that he has advised the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor not to release to the Joint Committee of Public Accounts seven files in relation to medical fraud? Will the Minister confirm that the ground for this refusal is the supposed confidentiality of the solicitor-client relationship? Given that in this case the client is the Commonwealth, what does the Commonwealth have to hide in relation to these files? Since the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee has said that these files are essential for the proper exercise of the inquiry, is the Government set on a course to frustrate the inquiry?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I am glad the honourable member was able to get himself abreast of the issues that arose in the Public Accounts Committee hearing as I gather there was some difficulty in discovering other Australian Labor Party members of the Committee present. Nevertheless, the honourable member seems to be abreast of the issue. The Crown Solicitor has on occasions been invited and requested to attend before the Public Accounts Committee and other committees. On this occasion he was issued with a summons. Simply being issued with the summons and having that summons presented to me, the situation was that a decision had to be made on behalf of the client, namely the Government, as to whether legal professional privilege would been asserted. In the exercise of my discretion I decided that that was the proper course to take.
It is a very sound principle; it has nothing to do with cover-ups or the other exotic phrases that the honourable member sought to attribute. It has nothing whatsoever to do with that. It has a lot to do, however, with a very sound principle. There is a long, historic and proper basis for legal professional privilege. I may as well tell the honourable member that I am not prepared, on the mere say-so of someone issuing a summons to the Crown Solicitor, to breach or to waive that privilege. If reasons are advanced, of course I will look at them. The matter rests, as I understand it, in this situation: The Crown Solicitor and, as necessary, I will be talking with officers of the Public

Accounts Committee. Perhaps the matter can be resolved in a more civilised manner than the manner in which some people seem to have approached it so far.
NATIONAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Leader of the National Party of Australia)-I wish to inform the House that the party which I lead is now called the National Party of Australia.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
SOUTH WEST TASMANIA: HYDRO-ELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT
Mr MacKELLAR-The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment will recall that the House of Representatives Committee on Environment and Conservation tabled a report on South West Tasmania on 27 August 1980. That report contained a recommendation that the Commonwealth Government seek advice as to whether the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act 1974 applies to the hydro-electric developments in South West Tasmania and that, if these are proposals defined under the Act, it be invoked. The Minister will also recall that the Committee has, on two occasions since the tabling of that report, sought a Government response to the recommendations contained in it. In view of the fact that it is Government policy to respond formally to recommendations made by parliamentary committees within six months of report tabling will the Minister advice the House as to when the Committee can expect a detailed response to its recommendations made over two years ago?
Mr McVEIGH-The Government has considered the report to which the honourable member referred. At present we are awaiting a report from the Senate select committee which inquired into basically the same matter. We believe it is appropriate to defer the Government's final response until that report is received. I point out to the honourable member that since the report to which he referred was commissioned there have been certain significant changes in the general area. The former Labor Government of Tasmania requested the Commonwealth Government to place South West Tasmania on the World Heritage List. Of course, that has not been finalised and complicates the situation just a little. In conclusion, I advise the honourable member that in June of this year Mr Justice Mason, in a judgment in the High Court of Australia,

2164 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Questions without Notice

indicated that the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act and the Australian Heritage Commission Act did not have any application whatsoever to Ministers when considering Loan Council proposals.
BUDGET ESTIMATES
Mr WILLISMy question, which is addressed to the Treasurer, relates to the Treasurer's announcement last Thursday that he now estimates that the average number of unemployment beneficiaries will rise by 128,000 this financial year rather than the 63,000 estimated in the Budget. Does he concede that with this much higher level of unemployment the Budget income tax estimate, based on an assumption of no fall in employment, is unreal and that employment will decline? Does he agree that this means that receipts from both income and indirect tax were overestimated in the Budget? Will the Treasurer now advise the House by how much his revenue estimates are overestimated in the Budget because of his unreal assumptions about the level of employment?
Mr HOWARD-As I think the honourable gentleman would know, it is too early in the Budget year to be giving precise revisions of estimates of collections of tax. I think it would be the invariable experience over probably the last ten years, irrespective of which government was in power, that the likely outcome on personal taxation, provisional taxation and company taxation is subject to very significant fluctuation until about the early part of June or late in June of the relevant financial year. I remind the honourable gentleman that last year it was thought likely that the Budget outcome would constitute an addition to the overall deficit of about $1,OOOm or $1,100m. In actuality it turned out at about $640m. The principal reason for that was that in June of last year there was a very late surge of tax collections. Obviously if the number of people unemployed exceeds the estimate, all other things being equal, there will be a shortfall of revenue compared with the Budget estimate. But to suggest that in October one can make any assumptions about whether all other things will be equal is quite ludicrous.
GRAIN: STOCK FEED
Mr GILES-Has the Minister for Primary Industry seen reports that the Australian Wheat Board has increased the price of wheat for stock feed by $11.50 per tonne to $176 per tonne for October deliveries? Would it be cheaper for stock producers-I emphasise stock producers-if grains such as maize for stock feed were to be

imported and our own wheat were to be used for human consumption and to maintain our export markets? What difficulties does the Minister envisage if a decision were to be taken to import stock feed for drought and associated purposes?
Mr NIXON-I can confirm that the Australian Wheat Board has had to increase the stock feed price by about $11 . 50 a tonne. This decision by the Board came as a result of the refusal by the New South Wales Government to extend the freight subsidy to wheat crossing the Queensland border into New South Wales. This means that the increased cost of the wheat will have to be met by the farming community and is typical of the miserly approach taken to the entire drought question by the New South Wales Government. The Government this morning has agreed to the Australian Wheat Board having the right to import some wheat for the purpose of stock feeding, should that become necessary. There is already a capacity for other grains to be imported. I understand approval has already been given for some 35,000 tonnes of sorghum to come into the country. This will be brought in by private people for the purpose of stock feed.
I cannot tell the honourable member what the final price would be for imported grains or whether that price would be cheaper than the feed wheat price. Only time will tell. This will depend on the circumstances of, firstly, the cost from the importing country and, secondly, the freight cost and the handling charges added to it. We made available all these flexibilities for the Wheat Board to ensure that it could meet the obligation placed on it, that is, that there be enough feed grains in the country to feed the nation's drought ridden stock.
UNEMPLOYMENT LEVELS
Mr HAWKE-I remind the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations of the Prime Minister's statement on 30 April 1981 announcing the termination of the regular collection of the Commonwealth Employment Service unemployment registration statistics. The Prime Minister said:
More reliable information on unemployment levels will continue to be available through the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
I further remind the Minister of the Treasurer's answer to me last Thursday, which raises some questions about the complete reliability of the Australian Bureau of Statistics unemployment data. Does the Minister agree that while the CES figures are not an absolutely accurate reflection of the unemployment levels, they would serve as a

Questions without Notice

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2165

useful adjunct to an understanding of the dimensions of this grave problem and are particularly vital for these purposes at a regional level, which is totally uncovered by the ABS statistics? Finally, in the light of these facts, does he agree that it would be highly desirable to reintroduce the regular collection and publication by the CES of persons registered as unemployed? Will he therefore take steps to secure the authority of Cabinet to review the short-sighted decision of April 1981 ?
Mr MACPHEE-Some time ago a couple of State Ministers approached me with a similar request. I then asked the Department to have a look at the defects that were apparent in the CES stock figures to see whether they could be rectified so that the figures could be more useful than they were at the time of the Cabinet decision. I have not yet received that report, but I acknowledge that if the figures could be made more useful and more accurate, they could be of some value for regional planning purposes although I must say I do not concede the point that the ABS figures have the defects to which the honourable member has referred.
In respect of the CES figures, one of the problems is that people register many times at different offices in their search for work. Sometimes when they have found a job they then do not de-register and the figures can be very misleading. They were used, dare I say, for political purposes in a way which was very misleading and demoralising to the public. In respect of the administrative time involved--
Opposition members-Ha, ha!
Mr MACPHEE-Honourable members opposite can laugh at that but that was a very serious proposition. The administrative arrangements also were quite expensive. I have asked the Department to carry out that review. I am not giving an undertaking that the review will recommend that the matter be taken to Cabinet. If I find the wishes of the State Ministers and the honourable member can be met, I will take the matter to Cabinet and let the honourable member know the outcome. Perhaps I should say that we have already decided to release what are called flow figures which are available through certain CES offices. They are also of some value. They are available to honourable members, if they wish to seek them, from the Department. In the meantime the review is under way. It will not be very long before it is completed, and I will take it to Cabinet if that seems appropriate.

DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Rocher having addressed a question to the Minister for Health-
Mr SPEAKER-Before I call the Minister for Health I indicate to him that the first two parts of the question are not necessarily to be answered. It is a false proposition to ask a question based on a newspaper article and then ask whether the newspaper article is correct. However, the third part of the question is something for which the Minister is responsible. I call upon him to answer that part.
Dr KlugmanMr Speaker, I raise a point of order. In view of your ruling I put to you that the third part of the question is out of order also because there is a Bill before the House at the present time dealing particularly with that matter.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman's point of order is that the question is anticipating the debate. I uphold the point of order.
HEALTH INSURANCE REBATES
Dr BLEWETT-I refer the Treasurer to the fact that in official Budget Papers the Government has already given three quite different estimates of the revenue forgone in 1982-83 for health insurance rebates. In the Budget Papers for 1981-82 the estimate was $600m. In March 1982, when seeking to discredit Labor's health scheme, the official estimate was reduced to $470m. The most recent official estimate is $506m. Is that last figure likely to be any less rubbery than the preceding two estimates?
Mr HOWARD-It is true that those three different figures have been given. It is equally true that there is a very good reason that those figures should be different. The first of them represented an attempt to estimate the cost of an entirely new tax concession. The data base available was, therefore, limited by the fact that there had not before been a tax rebate for health purposes of that kind. The subsequent figures have been developed in the light of greater experience with the operation of that levy. To suggest that those three different figures in any way represent any kind of rubberiness or misleading of the House is absolute nonsense.
SUGAR: EXPORTS
Mr MILLAR-I direct my question to the Minister for Trade and Resources. Is it a fact that current world agricultural prices are threatening the prospects for Australian rural exporters? Do European Economic Community policies providing for the disposal of surpluses at dumped prices

2166 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Questions without Notice

on world markets contribute to that threat, especially for the sugar industry? What is the Government doing to improve the outlook for Australian sugar exports?
Mr ANTHONY-As I have stated before in this House, Australia, along with other countries, is very concerned with the increase in production of the EEC and the surpluses which are now being put on to the world market. Indeed, the subsidy contribution of the EEC governments is becoming quite enormous. In the last five years the direct export subsidies have gone from $7 billion to $14 billion. Production subsidies within the EEC member countries bring the total figure this year up to an estimated $30 billion. It is against this situation that other agricultural countries are having to compete.
If I could use one example, the sugar industry is feeling the impact probably more than any other industry. This year in the EEC's Budget there is a figure of $1.2 billion for sugar restitution payments. I believe the amount will be considerably higher than that because of the very low world prices that EEC exports have created. Within a decade the EEC has gone from being a net importer of sugar to being the world's largest exporter to the free market for sugar. It seems crazy and contrary that the EEC is encouraging increased production, producing surpluses and then dumping those surpluses on the world market with a restitution pricing arrangement to bring the price up to that within the EEC. So the more sugar that it puts on the world market, the more it depresses the world market and the more restitution payments have to be made to equalise it. With the world price now being below 6c, it seems an impossible situation for normal sugar producers to have to compete against.
Australia has joined with nine other sugar producing countries to protest before the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade about this behaviour. I add that the other nine countries are all developing countries. Because of a series of legal procedures we have found it very hard to come to grips with the problem. Under the existing rules of GATT, particularly those relating to subsidies, it is very hard to get any redress of the situation. This is one of the matters that we will be considering at the ministerial discussions this year. The international trade of agricultural commodities is in an uncertain situation largely because of the practices that the EEC countries have introduced through the Common Agricultural Policy.
TAX EVASION
Mr HOWE-I remind the Treasurer of the Budget estimate of $225m expected to be raised in

1982-83 by the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Bills. Has the redrafting and associated delay in implementation of that legislation caused the Government to expect a lower recoupment of evaded company tax in 1982-83? If so, what is the new estimate?
Mr HOWARD-I shall be in a position, when the legislation goes through, to provide the House with any revision that the Government then believes will be necessary regarding that particular estimate.
AUSTRALIAN PAPER MANUFACTURERS LTD
Mr GOODLUCK-Is the Minister for Industry and Commerce aware that Australian Paper Manufacturers Ltd has announced its intention to close its mill at Geeveston near Hobart in Tasmania? What action has the Government taken in respect of this proposed closure?
Mr PEACOCK-Naturally I am aware of the matter, having had a discussion with the honourable member. The action that the Government has taken goes back to last Thursday when the Premier first contacted me about the matter. He had been advised on Wednesday afternoon that the company intended to close the plant and was likely to close it the following day. As a consequence of discussions between the Premier and me, and between the managing director of APM and me, and, in particular, the Minister for the Capital Territory, in his capacity as Minister assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce, who spoke with the chairman of the company, discussions were arranged for Friday of last week. The Premier met company representatives and they agreed to defer the closure for a month to allow further discussions to occur between the Commonwealth Government, the Tasmanian Government and the company. Naturally we regard the matter as very serious indeed and look forward to discussions arranged as a result of the consultations held on Friday.
COMPANY TAX
Mr ARMITAGE-Has the Treasurer's attention been drawn to the survey of corporate profits for 1981-82 in last Friday's Age newspaper? Is it a fact that the survey shows that company tax paid in 1982-83 by the top third of the corporate sector will fall by 12.5 per cent? Is it also a fact that if such a trend holds for the corporate sector as a whole, company tax receipts in 1982-83 will be up to $600m below the Budget estimate, depending on amounts recovered through anti-evasion and anti-avoidance measures?

Questions without Notice

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2167

Mr HOWARD--I am aware of the survey. I say to the honourable gentleman that in a number of respects it tallies very much with the experi.ence of the Australian Taxation Office in putting together the estimates for this year's Budget. There are, however, in a number of respects a couple of differences. For example, according to the advice I have received the survey referred to in the Age report did not make any representative allowance for new companies or for companies previously being unprofitable returning to profitability in 1981-82. I also inform the honourable gentleman that I have recently been advised by my Department that the Australian Taxation Office has reworked its Budget time estimate and at this stage has no reason to suggest that that estimate should be altered.
SOUTH WEST TASMANIA
Mr GROOM-I ask the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment whether it is true that he and other senior Government Ministers have repeatedly said that any decision to construct a dam in South West Tasmania must be made by the Government of Tasmania on behalf of the people of Tasmania and that it is not a matter for the Commonwealth? Is the Minister aware that in a referendum and at a State election the people of Tasmania have given a clear directive to their Government to proceed with the construction of adam?
Mr Barry Jones-A choice of 'yes' or 'yes'. That was not a proper referendum?
Mr GROOM-I will start that part of the question again. Is the Minister aware that in a referendum and at a State election the people of Tasmania have given a clear directive to their Government to proceed with the construction of a dam and that the enabling legislation was supported by 51 of the 54 members of the Tasmanian Parliament? Has the Minister received reports that the Tasmanian people, the Tasmanian Parliament, the Tasmanian Government and the five Tasmanian representatives in this House will fight hard for their State if there is any attempt to interfere in the internal affairs of Tasmania? Finally, does the Minister still hold to the view that the dam question is for Tasmanians to decide? I want a clear answer-yes or no.
Mr McVEIGH--Generally, land and water matters are the responsibility of a sovereign State. It is fairly difficult to give yes or no answers to four such long questions. I instanced in a previous reply the recent decision of Mr Justice Mason. I also remind the House that, following the nomination of the area to the World Heritage List, the

situation becomes a little clouded. The Government has sought advice from several legal authorities and is considering that advice. Legal authority is not always the only way in which a government makes decisions, particularly when we live under a federal system. Obviously, we would have discussions with the sovereign State concerned. In the case of Tasmania discussions have been held and are continuing to be held.
The second part of the honourable member's question related to a referendum. I have to disagree with my friend and colleague. The honourable member for Lalor interjected earlier and indicated that perhaps the right questions were not asked in the referendum. If the honourable member for Braddon checks with the Chief Electoral Officer in his State he will find that the view that won was that of the people who wrote 'No Dams' on the ballot paper, who voted informally or who failed to vote. They accounted for 49.28 per cent of the vote. The people who voted for the Gordon above Franklin proposal accounted for 43.41 per cent of the vote. I think that result clouds the issue. It is unfair to say that an overwhelming majority voted for the proposed dam.
In answer to the third part of the question, I noted in the Press last week that enabling legislation was agreed to by the Government of Tasmania. Quite obviously, as the honourable member for Braddon said, the Labor Party in Tasmania agreed with the Government that work should proceed. I think there is some conflict between the Labor Party in Tasmania and the Labor Party in the Federal sphere as to what should be done. If one has been in this place for a little while, one will be fully aware of the tremendous effort by its various representatives that is put into pursuing the objectives and aims of Tasmania. However, occasionally one might be excused for thinking that maybe they push it just a little too far. When, in a true spirit of federalism and cooperation at the magnificent Commonwealth Games in Brisbane, we wanted to make Tasmanians feel very much a part of us they reacted by saying that we had excluded them, whereas all we did was say 'We love you; come with us' and leave out Bass Strait.
FODDER AND INTEREST SUBSIDIES
Mr WALLIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Primary Industry. Does the $356m estimated cost of fodder and interest subsidies cover the liability likely to be incurred up to 30 June 1983 or the actual payments likely to be made before that date? Can the Minister state whether this figure will or will not be exceeded? Has the Minister received the Australian

2168 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Questions without Notice

Wheat growers Federation request for a 75 per cent subsidy on the cost of seed grain for the 1983 crop? Will the Government accede to that request? Will the Government also subsidise 50 per cent or 75 per cent of the cost of fuel and fertiliser wasted on failed crops this year?
Mr NIXON~I was able to hear only half of the question because of the rapidity with which it was delivered and the noise that was going on in the House at the time.
Honourable members interjecting~
Mr NIXON~The honourable member very sincerely asked a question so I ask honourable members to give me a chance to answer what I heard.
Mr Wallis~Do you want a copy?
Mr NIXON~ Yes, thank you; that would be helpful. I shall answer the various parts of the question as they relate to the core measures. I am not aware that I have received anything on the matter raised in the last part of the question. The second last part of the question asked whether the Wheatgrower's Federation had made a request to me about seed. I believe that such a request has been received, and consideration will be given to it. The first part of the question I was unable to hear. I have a copy of it now.
Mr SPEAKER~I ask honourable members not to interrupt the reading of the question.
Mr NIXON~Mr Speaker, I thank you for your courtesy and assistance. You are unfailing in that regard. I will repeat the first part of the question to the House so that honourable members may hear it. It states:
Does the $356m estimated cost of fodder and interest subsidies cover the liability likely to be incurred up to 30 June 1983 or the actual payments likely to be made before that date?
The purpose of the Bill before the House the other night was to appropriate $356m for drought aid. There is no fixed date of 30 June in respect of that. The final level of the cost of the drought will, of course, depend on, firstly, the expenditure and, secondly, how long the drought extends.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Tuckey proceeding to address a question to the Treasurer~
Mr SPEAKER~Order! The honourable member's question is out of order.
TAXATION AVOIDANCE
Dr KLUGMAN~My question is directed to the Prime Minister. I refer the Prime Minister to his recent strong statements insisting on extreme probity in financial dealings with governments as

illustrated by his recent speech to the New South Wales Chamber of Manufactures where he said:
. . . the mere performance of a legal obligation is not sufficient and that there needs to be an ethical base to business activities and to financial transactions.
I also refer the Prime Minister to a statement of 28 October 1974 when, as Opposition spokesman on Labour and Industrial Affairs, he said:
I don't know if you have your wives in the NEAT scheme yet, but you should have--there is no easier way of making $5,000 a year . . .
There is nothing wrong with taking advantage of a stupid scheme while it exists.
I ask the Prime Minister:When did he have his Charles Colson~of Watergate fame~like conversion?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER~A long while ago.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Cowan proceeding to address a question to the Treasurer~
Mr SPEAKER~The honourable member's question is out of order.
JUDGMENTS OF JUDICIARY
Mrs KELLY~Does the Prime Minister stand by his decision to ignore the adverse findings of Mr Justice Woodward against the Minister for Primary Industry on the grounds that the judge's determination was unsubstantiated? What measures will he take to ensure that others in the community do not suffer from similar unsubstantiated judgments?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER~ The first thing that the honourable member could do to make sure that people do not suffer as a result of unsubstantiated allegations in this Parliament is to see that the Leader of the Opposition does not make those unsubstantiated allegations.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Good luck proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Primary Industry~
Mr SPEAKER~The honourable member is giving information, not seeking it. The question is out of order.
TAXATION AVOIDANCE
Mr HAYDEN~I refer the Prime Minister to the debate which took place in this Parliament on the 12th instant concerning six companies sold to the Maher organisation in June 1977 in circumstances designed successfully to avoid payment of tax. Did the Prime Minister note that the market value of the six companies concerned, after allowance for tax liability on accumulated undistributed profits and professional promoters fees, was

Questions without Notice

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2169

$423,5 IO but that the sale price at $467,338 exceeded the market price? I ask the Prime Minister whether that is what he had in mind when he said in high dudgeon in Brisbane IO days ago at a Liberal Party breakfast:
If you have got something that is worth: $1,000 and somebody comes along and says I can pay you $1,300 for that, aren't you going to wonder whether something is a bit odd?
Does the Prime Minister still stand by that statement? If so, does he not agree that there is something decidedly odd about the arrangement I have mentioned which resulted in the avoidance of the tax liability on a payment of some $43,000? Does he condemn that sort oftax avoidance now?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition, above all his colleagues, has taken the lead in this place in making allegations about individuals-allegations which have been proved to be totally without foundation. He made allegations about Mr John Reid. The Commissioner of Taxation, Mr O'Reilly, indicated in the plainest of terms that those allegations were quite without foundation. Mr David Moore, who was a cotrustee with Mr John Reid, has also indicated in the strongest terms that those allegations are without foundation. He said:
. . . there's been absolutely no attempt whatever by Mr Hayden to find out what the facts are, no-one's ever approached me, and I would strongly resent anyone suggesting that I stand down because I know that my position is completely clear.
He indicated that the charges were totally and demonstrably false and that he resented the smear which had been imposed directly on John Reid and indirectly on him because he was co-trustee at the time. It is worth noting, I think, that the Chairman of the New South Wales Public Service Board very vigorously came to the defence of Mr John Reid. Mr Wran came to the defence of Mr David Moore and thereby of Mr John Reid also, because one cannot be defended without the other. It is time that the Leader of the Opposition was prepared to ask himself what this Parliament is being used for and what he is using it for. It is meant to be an institution that defends the rights of individual Australians. The Leader of the Opposition has used it to smear individual Australians who, upon examination, have been found to be totally innocent and, in relation to the charges that had been made, all of whose taxes had been paid. That has been made perfectly clear by the Commissioner of Taxation.
If the Leader of the Opposition has complaints to make about individuals or corporations he can make those complaints to the corporate affairs commissions of the States. If he has complaints to

make about taxation he can do that to the Australian Taxation Office. If he has complaints to make in relation to criminal matters he can do that to the police. It is time that he learned to accept the word of the Commissioner of Taxation. When the Commissioner says that there is no outstanding tax liability at the time of the sale of a company, when he says that there is no obligation under the recoupment legislation currently before the House, that ought to be accepted. The Leader of the Opposition is using this Parliament as a star chamber to slander decent Australians, and it ought to stop.
FISHING INDUSTRY
Mr SAINSBURY-My question is addressed to the Minister for Primary Industry. I refer to a decision last year of the council of Ministers responsible for rural adjustment that at some time in the future rural reconstruction measures would be extended to the fishing industry. In view of the present plight of the fishing industry, especially in south-eastern Australia, has there been any movement along these lines?
Mr NIXON-In discussion with State Ministers in charge of the rural adjustment scheme I made it plain to them that I felt it was competent for them, if they so wished, to use the rural adjustment funds within the fishing industry. One or two Ministers exhibited some interest in that proposition and others believed that there were complications that required further consideration. In the event, the fishing industry has had a general reference before the Industries Assistance Commission. One of the elements we have asked the Commission to look at particularly is the sorts of funds that might need to be made available and the method by which those funds would be made available to the fishing industry. Therefore I take it that most State Ministers will now be awaiting that lAC report before proceeding with handing out the funds.
TAXATION AVOIDANCE
Mr HAYDEN-I refer to the Prime Minister's answer to my last question in which he declared with some active passion that--
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Leader of the Opposition to ask his question rather than make a statement.
Mr HAYDEN-I ask: Does the Prime Minister recall a few seconds ago declaring that several people, including a Mr John Reid, involved in the disposal of six companies to the Maher organisation in June 1977 in circumstances which avoided the payment of some $43,000 tax liability were totally innocent of any criticism and beyond

2170 REPRESENTAnVES 19 October 1982

General

any allegation because of that conduct? I ask whether he recalls in his electorate talk on Sunday, 31 May 1981, saying:
We believe that there is no real difference between the person who finds an artificial loophole to slip out of tax and a person who falsely declares his income.
Why has he changed from that principle? Why does he now declare that Mr Reid and others who used an artificial loophole to slip out of tax and who would have been condemned by him in May 1981 are now innocent and beyond moral reproach?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-What the Leader of the Opposition says and the implications he draws are again totally false. Again it is smear, smear, smear. The Commissioner of Taxation has made it perfectly plain that at the time those companies were sold there was no tax liability whatsoever. That is the simple truth that the deceitful Mr Hayden refuses to understand.
CITRUS INDUSTRY
Mr HICKS-The Minister for Primary Industry is well aware of the importance of the citrus industry to the Riverina, the Riverland and the Murray Valley areas of Australia. Could the Minister inform the House of the most recent developments following the presentation to the Government of the report of the Industries Assistance Commission concerning the citrus industry?
Mr NIXON-The lAC report on the citrus industry has been received by the Government. It is going through the usual process of consideration by a number of industry departments. When that process is complete there will be a submission to Cabinet on the matter and announcements will be made following that.
REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMAnON
Mr SPEAKERI understand that the honourable member for Bonython wishes to ask for detailed information about the Parliamentary Library.
Dr Blewett-Yes, Mr Speaker. I seek information in relation to the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman puts his request in writing and hands it to the Clerk it will appear in Hansard and I will answer in due course.
I understand that the honourable member for Lalor likewise seeks information.
Mr Barry JonesYes, Mr Speaker. I also seek information on the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman puts his request in writing and hands it to the

Clerk it will appear in Hansard. In due course I will answer, and that answer will appear in Hansard.
I understand that the honourable member for Burke also seeks information.
Dr TheophanousYes, Mr Speaker. I seek information in relation to the operation of each of the parliamentary departments.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman gives his request in writing to the Clerk I will reply in due course and my reply will appear in Hansard.
OILSEEDS RESEARCH COMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 228 of the Oilseeds Levy Collection and Research Act 1977, I present the annual report of the Oilseeds Research Committee for 1981-82.
TOBACCO INDUSTRY TRUST ACCOUNT
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 7 of the Tobacco Industry Act 1955, I present the annual report of the Tobacco Industry Trust Account for 1981-82.
PIG MEAT PROMOTION COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 16 of the Pig Meat Promotion Act 1975, I present the annual report of the Pig Meat Promotion Committee for 1981-82.
TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE COMMITTEE OF THE AUSTRALIAN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- Pursuant to Section 6 (2) of the Australian Science and Technology Act 1978, I present a report prepared on robots. This is the first report by the Technological Change Committee of the Australian Science and Technology Council which was established in response to the Government's consideration of the Committee of Inquiry into Technological Change in Australia.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor)-Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence for a moment to ask whether, because of the importance of this matter, the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) could move that the House take note of the paper and that it might be set down for debate at some subsequent moment.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House)-I am happy to accede to that request. I move:

'Empress of Australia' Replacement

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2171

That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Barry Jones) adjourned.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PRICING AUTHORITY
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to section 37 (2) of the Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981, I present the annual report of the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority for 1981-82. The report also incorporates a report on the operations of the Authority in the period between its establishment on 26 June 1981 and the end of that financial year.
'EMPRESS OF AUSTRALIA' REPLACEMENT
Ministerial Statement
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) -by leave-Honourable members will be aware that the Australian National Line vessel Empress of Australia provides the only sea passenger service between northern Tasmania and Melbourne. The significant factor that has affected and will continue to affect the policies and programs of the Commonwealth and Tasmanian governments and the way of life of the people of Tasmania is Tasmania's separation from the mainland. This factor is the most significant factor affecting the Tasmanian economy, of which tourism is an important part. Consequently, the Empress is a vital link to the mainland for the State.
Naturally the Commonwealth is concerned to see that a replacement for the Empress provides the most economic and efficient service possible to meet the needs of Tasmania. We are concerned that as much as possible is done to correct the imbalance that has occurred because of a geographically imposed difficulty.
The Empress is expected to reach the end of its economic life by the middle of this decade, and the Commonwealth in consultation with the Tasmanian and Victorian Governments has sought statements of interest from operators interested in providing a commercially viable service. In this regard I have received statements from the Australian National Line, Brambles Industries Ltd, Celsiunator Pty Ltd, Tasmanian Shipping Services, and TNT Bulkships Ltd. I have made copies of the statements available to the Tasmanian and Victorian governments, so that the Commonwealth can consider them in consultation with representatives of these governments. Also, it is

intended that discussions with the shipping organisations concerned wiJI be arranged as appropriate. I expect that the outcome of these arrangements will allow the prospective operators to decide by early 1983 whether or not to proceed with their proposals.
While it would not be appropriate for me to disclose details of particular statements, I would nevertheless like to provide some general information concerning the proposals being advanced. All the proposals are for combined passengercargo vessels, and include services capable of operating on a commercially viable basis, without direct Government subsidy. The proposals would all cater for the maximum number of passengers currently travelling by the Empress of Australia plus provision for additional capacity to cover growth in demand.
The type of accommodation mentioned in the proposals includes some based on first class jumbo jet aircraft seating only, and others based on a combination of sleeper berths and first class jet aircraft seating. Services proposed vary from basic 'no friJIs' to luxury international hotel standards with a wide range of entertainment facilities. Cargo carrying capacity of the services proposed ranges from about 60 per cent of the current nonbulk trade between northern Tasmania and Melbourne, to over 100 per cent, thus allowing for growth in trade.
Terminal ports vary between proposals, the possibilities being Melbourne-Devonport, Melbourne-Burnie, Melbourne-Bell Bay and Westernport-Bell Bay, or some combination of these terminal ports. Three of the proposals provide for overnight services similar to those recommended by the Senate Select Committee on Passenger Fares and Services to and from Tasmania.
Mr Hodgman-A good recommendation.
Mr HUNT-Indeed. In conclusion I must emphasise that the Commonwealth Government's prime concern is that, as far as possible, the Empress of Australia be replaced with a service or services based on a sound commercial decision, rather than government selection. I am confident that this approach will result in Tasmanian interests being served in the best considered and most cost effective manner possible.
I present the following paper:
Empress of Australia-Proposed replacementMinisterial Statement, 19 October 1982.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (2.39)-The Opposition welcomes this statement because it provides

2172 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

'Empress of Australia' Replacement

at least some information on what is a rather contentious matter in Tasmania. It is a matter of great importance to Tasmania and its future relationship with the mainland. The service is a major sea link. The economic future of Tasmania depends upon the efficiency and the suitability of the service to be provided. From a number of aspects, however, the statement is a puzzling one. Firstly, it makes the profound observation that Tasmania is separated from the mainland. I think all honourable members would agree on that. It is short on fact.
Mr Hodgman-Tasmania is separated from the north island.
Mr MORRIS-Is the Minister disputing that?
Mr Hodgman-From the north island. We are the south island. You are the north island.
Mr MORRIS-It is short on fact; it is long on inference as to the future of the sea service and the nature of the service to be provided. I will return to that later. I would like to give a little bit of background to the provision of this service. I refer to the report of the Senate Select Committee on Passenger Fares and Services to and from Tasmania of 1981. Tht< thrice-weekly service provided by the Empress of Australia has been operating for some 17 years. There have been a number of studies into the provision of sea services between Tasmania and the mainland. A study was undertaken in 1980 by the Bureau of Transport Economics into the demand for sea passenger transport between Tasmania and the Australian mainland. It examined two main types of replacement service. The first was equivalent to the present service and the second was a two-ship day passenger service with a return night freight service operating between Burnie and Westernport-Bell Bay. The latter service was recommended by Commissioner Nimmo in 1976. As I said, the Senate Committee report was made last year. The recommendations of that report, referred to by the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) in his statement, were as follows:
. . . that the ANL replace the 'Empress of Australia' with two combined freight and passenger ships, one to operate from Melbourne to Devonport and the other to Burnie. . . . that the Minister for Transport direct the ANL to examine expeditiously the Committee's proposal for two ship passenger service to and from Tasmania.
. . . that the replacement service should be based on the following principles:
that passengers and freight are combined in the service;
that the main service operate between Melbourne and Devonport;
that the service operate overnight;

that the service contain a mixed configuration of berth and sleeper lounge-chairs; and

that the service provide accommodation for at least 650 passengers in one or more ships.

The report went on to refer to negotiations be-
tween the Australian National Line and the mari-
time unions in respect of manning levels and conditions of service and replacement passenger service ships.

I mentioned the puzzling aspects of the Minister's statement. The second last paragraph of the
circulated copy states:
- . . the Empress of Australia be replaced with a service
or services based on a sound commercial decision . . .

He conveniently did not define what 'a sound
commercial decision' was. Commercial for whom? For the people of Tasmania, for the ship
operators or for the national government? He
continued:

- . . rather than Government selection.

I do not know what 'rather than Government
selection' means in the context as put by the Min-
ister. That statement conflicts with his earlier statement as follows:

- . . the Commonwealth is concerned to see that a replacement for the Empress provides the most economic and efficient service possible to meet the needs of Tasmania.

That is a desirable objective, clear and explicit. The statement continues:

We are concerned that as much as possible is done to correct

the imbalance that has occurred because of a geographically

imposed difficulty.

.

Again we have to agree. If we contrast those two
statements with two concluding statements of the
Minister this afternoon, there are problems. In the conclusion to his statement the Minister seems to
be indicating that it is the Government's desire to
abolish any subsidy for the provision of sea services to Tasmania. The primary consideration will obviously be the profitability of the operator
rather than the level of sea freight charges or pass-
enger fares or the quality or suitability of service being provided between Tasmania and the main-
land. We are seriously concerned about that. It
seems to us that the Minister is saying: 'Here is a range of propositions-Melbourne-Devonport,
Melbourne-Burnie, Melbourne-Bell Bay and Westernport-Bell Bay'. They contrast with the
major recommendation of the Senate Committee, that is, the service between Melbourne and
Devonport. Some of the services-he does not state which-will require subsidy, but these can
be excluded. The Minister says, in another part of the statement, that there should not be any subsidy and that the replacement service should be
based on a sound commercial decision. As far as we on this side of the House are concerned, the

'Empress of Australia' Replacement

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2173

primary consideration has to be the suitability of the service to the people of Tasmania. Every action should be taken to ensure that the service that ultimately replaces the Empress of Australia provides for the continued economic development of Tasmania and assists to overcome the enormous economic abyss into which Tasmania has fallen.
The Minister's statement, as I said, does not provide any answers. It raises a number of doubts. The one clear thing that comes through is that no subsidy will be provided. If there is no subsidy, that means that the Empress of Australia is out. The Minister mentioned a range of services that could be provided-reclining chairs, various frills, luxury-type accommodation. Unfortunately, he did not go on to detail the companies concerned. I believe that information could have been provided. The ports between which the various companies intend to operate could have been indicated in his statement without any breach or loss of confidentiality, or damage to the firms concerned.
Let me for a few moments refer to the AprilMay 1982 edition of All Hands, the journal of the Australian National Line. In this in-house newspaper of the Australian National Line is set out the kinds of proposals being looked at. It is fairly easy to identify the comments of the Minister from this journal. ANL employed a firm from the Wartsila Helsinki shipyard to assist in the preparation of a statement of proposals which went to the Minister. In the statement put forward by ANL-it seems to be a very appropriate kind of service-ANL was looking at these factors. The journal states:
Wartsila are examining various capacity options ranging from a straight replacement of the 'Empress', to a larger ship capable of carrying up to 650 passengers and their vehicles, and with an adequate freight capacity.
Passengers would have the choice of cabins or ful\yreclining sleeper chairs, and family cabins would have private toilet facilities.
There would be public rooms which would include lounges, a nightclub, a disco, games and, if approved by the Tasmanian Government, a minicasino. Along with that would go the benefit of the 23 years' experience that the Australian National Line has in catering especially for the needs of the people of Tasmania and the ports of Tasmania. ANL has a considerable investment in the ports of Tasmania. The statement presented by the Minister, whilst it is welcome, does not set down any definite point beyond which the Empress of Australia cannot be utilised. My understanding even is that the Minister is talking about termination of service in the mid-1980s and that

the Empress of Australia could be pressed into further service beyond that date.
Mr Hunt-That is the end of its economic life. That is why we have called for the statements of interest to replace it to provide a satisfactory service.
Mr MORRIS-I understand that. The end of economic life, though, does not necessarily mean the date beyond which the ship could be utilised reasonably for the continuation of the type of service being provided. There are options. I am just making that distinction.
Mr Hodgman-This Minister has done a great job for Tasmania.
Mr MORRIS-I beg the honourable member's pardon.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member should continue with his speech and ignore the interjections.
Mr MORRISI accept your direction, Mr Speaker. I thought the interjection was productive. That is why I was trying to hear what it was. I thought it was intelligent. The use of the Empress of Australia could be extended beyond the mid-1980s. What the Minister has told us this afternoon has not included when that service will have to terminate, when he will make decisions and the nature of the service that is most appropriate to the people of Tasmania. We welcome the statement. It provides some information. We hope that in the very near future the Minister will take the opportunity to clarify the situation as regards the types of services being provided. As I said, I do not believe that the kind of information which I have suggested could be made available would damage the confidentiality of the firms which have made those proposals.
We on this side of the chamber welcome the statement. But we indicate that we will do everything we can, irrespective of what the Government's actions are, to ensure that the people of Tasmania get the most appropriate type of service for their needs. We will not follow the kind of dogma that has been set out in the last paragraph of the Minister's statement-that the Government's decision will be 'based on a sound commercial decision', whatever that may mean.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Mini~ter for Administrative Services) (2.49)-1 also make a few comments about the statement of the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt). I point out that the Minister, in making his statement, has been-as always-in very close consultation with me and other members from Tasmania to ensure that the spirit of the statement and the course of

2174 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Wages Policy

action that he had in mind clearly meet the needs of the people we represent. I accept the fact that the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) asked genuine questions and was not trying some mean political tricks to muddy the waters. It is not unknown for that to happen in this place. I accept the assurance of the honourable member that they were genuine questions. I want to clarify these points: The Minister has made it very clear in his statement that the fact that Tasmania is an island State is something which dictates the economic and social life of Tasmania and that the ferry service is absolutely essential to ensure that, as far as a ferry service can, the disadvantages of isolation are overcome.
The Minister has in the past made decisions which have been extremely beneficial to Tasmania. I talk about freight equalisation and the air-bridge formula, which provides for the subsidy of air fares to Tasmania. It is clear, given those two matters, that this statement is made in the spirit of those previous policies. The Minister, in the first four or five paragraphs of his statement, clearly points out the problems as they exist, that a ferry helps to overcome those problems; and that he has not ruled out a subsidy if necessary-I think that was the essential question asked by the Opposition member. Most importantly, the statement contained an assurance that no final decisions will be taken until the matter has been given full consideration and discussions have taken place with both the Victorian Government and, more importantly, the Tasmanian Government.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (GRANTS) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
WAGES POLICY
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's total confusion and absence of policy in regard to wages.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-

Mr HAWKE (Wills) (2.53)-There is a pervasive stench of decomposition and decay about
this Government. Amongst the many elements that have gone to make up this condition is the vacillation, now amounting to chaos, exhibited by the Government in the area of wages policy. I want to make it clear that when we talk about wages, we are not talking about something peripheral. In the last financial year, 1981-82, wages made up 56 per cent of the gross domestic product. They are in the main the only source of income for the great majority of our fellow Australians. If I can put it in economic terms wages are significant, on the one hand, in affecting the levels and direction of production and, on the other hand, in determining the opportunities for participating in the distribution of what is produced. That puts it in economic terms. If I put it more simply, in terms which I have consistently attempted to get into the consciousness of people engaging in discussion in this area, wages have a two-dimensional element. They are at one and the same time costs and income.
When one understands the foundational importance of wages in respect of both the functioning of our economy and the distribution in our economy of what is produced and when we understand just how fundamentally important an issue this is in that it is central to the welfare of our fellow Australians; it is legitimate to expect that this Government would have some consistent, discernable policy which it applies to this area-a policy which could be recognised by the parties immediately involved in the industrial and economic relationship, by which I mean the trade unions and the employers, against which policy those parties would be able to measure and perhaps even adjust their own policies. It is legitimate to expect that the Government would have a policy which could be adjudged by the electorate as to whether that policy serves the people's perceptions of this country's best interests. But against these legitimate expectations, both of the parties to the industrial relationship and of the Australian people, what government policy do we have in the wages area? We have nothing but chaos-a chaos characterised by diametrically opposed positions within the Government itself and those advising it.
I will spend very little time on the longer history of this matter. I simply recall to the House the promise and the commitment of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), then Leader of the Opposition, during the 1975 election campaign when he put to the Australian people what the policy of this Government would be in regard to wages. The promise he made as to the policy of

Wages Policy

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2175

an incoming government led by him was that it would support wage indexation. We know that that promise was smashed in February 1976 and that what transpired from then on was a series of representations by this Government in the national wage cases, in the overwhelming majority of which it argued against any increase at all in wages. I also remind the House very briefly of the events of last year. I have had occasion to go to them before but you will appreciate, Mr Speaker, that it is necessary briefly to allude to them again if we are. to try to understand the chaos of the Government's position in regard to wages.
On 30 April 1981, in the razor gang speech, the Prime Minister espoused the philosophy of the Government. He said: 'We want out of any government regulation of what happens in the market'. The Government abolished the Prices Justification Tribunal and watered down the Trade Practices Commission. Within a very short time the Government applied the logic of that philosophy to the wages area. It was on 20 July 1981, just a few months after that razor gang speech, that the Prime Minister threw up his hands and said: 'Well, let what will happen happen in regard to the transport workers issue. We will live with whatever is negotiated in the transport workers area'. In that context, just a few days later, on 31 July the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission abandoned the wage indexation system.
If we are to understand this issue it is very important to see what happened in the months after and what role the Government had in determining what happened to wages movements in this country. Following the abandonment of wage indexation on 31 July, with the agreement of this Government, of course negotiations began out in the field between the unions and the respective individual employers and employer organisations. For instance, we saw the negotiation of agreements for significant increases in wages in the transport industry and with the storemen and packers. I mention those two areas because anyone who knows anything about economics and industrial relations will realise that what happens in the transport area and the storemen and packers area will fairly quickly influence other areas of the economy. In other segments of the economy, such as the oil industry and the stevedoring industry the same sort of thing happened.
With that sort of thing happening in the second half of the 1981 calendar year negotiations were also in progress within the metal trades industry. Anyone who knows anything about this area knows that what happens in that area has a very

significant influence on the rest of industry. What happened? The unions and the employers negotiated an agreement. They went to the Arbitration Commission for the purpose of having that agreement ratified. It is very important to note that on 17 December the Government went before the Arbitration Commission, when the Commission was being asked to confirm the agreement that had been negotiated between the unions and the employers, and the Government did not oppose the agreement. It had the opportunity, if it wished, to say: 'No. We believe, according to our concept of what should happen to wages in this country, that this agreement should not be endorsed or ratified bY' the Commission'. The Government declined to do that. It specifically said: 'No. We leave it to the Commission. It can make up its mind whether it is all right to endorse the agreement'. It did that knowing that that agreement, together with what had been done in the storemen and packers area and the transport industry, would serve as a pattern and would permeate other areas in the economy. Not only did the Government go into the Commission and not oppose the agreement negotiated in the metal trades industry but also, in a report in the Press at the time, the Prime Minister indicated his lack of concern about what was happening. The Australian of 14 December stated:
Mr Fraser told journalists at his annual party at The Lodge that he was not unduly worried about the metal trades proposals or fears of a flow-on to the rest of the workforce.
Quite clearly we have the situation-without the possibility of contradiction-which this Government ensured would emerge by its philosophy, its actions and its inaction. After 30 April 1981 and 31 July the Government sat pat and allowed these negotiations to go on. It knew that this was what would happen but it declined, before the Commission, to do anything which would in any way stop the spread of these agreements throughout the rest of industry. In the national wage case earlier this year, after those things had happened, the Australian Council of Trade Unions suggested that there should be some conference before the next round of negotiations so that there could be an opportunity of seeing what would happen to wages in this country. A very specific proposal was made by the ACTU. It said: 'Do not let us let this thing run as it will without any form of direction at all. Let there be a conference of the parties with the Government involved so that we can get some sort of form into what is going to happen in wage movements'. That was the specific proposal of the ACTU. In the national wage case hearing this Government opposed that proposition.

2176 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Wages Policy

Those are the facts and let them be clearly in the minds of every honourable member in this House and all members of the public. Wage movements in this country during 1981-82 occurred because of the decision of this Government, firstly, in terms of philosophy, that they should be left to the free play of market forces so that those forces could use their power and influence to determine what prices should be. Secondly, having given its philosophical imprimatur to what should happen in practical terms, the Government declined to use any influence to stop the working out in practice of the application of that philosophy. That is how we got into the position that we are in now. At this moment if we ask: 'What does the Government say about what should happen now and into the immediate future? What is the wages policy framework of the Government?' there is as I say nothing but confusion and conflict.
The Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee)-I ask honourable members to understand this-says that he cherishes some form of centralised ad hockery in regard to wages policy. That is a lovely phrase which I think will remain with the Minister for some considerable time. Honourable members will be indebted if the Minister, in this debate, does us the service of explaining in some detail just what he means by the delightful phrase 'centralised ad hockery'. It may get down to centralised humbuggery. Mr Deputy Speaker, you will appreciate that I am not swearing when I say that. The Minister's phrase is that we should have some form of centralised ad hockery. What do the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Department of Treasury say? They will not have a bar of what the Minister is saying. I refer first of all to the Treasurer's speech of 17 August. The Minister was talking in favour of a centralised system, albeit at this stage centralised ad hockery until he gets something a little less ad hoc and a little more centralised. On page 36 of his published speech the Treasurer stated:
A more market-responsive system of wage determination could also help produce wage outcomes closer to the capacity of individual firms, and hence the economy, to bear.
However, it is the Treasury which is being much more specific about what it says the wages policy should be for this country. In the associated documents that were handed down with the Treasurer's speech on 17 August this is what the Treasury suggested should be Australian Government policy. I read from pages 52 and 53 of Budget Paper No.1. It states:
Of course, even wage bargaining on an industry basis
will not necessarily lead to outcomes which are appropri-
ate to every firm within that industry.

It was further stated in the Budget Papers:
A more decentralised approach to wage determination, which worked to reduce rigidities in the wage system by bringing the focus of responsibility for bargaining outcomes closer to the work-face and to the fortunes of the individual firm involved and its employees, should assist in this regard.
There we have the seeds of chaos and confusion. I believe the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations is sincere when he says we should have a centralised form of wage fixation. He is in favour of that. He has advocated that around this country. In contrast with the Minister's statement we have a Treasury and a Treasurer saying, 'No, we don't want a bar of a centralised system. What we want is one which in essence will destroy the influence of the central trade union movement and allow wages to be fixed according to bargaining at the individual work face, at each individual company level'. We could not have a great conflict of philosophy and practical implications than that which has been displayed between the Macphee view of wage fixation as a centralised system and the Howard-Treasury view which will not have a bar of centralised fixation. This is chaos and confusion. Neither the parties nor the public know what should happen.
We on this side of the House say there should be a prices and incomes policy which does in fact intervene a public surveillance upon the making of claims by trade unions and by employers in terms of prices so that we can have an expansionary economic policy leading to the creation of more job opportunities within a situation in which we will not have that policy frustrated by unduly high levels of inflation. It is a tragedy and a dereliction of duty that this Government has created this situation and that in the face of that situation not only has no policy but also faces this country with totally and diametrically opposed views as between the Treasurer, the Treasury and the Minister concerned.
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations) (3.7)-1 reject absolutely the actual wording of the matter of public importance and the suggestion by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) that there is any difference of opinion between the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and myself. I will explain why that is. Let me pick up some of the final points which the honourable member made. He referred, albeit in the last 15 seconds of his speech, to the Australian Labor Party's prices and incomes policy. We wait in vain for a detailed exposition of that. I will certainly give him and the House the detailed exposition of what I have called centralised ad hockery. But in fact the description of what the Labor Party seeks to achieve

Wages Policy

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2177

by way of a prices and incomes policy, and more particularly how it will achieve it, remains to be seen.
One of the weaknesses in what has been proposed so far by the Labor Party in respect of prices and incomes is the lack of what the honourable member for Wills has called, 'the influence of the centralised trade unions of this country'. As the honourable member accurately says, when I have spoken around the country of options for wage fixing I have spoken of favouring a centralised wage fixing system as a matter of principle but I have put certain preconditions on it. One of those is the capacity of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the centralised union organisation of this country, to deliver. Does the honourable member for Wills seriously say that if we had maintained a system of full wage indexation, that is passing on consumer price index increases to all wage and salary earners, that would have satisfied State secretaries of the trade union movement? Would it have satisfied Mr Halfpenny, who is a State secretary?
In both the employer organisations and the trade unions in Australia, for well-known historical reasons, the real power lies with the State officials. That is where the money is. That is where the membership pays its subscriptions. State officials tolerate this situation in much the same way as the colonies of this country at the turn of the century tolerated a Federal structure. They recognise the need for it. It was part of the charisma of the honourable member for Wills when he was President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions that the ACTU gave an appearance of unity and strength. In truth he knows as well as I do-as do all of those observers of the industrial relations scene to whom he has referredthe weakness of the constitution of the ACTU. It very largely mirrors the weaknesses of the Australian Constitution. As one formerly involved with him and as one who learnt a lot from him in the arena, I deplore that situation. I do not think it is relevant for the 1980s but it is a fact of life. This Parliament does not have enough power in respect of conciliation and arbitration and the ACTU does not have enough power with regard to its affiliates. If one wanted a demonstration of that, it would be the special union conference held not long ago. The Labor Party itself has had to make a number of compromises. Let me just refer to the ALP platform and what it calls its short term policy on the economy. It is not a strong statement but is a hopeful one. Paragraph 3 on page 105 of the ALP's Platform. Constitution and Rules states:

With the understanding and co-operation of the trade union movement, develop and implement a comprehensive, equitable prices and incomes policy, encompassing prices, wages, non-wage incomes, the social wage and taxation reform, which policy will enable sustained economic and employment growth to occur without generating undue inflationary pressures, and which will achieve a more equitable distribution of our national income and wealth, the maintenance of real wages and the passing on of the benefits of increases in productivity.
There, buried in the statement on short term economic policy, is an objective for the maintenance of real wages. As to the industrial relations platform of the Labor Party, paragraph 13 on page 151 states:
Automatic, full quarterly indexation of wages and salaries in accordance with movements in the Consumer Price Index.
So the Labor Party is committed to the maintenance of real incomes; that is, the passing on of increases in the consumer price index. One has to ask: How is it to be achieved?
Mr Hawke-What is the Government's policy?
Mr MACPHEE-I will come to the Government's policy in a moment. We listen, week in and week out, to the Opposition asserting that the Government has this policy or that policy or has not this policy or that policy, and we never hear the alternatives. I will come to the Government's policy in a moment. I will handle this debate in my own way. In respect of wages and working conditions, a statement released jointly by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and the President of the ACTU, Mr Dolan, on the Friday after the Budget was brought down, under the heading 'Wages and Working Conditions' stated:
a centralised system of wage fixation.
the adoption by industrial tribunals of a system of full cost of living adjustments will be strongly advocated. Where overaward payments exist, the Government will support the maintenance of those levels in real terms.
That is the statement, so it seems, of the Opposition. How will it be enforced? The honourable member for Wills, rightly, and to his credit, has pointed out that wages are a cost as well as an income. He has tried to educate the trade union leaders and his successor about the importance of looking at them as a cost as well as an income but he has not explained to us how he will control the State union secretaries or the Federal unions so that their members do not get something over and above indexed wage increases. We cannot, in my view, seriously contemplate a return to a full and centralised wage fixing system unless we have those kinds of undertakings. We have at the moment a serious crisis in the economy. This Government is of the view that what we need is action, not words. We have in this Budget responded to what the ACTU has said to us. We have gone

2178 REPRESENTATlVES 19 October 1982

Wages Policy

further than most economic commentators thought we could reasonably go in trying to increase people's real disposable income. We have looked at various bench marks such as the classification of fitter, which has been almost the most hallowed classification since that of the shearer. The average fitter with a dependent spouse and two dependent children and with the average mortgage and so forth will benefit very greatly from the tax reductions-the lifting of the threshold, the family allowance increases, and the assistance in respect of home ownership-to the extent that he would require more than a 10 per cent increase in award wages in order to have the same benefits.
We have gone a long way to meeting the immediate problems of the low to middle income earners. We have, as a matter of short term strategy, set out to restrain salary increases for the fat cats, as Mr Cameron once called them, the senior salary earners in the public and private sectors. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), Sir Phillip Lynch and I have written to industry representatives urging their support in this matter, and they followed the example which the Remuneration Tribunal and the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission set in respect of those higher income earners. This Parliament willingly set that example, and it has been followed elsewhere.
This is a short term expediency. The point about my reference to centralised ad hockery is that no one imagines that we can turn quickly to a really decentralised system. The Treasury statement, from which the honourable member for Wills quoted, does not suggest that we will move quickly to that. It merely says that, in the Treasury's view, that is a desirable objective. The Treasurer said-again I quote the same expression which the honourable member for Wills quoted-that we want a more market responsive system. That phrase is used in respect of the wages outcome, particularly over the next 12 months. As I recall it, that statement is on page 36 of the Treasurer's Budget Speech. That is entirely consistent with what I and other Ministers have urged: That over the next 12 months we get the lowest possible wage increase, acknowledging as we do that the Budget has done a great deal to assist people in difficulty.
Because of the ACTU's decision to leave the conference convened by the President of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, its decision to have an industry-by-industry approach, its decision to be involved in and have the carriage of those industry-by-industry cases, the decision of the Confederation of Australian Industry to do

the same on the employer side of things, and because of the need for the Federal Government to keep the lid on wages as much as possible over the next 12 months and our probable intervention in most cases that eventually get before the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, we have a highly centralised system. It is not one which I would advocate continuing, therefore it is ad hoc. It is not a national wage case, it is not an approach to indexation; it is an approach, however, to using the key industry awards. They include those areas mentioned by the honourable member for Wills: Transport, building-I do not think he mentioned building because that industry would be the hardest to control from the ACTU's point of viewstoremen and packers, and oil. All of those areas are areas in which the two peak councils, the ACTU and the CAl, and the Federal Government will be directly involved. If that is not centralised I really do not know what is. If it is not ad hoc, I do not know what is. I hope that is a clear enough explanation of what we are doing.
The Treasury has put forward a longer term option. Again using the same expression as that used by my honourable friend, anyone who understands knows we cannot by some ex cathedra statement suddenly achieve a decentralised system; nor could I recommend a return to a permanently centralised system without undertakings of the kind to which I have referred from the trade union movement, which at this stage, sadly, it is not in a position to deliver. There is no confusion at all. Treasury put a sensible option for the longer term. There are institutional and cultural barriers to achieving that quickly, but we have an industry-by-industry examination at the moment. What I would like to see for the longer term as an option would be a narrower definition of industries and fewer unions, moving towards industry unions in relation to a narrower definition of industry-much narrower than the current so called metals industry, for instance. Indeed, one could easily imagine a series of industries dealing with different metals, with different cost structures and with different capacities to pay at a given time, being involved. Then we might get not only smaller unions called industry unions but also an award structure to match, with no automatic ftow-ons. There would be no key awards such as those mentioned by the honourable member for Wills.
That is another option. It would enable the conciliation and arbitration system from time to time to decide to have national wage cases. It would enable the employers and the unions concerned, if they so wished, to opt out and to have differential

Wages Policy

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2179

increases in those cases and to have their own conciliated arrangements, sometimes partly outside the tribunal and sometimes under the auspices of conciliation and, in respect of those areas in which they could not agree, using arbitration. They could enter into no claims arrangements. That is a decentralised approach. We are not there yet and we will never get there as long as we have the automatic flow-ons to which we are accustomed.
I have asked my Department to conduct a long range review. It will take a year or so. I have spoken to my opposite number, the honourable member for Wills, about this matter, and from time to time. I will speak to him, to the ACTU and to the CAl about the findings of this review. It will eventually put forward a discussion paper at which those in the community who are interested can look to see the options for long term wage fixation machinery. In the meantime it is imperative that we get the lowest possible wages outcome over the next 12 months to retain as many jobs as possible and to set the economy on the soundest possible foundation to take advantage of the world economic recovery when it occurs. There is little we can do to influence our economy. The major area is wages. I hope that the Labor Party and the trade union movement take notice of the honourable member for Wills when he talks of the costs of wages and look at the benefits in the Budget for real disposable income.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (3.23)-1 support the matter of public importance proposed by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) concerning the Government's total confusion and absence of policy in regard to wages. I listened to the speech of the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee). For 50 per cent of his speech he debated the Australian Labor Party's policy rather than what the matter is all about, that is, the Government's total confusion and lack of policy. I will return a little later to what the Minister had to say. The matter proposed by the honourable member for Wills concerns the Government's total confusion. One could say that at present one influential group is sitting on top of one mountain and another influential group is sitting on top of another mountain, and they are throwing rocks at each other. The people of Australia, who are sitting between those mountains, have had enough; they are sick of these events taking place.
The avowed policy of the Fraser Government has been its fight against inflation, including as a prime aim the reduction of the real level of wages. When the Fraser Government came to power there was in place an indexation system designed

to maintain a real level of wages. The Government and the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission were immediately set on a collision course which has persisted ever since. We have even seen the complete collapse of wage indexation and we have seen develop the situation which was outlined by the honourable member for Wills. Quite regularly the Fraser Government argued against any wage increases or called for the discounting of the full flow-on to award wages of the consumer price index increases. The Fraser Government had no policy when it came to power and it still has no policy. It deliberately set about creating confrontation. Today we have total confusion and the absence of a wages policy.
I should like to comment on a few of the things the Minister had to say. He attempted to tell us that, because the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) and he have written to some of the larger companies asking for restraint on higher incomes, this is some type of policy and some sort of direction has been given. He talked about market responsive systems. What we really have when it is all boiled down, as I said earlier, are two groups of people on top of a mountain throwing rocks at each other. That is not a policy as far as this country is concerned. The original indexation package was designed to last for only a few years. Co-operation and support from so many parties with interests in so many matters could not be expected to last indefinitely. The 1975 guidelines offered unions quarterly cost of living wage adjustments, provided no party persuaded the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to the contrary on any particular occasion, and provided the unions confined their claims for other benefits to particular cases of substantial changes in work value and to national productivity changes.
But this was only part of a larger package which the Federal Labor Government at that time had put forward. That Government committed itself to various actions which would have helped restrain wage increases outside the guidelines, whether in the public or the private sector. It attempted to use the Prices Justification Tribunal as a means of getting price increases to pay for wage increases outside the guidelines. It was expected to recast personal income tax so that there would be less of the tax bite on wage increases-an argument that was then looming large in current wage claims.
It was also understood by all at the time that any fiscal measures that added to costs and prices would have a direct and rapid effect on wage movements through indexation. The first of the annual productivity inquiries promised as far

2180 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Wages Policy

back as 1975 has yet to be held. The quarterly consumer price index adjustments have become six-monthly. All governments at the time, State and Federal, supported the introduction of the guidelines. But the wage guidelines were only part of the larger package. The change of government in Canberra in 1975 brought new directions which virtually destroyed what the Commission had been depending upon as a supporting mechanism for the wages principle. The powers of the Prices Justification Tribunal were cut back. Full tax indexation was never implemented. When it was implemented it was only for a little while and it was then reduced to half indexation.
In any debate the public must fully realise that a centralised wage fixing system will work. It can work provided there is co-operation between governments and unions. When this country had the opportunity in 1975 and in the period following 1975 to put that to the test the Fraser Government virtually destroyed what the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission had been depending upon. We cannot have a situation in any industrial relations field such as that which we have at the present time. The Minister indicated quite clearly and the honourable member for Wills pointed out the differences between a centralised wage fixing system which he supports on the basis of what is called 'centralised ad hockery' and what the Treasury is pushing for, where we have some unions operating in what might be called the free market forces system. Free enterprise unionism is another name that could be used whereby those who are strong enough and who can wield the power will be able to extract from the economy a greater share, in the same way as do businesses which have the strength to extract a greater share, leaving those in the weaker sectors to suffer. How can we possibly have that type of policy in an economy such as Australia's?
Let us take the case of three families living in the one street~honourable members can find this in any electorate in Australia~who are all working at the same factory. Let us say one family bought its home 15 years ago and is paying it off at the rate of $10 or $15 a week. About half-way through the system another family bought its home and is paying it off at the rate of $40 or $50 a week. A young couple who bought their home, say, five years ago is paying off $80 to $100 a week. How can we possibly have a system whereby we have a free enterprise approach to adjustments in the cost of living? Of course it would be clearly shown that some of the people in the industy who are paying only $10 a week off a house~and some of them would agree with that

view~can afford it, and they do not need an increase in wages at all at that point in time. But the person paying the $80 to $100 a week desperately needs the adjustment to the cost of living in order to survive or he or she has to start cutting back elsewhere. Of course, when families start cutting back the economy starts to go down. We do not only have to have the Fraser Government chopping into the money supply. The policies of the Fraser Government in this country have forced families to reduce their demand for goods. That reduction has meant an oversupply of goods in the warehouses. It is reducing employment in this country. So we cannot possibly say that this type of free enterprise approach to industrial relations and wage fixing has any possible hope of working in this country.
I turn now to one other matter which I want to cover. I was pleased to see the former Minister for Industrial Relations, the present honourable member for Kooyong and Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Peacock), sitting in the House a moment ago. He is the man who announced his irrevocable decision to resign from the Fraser Government on 28 April 1981. He criticised the Prime Minister for his gross disloyalty and for his dangerous reluctance to consult Cabinet in an obstinate determination to get his own way. He claimed that the Prime Minister had cast aside the stability and sense of direction of the Government. The Prime Minister has certainly cast more than that aside. We have only to go back and read that resignation speech to see the type of approach that this Government and this Prime Minister are taking. The honourable member for Kooyong said:
Over recent months I have regretfully concluded that the Prime Minister is fracturing Cabinet government and the parliamentary system as we know it. Out system of government will operate only if there is a responsible relationship between the Cabinet and the Parliament.
I also say that in this situation of industrial relations it wiIl work only if there is a responsible relationship between the Government, the unions and the employers. If the former Minister for Industrial Relations can stand up in this House on 28 April 1981 and say that about a Prime Minister who is running this country it is clear why we do not have at present a policy of any nature in regard to wages in this country. The honourable member for Kooyong went on to say a few other things. He said:
This is another of the reasons referred to on the day of my resignation. Two things are relevant. First, effective industrial relations in this country have been put at risk by the undermining of the authority of the responsible Minister.
It is quite clear why people in this Parliament who sit on the same side of the House as the Prime

Wages Policy

19 October 1982 REPR ESENTATIVES 2181

Minister and who support the Government's policies have resigned, as the former Minister for Industrial Relations did. How can we expect to have a wages policy? It is no wonder, as the honourable member for Wills has said, that we have total confusion in the absence of any wages policy.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (3.33)-This matter of public importance is somewhat audacious. I suppose that it fits the reputation of the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) who proposed the matter for discussion because he has been known, I guess, for the way in which he has been prepared to attack matters in a forthright way, often with some other purpose in mind. But I am in some difficulty in understanding what purpose he is trying to achieve today unless it is to direct attention from the absence of a wages policy in the Australian Labor Party. Alternatively he is endeavouring to sow in people's minds that there is some confusion in the Government's approach simply by saying that and by trying to direct their attention away from the very clear statements that have been made by the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) as to the nature of the Government's policies.
I listened very carefully to the speeches made by the honourable member for Wills and the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) to see whether there was any content in what they had to say. I am interested in this proposition. We had a debate about this question of wages policy some weeks ago. On that occasion I had some comments to make. Essentially I could make the same speech again on this occasion. The honourable member for Wills wanted to give us a history lesson on wages policy in Australia. He ignored two principal aspects, one of which was pointed out by the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations and the other which the honourable member simply and conveniently overlooked.
The first matter that I think he overlooked in this history lesson was the importance of wage overhang as a result of the significant wage increases that occurred in the period running up to 1974-75. Increased cost pressures were of such an order that our international competitive position was being severely jeopardised. There was no way in which we could continue to index wages which had that very significant overhang present because the disadvantage that we had suffered as a result of those very heavy increases in wages in the period running up to 1974 would have continued and there would have been structural problems in relation to our economy. In fact the position is that after that wage overhang problem was

largely overcome we saw a gradual improvement in Australia's competitive position.
The second point the honourable member for Wills overlooked-the Minister has dealt with this-was the role of the trade union movement in the abandonment of indexation. It cannot be suggested, I believe, with any validity at all that
this Government is the only party that could be held responsible for the abandonment of indexation. This has to be understood. The honourable member for Wills is nodding agreement. I want to make it very clear-this was overlooked by the honourable member in his statement--that the trade union movement, in the way in which it bargained outside of indexation, played a significant part in undermining the credibility of our system of comparative wage justice. We have spoken about this matter with a great deal of pride in this country over a period. The fact of the matter is that it was not just the Government that was in any way to blame for indexation being abandoned. This cannot be sheeted home to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) or Treasury statements or statements by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). One has to look at the whole situation and understand the role of the trade union movement in bargaining outside the system for significant over-award payments. This has severely jeopardised the wages and the jobs of other employees who were not able to bargain outside that system because they lacked industrial muscle and industrial strength. Indexation was abandoned largely because wage increases were being granted in a centralised system on the one hand and additional wages were being granted to some people outside that system on the other hand. There was no way that system could last. The Conciliation and Arbitration Commission recognised that fact. If those matters had been included in the honourable member's presentation of the historical events it may have had more credibility.
The ALP lacks a policy of its own in this area. The honourable member for Wills and the honourable member for McMillan spent little time in their addresses dealing with alternatives, with what they would offer if they were in government. We can only judge people's credibility in these matters by looking at what they say are their own policies. I did not hear the honourable member for McMillan mention any aspects of the Labor Party's policy. The honourable member for Wills mentioned the Labor Party's policy in a one line throwaway comment at the end of his speech when he said that the Labor Party would pursue a prices and incomes policy if it were in office. To say, as a throwaway line, that the Labor Party

2182 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Wages Policy

would pursue a prices and incomes policy does not give any indication as to what it would do, how it would handle negotiations with the trade union movement, the way in which it would put that policy in place and the way in which it would work.
If one looks at the transcript of the discussions at the ALP annual conference one will recognise why the Labor Party spends so little time on this matter. I would like to draw to the attention of honourabe members some of the news reports of the rather acrimonious discussion that was going on in the Labor Party at that time as it endeavoured to get some remarks into its policy statement about having a prices and wages policy in the economic area. I have before me a report from the Melbourne Age of 7 July. The headline states: 'ALP backs away from indexation'. The article, which was written by Michael Gordon, stated:
The Labor leader, Mr Hayden, yesterday gave notice that a Labor Government may not support quarterly wage-indexation.
The shadow Treasurer, Mr Willis, said the worsening economy could make it difficult for the party to honour its commitment to maintain real wages.
Mr Willis said a Labor Government would be hard pressed to increase real wages, particularly for those on lower middle Incomes.
Some of the comments of the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Hayden, were reported. Mr Hayden stated:
'Now, I put it to you bluntly, the conditions of the economy could be, in certain circumstances--Iet us not hide behind the bloody bushes about this--that you could not adjust wages quarterly for a given period.'
'Let us not fiddle about with pie-in-the-sky, with airy-fairy declarations that make us feel good but in fact hobble us in terms of economic management.'
We had reports of the discussion in which other front bench members were ranged against that point of view and there was a very narrow vote in relation to it. Then we had the obvious contradiction in the policy in relation to the economy. A prices and incomes policy has been mentioned but in the industrial relations area it is suggested that the Labor Party could credibly hold to forms of quarterly wage indexation. The Labor Party's policy has not been made clear. The prices and incomes policy, if one understands what is inherent in the nature of the policy that I understand the Labor Party has been advancing, is that there may be some other trade-offs involved in encouraging trade unions to accept somewhat less than they would have otherwise received in the form of wage or salary increases.
According to an article written by Mr Warwick Bracken in the Canberra Times on 13 July, some of the items that might be included would be tax

reductions, increases in family allowances, and provision for health insurance. One item that had been suggested for inclusion was any saving that would be incurred from a reduction in interest rates on housing mortgages. I can only assume that that gentleman probably got his comments from discussions with Labor Party members or Labor Party front benchers about what they thought might be involved. One would readily appreciate that what the Labor Party is really talking about are matters that were included in this Budget. The Government, in responding to the suggestions from the Australian Council of Trades Unions in its pre-Budget discussions, had mentioned that these were matters that should be considered. The Government, as part of its wages policy, has emphasised its willingness to accept some reduction of taxation, some increase in family allowances-both were included in the Budget-and to provide a special system for reducing interest rates.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Acting Clerk--Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian postal service meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any reduction in Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward will destroy the concept of the national postal service and result in:
increased rates for mail carried outside the capital cities;
a reduction in mail delivery and collection frequencies in non-profitable areas;
the closure of post offices.
Your Petitioners therefore pray:
That the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will every pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.

Petitions

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2183

Slaughter of Marine Mammals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that:
I. Since the Australian Whale Protection Act 1980 provides for the banning of importation into Australia of all whale by-products, and
2. The Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the international banning of whaling,
3. Then consistent with (I) and (2), this Government should immediately legislate to ban the importation of all marine mammal by-products, including the harp seal of Canada, and
4. Through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly, the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an international ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that consistent with legislation on whaling, this Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products and support an international ban on slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross and Mr Humphreys. Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding of children's services which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years should be restored forthwith to at least basic funding allocated in 1975-76 Budget.
That in future Budget allocations for children's services be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen. Petition received.
Sex Discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) that the Australian Government signed the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women in Copenhagen in 1980;
(b) that the Convention came into force on 3 September 1981;
(c) that Australian women suffer serious disadvantage in employment, education, accommodation, membership of licensed clubs, provision of goods and services including services relating to banking, insurance and the provision of grants, loans, credit or finance;
(d) that this disadvantage could be overcome by 0) making
unlawful certain discrimination on the grounds of sex and marital status, (ii) eliminating discrimination on the ground of sex and marital status and (iii) promoting affirmative action for women in employment;
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament pass the Sex and Marital Status Discrimination Bill 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross. Petition received.

Proposed Student Loans Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the introduction of a comprehensive student loans scheme will:
I. Restrict Access to Education
People from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from studying by the prospect of incurring large debts. These people, if they enrol, will be forced to ama" loan debts. Richer students do not face this handicap.
2. Undermine the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme
TEAS should cover the basic living costs of students. Currently the scheme only assists 38% full-time students and the maximum level of TEAS is a mere $49.67. Government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced.
3. Disadvantage Women
Women students would be disadvantaged by a loans scheme as they have a lesser ability to repay loan debts, because on average women earn less and have a higher unemployment rate.
4. Disadvantage Mature-Age Students
Usually mature age students forgo income to study and already have large financial commitments. They could not return to study if it meant incurring substantial debts.
5. Distort Educational Choices
Mounting loan debts would force students into studying shorter courses or not continuing with post-graduate study.
6. Result in Massive Attrition Rates
Students will attempt to undertake extensive part-time work or overload courses to minimise their loans. Increased failure rates will result forcing students to "drop-out" rather than continuing study and increase their debts.
7. Cause Administrative & Financial Difficulties
Overseas experience shows high default rates will occur on student loans. Government money will be channelled away from TEAS to paying off banks. The government will also bear the administrative burden of pursuing defaulters.
Therefore, the proposed student loans scheme will have disastrous effects on tertiary education, which we believe benefits the whole community, not just the individual student.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The House of Representatives will reject the introduction of a student loans scheme. And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever humbly pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That (a) the export of live animals for slaughler ovef>eas and (b) the shipment of live horses to Japan sentences such animals to cruel and inhumane treatment in the export process and at the hands of foreign importers.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ban the export of live animals for food and allow only carcass trade.

2184 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Petitions

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were sUbjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(1) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the Government's failure to act to relieve the plight of many Australians who are being financially crippled by high mortgage repayments.
That we protest on behalf of all those seriously effected by the current crisis in rising mortgage repayments and those facing the near impossibility of obtaining housing loans.
That your Government's policies are forcing a downward trend in the percentage of Australians striving to achieve the "Great Australian Dream" of home ownership.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:
Resolve to demand immediate Government action to institute policies which recognise our grave problem and will preserve and maintain the "Great Australian Dream" of home ownership rather than continue to destroy that dream.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sand mining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is

urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Enquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
There is an urgent need that the Australian Government immediately upgrade the Regulations concerning exportation of animals overseas for slaughter and that there is unnecessary suffering caused to the animals under the present system.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The Parliament of Australia will amend the Legislation to ensure that the animals being exported be done so humanely and that, until this is achieved a total ban be placed on the export of animals for slaughter.
Further, it is requested that the export of horses be stopped.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the number of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose; and (b) the National Health and Medical Research council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Petitions

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2185

Broadcasting and Television Act
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That because television and radio-
(a) affect our social and moral environment,
(b) are family media watched and heard by many children at all times, and
(c) present too much explicit violence and sex,
they therefore need stronger control than other media and the existing standards need stricter enforcement in both national ABC, and commercial sectors.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Australian Government will amend the Broadcasting and Television Act, in relation to both national and commercial broadcasters, to legislate-
(a) for adequate and comprehensive programs in the best interests of the general public,
(b) for a 'Dual System of Regulation' enforced by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal by internal regulation and external control.
(c) for an independent consumer body to represent the best interests of the general public, and
(d) for immediate and effective penalties to be imposed for breaches of program and advertising standards.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHunt.
Petition received.
Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia, being dairy farmers, respectfully showeth that although dairy farmers account for approximately 20 per cent of the value of Australian beef and veal production and also export live dairy stock we have no representation on the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation or its advisory bodies.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act be amended to include a representative from the dairy industry on the Board of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, to be appointed by the Minister for Primary Industry from a list of names submitted to the Minister by our Federal organisation, the Australian Dairy Farmers' Federation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd. Petition received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders are angry. The Queensland Government plans to abolish reserves and give 50 year leases of land to the Aboriginal Communities instead. The Communities do not want this to happen. They want proper ownership of the land so that it cannot be taken away. This means freehold title.

With regard to the Aborigines Act. Even with the Act abolished, the people still want special legislation to allow community councils, elected by the people, to be in control of the management of communities. This can be done without any complications, and at no disadvantage to any Queenlanders.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government use their consitutional power to ensure that Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders are given freehold title to the reserves on which they live, and that they pass special legislation to give self-management to the people.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
Fretilin Representatives: Ban on Entering Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
That we strongly condemn the ban on Fretilin representatives entering Australia. We point out that this ban is preventing Jose Ramos Horta, Fretilin's spokesperson on Foreign Affairs and speaker at the United Nations from giving evidence in the current Senate investigation into East Timor.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Commonwealth Government take immediate action to lift its ban on Fretilin representatives entering Australia.
by Mr West.
Petition received.
Government Aid Projects to the Philippines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Federal Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we the undersigned Australian taxpayers and citizens oppose the present Government aid to the Philippines (80% of funds are for road construction in Northern Samar and Zamboanga Del Sur).
Recent reports released by 'Community Aid Abroad' and 'Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace' indicate that these roads are having no impact on poverty and are helping military oppression.
Your petitioners most humbly pray:
That these Government aid projects be stopped.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Willis.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of New England respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by-
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,

2186 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Petitions

(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency. and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially. publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Indi respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by-
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise. deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency. and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Brisbane respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by-

(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Wakefield respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially. publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrGiles.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Riverina respectfully showeth:

Petitions

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2187

That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commerciaI enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHicks.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Melbourne Ports respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.

Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Newcastle respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:~
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles Jones.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Blaxland respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:~
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

2188 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Petitions

by Mr Keating.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Hume respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:--
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lusher.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Calare respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by--
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of

the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Balaclava respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by-
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph servi'ce at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Macphee.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Burke, Victoria, respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by--
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia

Petitions

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2189

to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Cunningham respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by-
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natura! disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrWest.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Sturt respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by-
(1) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,

(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wilson.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of Queensland respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by-
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Cameron.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of New South Wales respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommuncations Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by-
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,

2190 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Petitions

(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Spender.
Petition received,
Advertising of Alcohol
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the citizens of Queensland respectfully show-~~
last year, over 3,300 people died on Australian roads;
alcohol is a factor in 50 per cent of road deaths;
alcohol advertisements do not show the perils of driving after drinking alcohol;
alcohol advertisements are glamorous and increase their effect on teenagers, indicating drinking alcohol as the social pastime.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will legislate to ban the advertising of alcohol from commercial television and radio.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite, Mr Ian Cameron and Mr Millar.
Petitions received.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas Subsidy
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Gwydir respectfully showeth:
That the removal of the current $80/tonne subsidy in the traditional LPG market would create significant economic hardship among consumers who do not consider conversion to other fuels either practical or desirable.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the suhsidy be extended for a further 3 year term from I April 1983.
And your petitioners as in duty hound will ever pray.
by MrHunt.
Petition received,
GRAIN: STOCK FEED
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek the Chair's indulgence to add to an answer that I gave at Question Time,

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)--~ The Minister may proceed.
Mr NIXON--In answer to a question without notice asked today by the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) I stated that I understood approval had already been given for some 35,000 tonnes of sorghum to be imported into Australia for drought feeding. I have since been advised that such approval has not yet been given but that it is currently under consideration. The required approval relates to quarantine provisions which are administered by my colleague the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton).
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO THE
PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY OF THE COUNCIL OF EUROPE
Report
Mr IAN ROBINSON (Cowper)-by leave-~I present the report of the Australian Parliamentary Delegation to the thirty-third Ordinary Session of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. I seek leave to make a short statement in connection with the report.
Leave granted,
Mr IAN ROBINSON-From 30 September to 8 October 1981 I had the honour of leading an Australian parliamentary delegation to the thirtythird Ordinary Session of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and to the annual debate of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development on the world economic situation. The primary purpose of the delegation was to attend the OECD debate but prior to this it had the opportunity to take part in a joint meeting of the Parliamentary Assembly's committees on economic affairs and development and on agriculture, to attend the Assembly's debate on the general policy of the Council of Europe and to have discussions with the President of the Parliamentary Assembly and with representatives of other non-members of the Council of Europe attending-namely, Canada, Finland, Japan, New Zealand and the United States of America-on ways and means to expand the participation of these delegations in the activities of the Assembly and of the Council.
The main themes and emphases of the debate centred on co-operation among OECD and associated countries with a view to promoting: Non-inflationary economic growth; the alleviation of unemployment as a major source of social distress; resistance to protectionist pressures and trade distorting measures, notably subsidies and

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2191

import restrictions; international monetary cooperation with a view to reducing the volatility of currency exchange and interest rates; the strengthening of education and training, including retraining systems to enable transition and mobility in the labour market; and the improvement of agricultural efficiency, particularly in the developing countries.
The meeting of the non-member delegations with the President of the Parliamentary Assembly canvassed ways and means of improving the status of parliamentarians and considered whether it was not now time to enlarge the scope of this debate to cover other matters of common concern to the parliamentary democracies and whether this enlargement of the debate could include specific problems of particular countries. This led to a discussion on the possibility of conducting a 'Strasbourg Conference' of genuine pluralist democracies concurrently with the meeting of the Parliamentary Assembly and the OECD debate. The President solicited our views and indicated that he would approach the parliaments of the respective countries to obtain their reactions to the conference proposals. I welcome the moves by the Council of Europe to expand the participation of visiting delegations and the proposals to give Australia a voice in this important international arena. Our 1982 delegation is, I understand, now in Strasbourg with a fuller opportunity for participation. I thank the Parliament for affording the delegation, comprising myself and the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), who I understand is unable to be in the House at this time, the opportunity to represent this House. It certainly was a very useful and rewarding opportunity.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
In Committee
Consideration resumed from 14 October.
Schedule 2.
Department of Employment and Industrial Relations
Proposed expenditure, $414,709,000.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton-Leader of the House)-I move:
That the consideration of the proposed expenditure for the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations be postponed until a later hour this day.
I thank the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) for his courtesy and co-operation in agreeing to a postponement of this consideration. It so happens that my colleague the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) is meeting a trade union deputation.

To accommodate him, the honourable member for Wills said that we could by all means postpone the consideration of the estimates of the Department. I appreciate his courtesy. It makes for a far easier running of the chamber.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Department of Education
Proposed expenditure, $604,713.000.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (3.52)--Last year we had the opportunity to consider the Estimates for all the departments by way of Estimates committees. During that process, which I think was quite valuable in a number of respects, we were able to quiz Ministers, to probe the Estimates, in some detail. That was a course which was not possible previously when we considered the Estimates in the Committee of the Whole. The Government decided that it would not pursue the Estimates committee course this year. I mention that one of the reasons why the Government changed its mind was that it ran into some trouble with the Estimates committees last year. Indeed, the committee dealing with the Department of Education last year did, in fact, carry a resolution which was critical of some aspects of the Estimates. This year the Government decided to revert to the former practice of considering the Estimates in the Committee of the Whole. However, the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) was co-operative enough to say at the time that the Government would be happy to consider in the course of the examination in the Committee of the Whole specific questions which honourable members might want to put to Ministers.
We are in the difficulty in relation to the Department of Education of not having the Minister for Education (Senator Peter Baume) in this chamber, and the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife), who represents the Minister for Education, is unable to be here this afternoon. I have, therefore, proposed to both the Minister for Aviation and to the Leader of the House that I have incorporated in Hansard a number of questions. The Minister has agreed that answers to those questions will be provided to me or to the chamber as quickly as possible. I seek leave of the chamber to have incorporated in Hansard a document, which I have shown to the Leader of the House, of four pages setting out a number of questions which were addressed to the Minister.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)-I am a bit unhappy about this from the point of view of the Chair. Has there been an agreement between the Government and the Opposition to accept a list of questions without mentioning them during the debate?

2192 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Sir James Killen-It would help if the honourable gentleman outlined something of the nature or character of the questions, but I understand he has discussed this with my colleague the Minister.
Mr Hodgman-~Mr Deputy Chairman, I take a point of order. I confirm that shortly before coming to the chamber, being on House duty, I was informed by a senior staff member of the Minister for Aviation that the matter had been discussed and that the Minister was content that the honourable member for Fremantle table and have incorporated in Hansard a series of questions which he has undertaken to respond to in due course as quickly as possible. Whilst not having seen the document, I understand that the Leader of the House has seen it. I simply say that it appears an arrangement has been made. Of course, it would be incorporated in Hansard and people could read it. The only difficulty is that those honourable members who may follow in this debate will not have direct personal knowledge of the questions asked.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. I will respond to the point of order, I accept in good faith that a commitment and a request have been made. The position of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman is a little more difficult. We have to ensure that debates take place in this chamber rather than speeches being incorporated in Hansard. I will allow that course to be adopted on this occasion, as long as it is not looked on as being a precedent. From the Chair's point of view, we have to study this matter a little further.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
Estimates of the Commonwealth Department of Education. Questions supplied by John Dawkins MP, ALP. Shadow Minister for Education.
I. Page I. Item 270: I:0 I a. How many additional staff are estimated to be required to administer the proposed student loan scheme?
b. What is the additional cost for the 1982-83 financial year?
c. What is the estimated cost for a full year?
2. Page I. Item 270: I:0 I How many Aboriginals are employed by the Department
and at what levels within the Department?
3. Page I. Item 270: I:01 What percentage of your department's workforce is
made up of women and at what levels are these women employed?
4. Page 15. Item 270:2:04
With regard to the proposed new expenditure of $625,000 on information and publicity
Is the publicity campaign to be based upon or informed by the results of any research into public attitudes or understandings?

If so, who performed that research for the Department and at what cost?
Will the results of the research be made available to the Parliament?
What aspects of the Department's programs and activities will be featured in the publicity?
Has the department chosen the programs and activities to be highlighted or was this determined in the government directive to the Department?
5. Page 18. 270:2:06 With regard to the sum of $100,000 to be spent employing consultants for a program of information and publicity, how many consultants will be employed for this sum of money?
In what field or fields do their expertise lie?
Are they to be employed as individuals or as a firm?
If as a firm, what is its name?
If a firIll, does it do other work for the Department or of the Government?
6. Page 37.270:3:07 (a) Will the Department continue funding any research projects which ERDC commenced funding, and which had a planned life beyond the end of 1981-82?
(b) If so, which projects will continue to be funded?
(c) If so, which projects will not receive continuing funding?
(d) If no continuing funding is to be made, which ERDC funded projects will have to be discontinued because of lack of Commonwealth funding?
7. Page 58 Item 270:3:17 Concerning the reduction of about $100,000 on curricu-
lum development in Aboriginal education
(a) what elements (or phases) of the former C.D.C. project on Aboriginal education have been discontinued?
(b) In deciding on what should be dropped, was the National Aboriginal Education Committee consulted?
8. Page 65 Item 270:4:02 (a) The Budget statements announced a 20% increase in TEAS living allowances for 1983. The estimates project a 5.8% increase only for the financial year 1982-83 which is much less than might be anticipated for a half year effect. What are the factors which lead to the estimated increase in expenditure being so low?
(b) The Budget statement No. I on page 84 shows 86,200 students receiving TEAS in 1982. The estimates state that the number of students assisted under TEAS in the January-June 1982 period was 81,252. What is the explanation for the difference of about 5,000 in the stated number of students receiving TEAS in 1982.
(c) Given that the Marginal Adjusted Family Income (M.A.F.!.) will increase by 11% in 1983 which will about maintain its real value and may be less than the rate of wage increases, what factors lead to the assessment that the number of students assisted by TEAS will rise by 2,500 in 1983?
(d) At what level would MAFI need to be in order for it to be at the same level in relation to average weekly earnings as it was in 1974.
9. Page 73 Item 270:4:05 (a) What is the balance as between full-time and part-time courses for which grants are being provided under Aboriginal Study grants scheme?

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2193

(b) What is the explanation for the approximately 75% in the number of grants awarded from 30th June to 31st December in recent years?
10. Page 137 Item 271 :3:01 The per capita grants to non-government schools in the
A.C.T. will rise from $I3.7m to $21.2m from 1981-82 to 1982-83, an increase of 54%. Will the department provide the Senate with a break-down of the figures upon which this increase is based showing the number of pupils on which the 1981-82 and 1982-83 grants are based and the grant per pupil each year as well as the effect of cost increases on the per pupil grant?
II. Page 145 item 278: I:? In August, the Academic Salaries Tribunal awarded aca-
demic staff a salary increase of 7%. The increase in salaries of teaching staff for the Canberra C.A.E. from 1981-82 to 1982-83 is 5.9%. Can we assume that it is not intended to fully supplement the C.C.A.E. for the effects of the A.S.T. salary increase which it is legally obliged to pay?
12. Page 149 Item 279: I:? The estimates for the Australian National University
show virtually no increase in the appropriation from 1981-82 to 1982-83. In the light of unavoidable cost increases which the University will face over the year including salary increases already awarded by the Academic Salaries Tribunal can we assume that the A.N.U. faces a major contraction in activity in the current financial year?
I 3. Page 20 I Item: Curriculum Development Centre. Why is not the Department of Education taking re-
sponsibility for the Curriculum Programs described on page 202 along with the residual activities of the C.D.C.?
Is it proposed to spend $24,800 on C.D.C. Council which no longer performs any functions. If so, why?
14. Page 207 Item 848: I:03 Does the estimate of $2,712,000 for capital works for
independent schools in the A.C.T., include funds for the proposed new third Anglican Grammar School? If so, what is the size of the proposed capital grant to this school?
Mr DAWKINS-Of course, I could have addressed the questions orally to the Minister except for the fact that he is unable to be here. In any event, the Minister for Education is not a member of this House. If the Government has decided-I know this is not a matter for the Chair-that Estimates committees are no longer to pursue the course that was adopted last year of allowing honourable members to pursue individual questions with Ministers, this is the only course that is open to us. Given that the Leader of the House said at the time of the abolition of Estimates committees that detailed questions would be able to be put to Ministers, I think this is the only way in which it can be done.
Having resolved that point, I hope satisfactorily, I will now address myself to a number of other matters concerning policy aspects of the Department of Education and, indeed, of the Minister for Education. I will refer briefly to the way in which the policies relating to the funding of schools have been changed very dramatically during the period of office of the current Government. It will be recalled that during the 1960s in particular and even before that time debate raged

in this country concerning the funding of nongovernment schools. It was referred to as the State aid debate. A number of people maintained that there was not a role for public funding of nongovernment schools and that the only schools which the Government should support were those operated and run directly by the Government. The Australian Labor Party was responsible for contributing substantially to the resolution of that particular conflict, although it has to be acknowledged that the debate was never formally or finally concluded. The establishment of the Schools Commission provided a basis for what might be referred to as an historic consensus concerning the funding of all schools in Australia. It provided a basis on which the Commonwealth could accept as its primary obligation the funding of Government schools in Australia and yet at the same time provide a basis by which all schools could be funded and, indeed, by which nongovernment schools could be helped to achieve acceptable standards in relation to the resources that they had available to them.
During the last few years there have been serious distortions of that particular process. The consensus which was achieved at that time has ruptured almost completely. The current Minister for Education has been largely responsible in recent times for aggravating the state aid debate. This comes during a process which has been continuing for the last seven or eight years. The elements of the aggravation and reinflammation of the state aid debate are basically these: Firstly, the Government has not pursued a policy of ensuring that the Schools Commission has balanced representation, a balance of interests in its membership, in a way which allowed its members to work towards the establishment and maintenance of a consensus. I am not saying that that has been the major influence, but it certainly has been one influence and has contributed to a lack of confidence in the Commission by at least some of the participants in that earlier debate and by some of the participants in the re-emerging debate. Secondly, the Government has pursued a policy of providing the Schools Commission with very restrictive guidelines in terms of what the Commission is able to recommend in relation to the funding of all schools throughout Australia. That policy has prevented the Commission from working towards the establishment of a consensus or compromises in relation to the funding of all schools. Thirdly, the Government has quite deliberately decided that subsidies to nongovernment schools should be in two parts-part going to all schools as of right and part, and only part, going on a needs basis.

2194 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Although the Government has never officially abandoned the needs principle, we now find that no school in the non-government system receives any more than 50 per cent of its grants on a needs basis. Of course, need was the basis on which funds were to be provided to all schools throughout Australia, but because of the unofficial abandonment of the needs policy we have seen under this Government that subsidies to the wealthier schools have grown one and a half times faster than those subsidies going to the poorest parochial or Catholic systemic school. This has contributed to a gross distortion of the original needs policy and has been instrumental in inflaming the debate over state aid. In recent days we have seen the Minister contribute again to the inflammation of that debate by criticising parents of children in state schools who criticised the Government in relation to the funding of non-government schools.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr FISHER (Mallee) (4.2)-1 would like to summarise briefly some of the major aspects of the Government's action in this current Budget in relation to expenditure on education and also, in particular, to summarise what I see as the Federal Government's priority in education. I believe its priority has been to provide young people with the sort of education and vocational. training which can best help them to find work. This year Federal Government spending through the Tertiary Education Commission will be $1,867.6m. Spending through the Schools Commission will be $1,003.6m, in total an increase of 1.5 per cent in real terms over 1981 figures.
Whilst spending levels have been maintained over the 1981 level and there is not extra money as a result of some of the election and Budget initiatives which I will shortly mention, resources will be reallocated between various areas. These areas, I believe, reflect the Government's approach to different priorities. Greater priority will be given to the School to Work Transition Program, the education of migrants and the handicapped. Action is also being taken to meet criticisms by the Schools Commission that secondary level education is preoccupied with preparing students for tertiary study. With a view to encouraging more school leavers to continue their education, the Government is promoting in technical and further education colleges the development of courses to meet a wider range of vocational needs. There is also a need, I believe, to expand vocational training for occupations which are skilled, but not always at the apprenticeship level.

The initiatives that I have mentioned represent the first step in improving the prospects of young people at risk, including those in school who are tempted to leave early and those who have already tried unsuccessfully to obtain work. An amount of $75.4m is to be spent on school and TAFE transition programs in 1982, compared with just $25m the previous year. The net effect of this will be to more than double the resources to be devoted to the transition program in 1982 compared with 1981. Therefore, the capacity of TAFE and secondary schools to admit students to transition courses will be greatly enlarged. The basic objective of these decisions, as I said, is to see more young people in the transition from school to work stay on at appropriate institutions to complete their education or training. I believe the Government has endeavoured to help the education system do a better job in servicing the needs of all children and in maintaining their interest in formal education, the aim being to improve the basic skills and employment prospects of young people as they leave the education system, particularly as the number of unskilled jobs in the community declines.
I wish to concentrate the rest of my speech in the short time in which I have to speak on some of the aspects of the Budget that are extremely beneficial for people in country regions. Of course, I refer to the very significant increases that have been made in the Budget to all student assistance schemes. Up to 12,000 more students will get financial help as a result of Commonwealth Government initiatives in the Budget when levels of student assistance are increased and means tests are eased. Those to benefit include undergraduate and post-graduate tertiary students, the parents of many senior secondary school students, Aboriginal students, and children whose homes are in isolated areas. Some of the new benefits include an increase in living allowances of 20 per cent under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme. With this goes an easing of the means test. We have also increased by 48 per cent to $6,850 the living allowance of students who win one of an increased number of post-graduate awards. We have lifted by 44 per cent to $12,248 the parental income on which the maximum secondary allowance scheme payment will be made for children at school in years II and 12. We have increased by 20 per cent to $871 the secondary allowance. The means test on parental income for eligibility for all other student assistance schemes has been eased by II per cent. We have also increased the benefits and changed the structure of assistance for the isolated children's allowance.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2195

I will broaden my remarks to include the Ternecessary for the Commonwealth, which is basi-

tiary Student Loans Scheme. Full time tertiary cally responsible for funding non-government

students will be able to borrow up to $1,000 a year schools throughout Australia, to apply more capi-

at a subsidised rate of interest from the beginning tal to them. As I have pointed out in other de-

of next year to help with their educational exbates, there are very severe income assessment

penses. Of course this is dependent on the legisprocedures to define categories of and appropri-

lation being passed through the two Houses of ate funds for non-government schools. I reject the

Parliament. The banks have agreed to provide up accusations that have been made by the honour-

to $50m a year in loans to eligible students. able member for Fremantle.

Students will be able to borrow up to a maximum

of $8,000 during the time that they are full time. I recognise the divisions that the expansion of

students. They will not have to make any repaythe non-government school sector can cause. It is

ments until two years after they have finished not good socially and it is not good for the efficient

studying and will have up to 10 years to pay off use of resources. However, as I said, I do not be-

their loans. The Government intends to subsidise lieve that the fault lies with government policy; I

by 5 per cent the interest rate charged by the believe it lies with the fact that so many teachers

banks. At current commercial rates a student and administrators, by their own negative atti-

would therefore have to pay 9.5 per cent interest tude, have convinced this nation, many parents

on a loan that he or she takes out. To be eligible and many students, that our government schools

for such a loan one would have only to be an Aus- . are not good. This is a very negative attitude. Our

tralian citizen or permanent resident, studying government schools are good and many of them

full time in a university, college of advanced eduare outstanding. Most of our teachers and admin-

cation or technical and further education inistrators are dedicated and professional people.

stitution. Students who will be eligible for benefits The parents involved with our government

under the Teriary Education Assistance Scheme schools have a genuine involvement and a desire

and other Commonwealth tertiary assistance to see that those schools and their resources are

schemes will be eligible for loans. Other students improved. This Government, by its action in the

will have to meet a simple means test. I mention Budget, remains committed to developing side by

this scheme-I hope the enabling legislation is side the non-government and government schools

passed-because I believe it is obvious that the system. We support the fine work of government

Government intends by this legislation only to inschools and the high standards set by their staff

crease and supplement the existing student and we will continue to do so.

schemes available. I believe it will have a ben-

eficial effect, particularly on those young people Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (4.12)-1 will prob-

who live in country areas or geographical areas ably disappoint my colleague the honourable

that make it difficult for them to attend tertiary member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) by not at-

institutions without living away from home.

tacking the Government too vigorously. It is bat-

tered enough. In a sense, the matter I wish to talk

In the last minute or two which is available, I about is not partisan. It reflects a degree of inac-

wish to make some remarks about the speech by tion in that there is no specific provision for it in

the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr State or Federal Budgets. I will discuss it under

Dawkins), who seemed to wish to create further the general topic of grants to education. When

divisions in the debate on funding for government one tries to discuss this subject with colleagues

and non-government schools. I understand the one finds that the Federal argument is that it is a

very widespread concern that exists in the AusState responsibility. The States say: 'The Federal

tralian electorate at the significant expansion in Government does not give us enough finance to

enrolments in non-government schools which, in carry out the programs'. I am referring to the use

itself, necessitates increased capital facilities and of schools as a base for community action and

also the development of many new schools. This is education. The honourable member for Mallee

occurring to a very large extent in my electorate, (Mr Fisher) showed that the Government's em-

as I have no doubt it is occurring in most electorphasis was on training for the jobs that might be

ates throughout Australia. However, I believe it is available and the School to Work Transition

wrong to suggest that this results from CommonProgram. I think a problem exists there. When

wealth Government policy. I disagree entirely one considers the economic stringencies and em-

with the honourable member for Fremantle on ployment opportunities which exist now I think it

this point. I believe the trend is in fact the reverse. is essential to get the school and community

Increased enrolments in non-government schools together to prepare young people for life by deal-

are due to ll: variety of factors which have made it ing with the things that will worry them when

2196 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

they leave school. In talking with a former colleague, Gordon Bryant, I found one consolation in that there may be a chink through which we can introduce such a scheme, that is, the regional committees on technical and further education.
I refer to one aspect of community interaction with schools and the education of children, and that is the prevention of drug abuse. It is appropriate that I raise this matter today because in Canberra, from Thursday to Sunday, a seminar was conducted by the Australian Foundation on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence about the Community Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention project. Community interest is being developed in this project. It may need government help, through the education system, because it is a school based project. In July I visited Washington and talked with officials, committee men and congressmen associated with the National Alcohol and Drug Abuse Education Program there. I think the best way to illustrate the program to the chamber is to read some of the factors in the program. The goal is to develop the capacity of local schools to prevent and reduce drug and alcohol abuse and
associated disruptive behaviours that are destructive to the individual and that hinder the learning process for others. Its basic premises are: First, that local schools are responsible for solving local problems; secondly, that the resources for solving local problems are at the local levelI will refer to that later-thirdly, that teams of personnel are much more effective in solving problems than individuals; fourthly, that local schools should analyse their own problems, assess their needs, determine resources available, gain necessary skills, develop action plans and implement them; fifthly, that people are committed to solutions they had some part in developing; sixthly, that problems and their solutions differ with each location, and seventhly, that parent involvement is necessary for effective solutions to student problems.
I think that illustrates what I am talking about and what is lacking, which is so much more important at present in view of economic and employment prospects. While the comment is made that the resources for solving local problems are at the local level we are talking about human resources. A government, in an education program, in a school-related program such as this, has to perform a function in the provision of seeding finance. To do this there must be some sort of national organisation which formulates policies and programs, gives leadership, trains the people who are involved in these programs and does spend some funds on monitoring how that service is being delivered. It is necessary with the training programs to set up training resource centres so

that the representatives from local schools and the communities they serve can attend those training centres and receive appropriate training in the techniques which are used. It is just as applicable to Australia as it is to the United States of America. There is no doubt that Australia faces a serious school-based drug problem as well as a drug problem in the general community.
So far over a period of years the impact in the United States has been this: The national program has established teams of school community personnel who are supported with training and follow-up assistance in every State and territory of that country. The total is four and a half thousand schools and communities and involves approximately 18,000 persons. The program set up by these teams reaches about half a million young people a year. The schools have found the programs to be most effective in reducing behaviour problems of all kinds including alcohol and drug abuse. Yet we have no provision for this sort of innovative program in preparing young people for life.
I will give an example of the sort of thing that I am talking about. I know that these figures refer to American schools but I think that every honourable member will admit that the circumstances exist in Australia in just the same way. I will give an example of what has happened in a couple of projects in America. In Salinas, California, a local high school which had a history of a monthly murder at the school-I do not suggest that we have that in Australian schools, but there is certainly violence-instituted a program to deal with the violence. The leaders of the gangs, the predominant mode of social organisation among the students-I do not think there is any doubt that there are groups within our school system in a variety of areas which are equivalent to thiswere invited to attend residential training workshops at the end of which they wished to have the responsibility and the power to deal with violent episodes in the school. Staff had to agree not to interfere unless requested to do so by the student teams. The result was a startling decrease in violence at that school and an unexpected, drastic reduction in the use of methaqualone, which is known here as mandrax and known there as quaaludes.
A number of other examples are given. In San Diego there was a cluster, a number of school integrated committees, which had a range of school-based activities which developed very effectively. The first was the Saying No Project, which was drug abuse prevention in the classroom. There was the Enhanced Family Relations

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2197

Project in which suburban areas are doorknocked in order to invite families to neighbourhood meetings for both parents and children. Anyone associated with our school system knows how important it is to take active steps to try to get families in certain neighbourhoods involved in the school so that they know what their kids are going through. This particular group found that it was important to have weekend family retreats. It was found that the activities of this organisation resulted in a great improvement of the local parent and teacher associations whereby they have developed a louder and clearer voice in their schools' affairs. The group set up Coping with Kids sessions which have been extremely popular, many groups continuing as support groups after the formal sessions have finished. As I say, I think governments-both Federal and State--for some time should be attacked for not allowing appropriate seeding finance and for forgetting that an important part of the educational process is to have the school as a community centre, integrated with the community and the real life that goes on in that community.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (4.22)-1 will concentrate on what these estimates provide for schools on the 3.9 per cent real increase for all schools and the 2 per cent real increase for government schools' current expenditure. I do this because there is a good deal of confusion in this area, some of it, it is pretty obvious, being deliberately cultivated. Let us take a recent statement on the funding of schools by the New South Wales Minister for Education, Mr Mulock. It was made in a Press release on 10 September 1982 and is typical of the distortions that confuse discussions of this subject. The New South Wales Minister said that there had been a transfer of funds away from government to non-government schools. This is wrong in every detail as these estimates show.
There are two basic facts about our schools as far as funding is concerned in recent years. Public spending on both government and nongovernment schools has risen dramatically but the disparity in resources between the two systemsgovernment and non-government-remains enormous. There is an enormous disparity in our proclaimed fair, egalitarian and democratic society. A student at a government school has spent on him more than double the amount of public funds-over $1,000 a year more per studentthan a student in a non-government school gets. Another way of putting it is that most of the 23

per cent of all students are in schools with resources about 30 per cent below those of government schools. This disparity, this inequality, between government and non-government schools, is one of the main objects of Commonwealth concern in education. The disparity must be reduced and is being reduced. There should be no misunderstanding about it. The Commonwealth-it does not matter whether we have a Liberal or a Labor governmenthas always regarded its role in relation to funding government schools as topping up what the State provides. The Commonwealth is topping up more and more because of its commitment to the state school system. But the State governments still provide the overwhelming bulk of the finance for state schools. Ever since the Commonwealth Government, be it Liberal or Labor, has been in the field of funding schools it has always given more to non-government schools because, as I say, it is concerned to reduce the inequality in the treatment of our school students. In short, the State funds government schools; the Commonwealth tops that up. The State gives a very small percentage of its funds to nongovernment schools and the Commonwealth gives a lot more.
There is nothing magical about this division of labour; it is not holy writ. Of course, we could change it. If the States, instead of spending 5 per cent of their school budgets on non-government school students, were to increase that percentage dramatically the Commonwealth contribution would come down dramatically. But frankly, I do not see that happening. The Commonwealth could massively increase its grant to the States of money tied to spending on government schoolssay by $600m a year-and accordingly reduce, by the same amount, the general untied revenue it returns to the States. Some State Ministers of Education might welcome that but I do not think that many State Treasurers would. That is the situation of the division of funding between the States and the Commonwealth that we work under.
I will now come to details. The Commonwealth has constantly and annually increased in real terms its spending on government schools because of its fundamental commitment to them. Commonwealth recurrent funding of government schools has gone up in real terms by between 3 per cent and 4 per cent in everyone of the past seven years, by more than 20 per cent in real terms since 1976 and by 2 per cent in these estimates. These are the facts. This is what the New South Wales Minister, whom I referred to earlier, completely distorts or totally misunderstands. He misunderstands the meaning of the figures from the Commonwealth Schools Commission which he quoted

2198 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

in his 10 September Press release. He said that since 1976 the proportion of Commonwealth
funds for State schools had fallen from 61.9 per cent to 47.2 per cent. A proportion can fall while the total amount in real terms can rise. For example, if we have 60 per cent of $100,000 we get $60,000; if we have a mere 20 per cent of $1 million we get $200,000. The proportion is slashed but the amount received is vastly increased. That is the position with Commonwealth funding.
Total Commonwealth funding of schools has increased dramatically since 1976. The increase in expenditure on state schools is 20 per cent, even though the proportion of the total has fallen. There has been no transfer of funds from government to non-government schools. I do not believe there ever will be. There has been an increase in the funding of both. Of course, there has been an increase in funding to non-government schools to raise their resources closer to that of the government schools, almost all of which are of group one standard. The basic fact still remains, that most of the 23 per cent of Australian students in nongovernment schools work with resources some 30 per cent below those of government schools. That is not good enough. That is what the Commonwealth wants to do something about. The Commonwealth wants to increase funding of both government and non-government schools.
I will turn to the other source of funding to bring out this point. In particular I refer honourable members to New South Wales. I am not the least bit surprised that in that State the parents and citizens associations and the New South Wales Teachers Federation are aghast at the very disastrous education budget we have had this year in New South Wales. In a period of inflation of about II per cent the State Budget has increased recurrent educational expenditure by a nominal 9 per cent. In real terms the Government has reduced it by 2 per cent. The Commonwealth allocation to New South Wales government schools for recurrent expenditure us up 3.5 per cent in real terms-that is about 14.5 per cent in inflationary or nominal figures. The Commonwealth allocation is up by 3.5 per cent in real terms as against the State's reduction of 2 per cent. The position is worse in respect of capital works. The State Government's allocation is down 8.6 per cent or, with inflation, about 20 per cent. The Commonwealth's allocation is unchanged. To me this seems to be amazing and scandalous.
I ask honourable members to remember that the State Government cannot escape the charge of incompetence or indifference by saying that the Commonwealth short-changed it because there

has been a 16 per cent increase in Commonwealth tax-sharing payments to New South Wales in 1982-83. There has been a 16 per cent increase in general funds but a 2 per cent reduction for schools' expenses as well as a 20 per cent reduction for capital works. No wonder there are State Government decisions about which the P and C associations and the Teachers Federation are complaining. There has been the abolition of 72 teacher-consultant positions and the 20 per cent less replacement of absent teachers, not to mention the slashing of building and maintenance funds by $20m. 1 fear worse is to come. The main item of Department of Education expenditure is, of course, teachers' salaries. With funds down 2 per cent I fear the State Government seems determined to reduce the number of teachers in New
South Wales. 1 hope not but that is what the figures seem to mean. Even with the Commonwealth's 3.5 per cent increase in its allocation in this Budget to New South Wales government schools the state Government has cut spending on these schools.
To sum up: Commonwealth funding of state schools has risen by 20 per cent since 1976-by between 3 per cent and 4 per cent a year. Commonwealth spending on capital works has also increased so that it now pays for a third of the building and capital works in government schools. But the New South Wales Government is cutting back. If the P and Cs and the New South Wales Teachers Federation want to campaign on this issue-as they do and shouldtheir target must be the Labor Government of New South Wales. I welcome these Budget estimates for their increases to schools-both government and nongovernment-but I fear that some Statescertainly New South' Wales is one of them-are undermining the Commonwealth commitment to increase school funding by drastically cutting State funding. It was never intended that the Commonwealth should increase funding so as to allow the States to decrease funding but that is what is happening, at least in New South Wales.
Mr MAHER (Lowe) (4.31)-1 am pleased to have an opportunity to contribute to the debate in Committee on the estimates of expenditure on education by the national Government. My opinion is that these estimates are grossly inadequate. If I had more than a few minutes to speak I would deal in depth with the comments made by the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) but I feel there are too many other important issues to mention today. It is not my aim to deal exclusively with schools within the electorate of Lowe but essentially these are the establishments known to me, that I am invited to and

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2199

where I present flags. I am appalled at the standard of buildings and the lack of capital funding provided by this so-called national Government for the state schools, Catholic schools and private schools and technical and further education establishments in that area.
Despite great expenditure since 1972 many of the state schools in the electorate of Lowe are not stimulating education centres. Quite recently the shadow Minister for Education, the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins), and I visited the Enfield Public School. Not one classroom had carpet. It is an old building and the upstairs area appeared to be crumbling. We were quite worried about the roof. The safety of people using this school was even questioned. Even the
kindergarten classrooms had no carpet on the floor. The little tots had to sit on rough wooden boards. It is against all modern trends and thoughts that infants should be allowed to sit around and be taught in such depressing, old fashioned, weary-looking classrooms.
The shadow Minister and I subsequently visited
another state school at Five Dock which was almost as depressing. We found that all the infants' rooms were undersized. There was no carpet except a few little squares provided by the parents and citizens organisation. This clearly indicated to us the shortage of funds to the State Government for refurbishing and renovating state schools and, indeed, the shortage of funds for major capital works to be undertaken. I know the shadow Minister was impressed by a pre-school at Five Dock run by the New South Wales Education Department for 50 four-year-olds-25 students in the morning and 25 students in the afternoon. These children are taught by teachers. They are not minded but are actually taught. There is a system of teaching the children Italian. The children learn the Italian language. The school is truly a multicultural pre-schoolprobably the only one in Sydney. It is a very stimulating centre. I know the shadow Minister was very impressed when he visited it.
I find in going around the state schools in my electorate-for example, even a large high school such as the Strathfield Girls High School-that there is no money available to paint and maintain the woodwork. Within Lowe the school that has become quite notorious is All Hallows Catholic Primary School at Five Dock. The shadow Minister and I visited that school and found that the Schools Commission has rejected an application for capital works at that school. The school, 80 per cent of the students of which come from families speaking a language other than English at home, is unsafe. It has no fire escape. The only

stairwell at the school surrounds the tuckshop facilities, the canteen. This is the main centre and main potential fire danger area. Yet this school was denied a grant to refurbish and renovate and to build fire stairs and an administration block. The school has no parents committee. It is a school that is extremely impoverished; yet the attitude of this Government is as I have stated it. In June I invited the then Minister for Education and the shadow Minister to visit this school at Five Dock, the All Hallows School, because it had been nominated on Nationwide as the most depressed parish school in Sydney. Only the shadow Minister has accepted that invitation. The Minister has not accepted my invitation.
Mr Dawkins-They were all there during the by-election.
Mr MAHER-Government members were
there during the by-election, as the shadow Minister quite accurately interjects. In fact, the then Minister for Education called at the school uninvited to say that he wanted to look around it. I am disappointed that the Federal Minister for Education has not bothered to look at the school. He wants to see just the good schools. He is not interested in the schools that are depressed, run down and a disgrace to our nation. Even many of the private schools in my electorate are in old buildings, are built on inadequate sites and have limited playgrounds. Even at St.. Patrick's at Strathfield-a well known boys high school-the class sizes are high and the manual arts division is located in a converted garage. I believe that all the schools in my electorate, whether they are government schools, private schools or systemic schools, are needy. Unfortunately, time does not permit me to deal with some of the problems of technical and further education in my electorate. I believe the Budget to be inadequate. I believe that it is not doing anything to assist the needy educational establishments in the electorate of Lowe. I believe that in the near future we will have a Labor
Government which will put education in its proper place.
Mr FREE (Macquarie) (4.37)-ln the few minutes available to me this afternoon I wish to deal with the Budget's failure to address two important problem areas in education. These are the areas of secondary retention rates and tertiary participation rates. One of the major problems relating to retention rates in our secondary schools concerns the fall in retention rates for males. While the overall retention rate for year 12-that is, that percentage of students who remain in secondary school until year 12-has fluctuated around 35 per cent over the last few years, the percentage of males staying on until the end of

2200 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

year 12 has fallen quite dramatically from 35.7 per cent in 1972 to 32 per cent in 1981. This means that in the period 1976 to 1981 some 25,000 potential year 12 students went missing.
The problem of low retention rates is especially important in government schools. Whereas in 1981 the overall rate was around 35 per cent in the government sector it was only 28.5 per cent and in the non-government sector it was almost double-56.9 per cent. When one breaks up the non-government sector and compares the Catholic non-government sector with other nongovernment schools one finds that the difference is against almost two to one. The average retention rate in the Catholic sector is 45.6 per cent and in other non-government secondary schools it is 89.2 per cent. So there is a two to one difference between the government and non-government sectors and within the non-government sector there is an almost two to one difference between Catholic secondary schools and the non-Catholic secondary schools. Overall our performance is very poor. It rates very poorly in comparison with that of other member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Where in this Budget is there any stimulus to boost these retention rates? Where in this Budget is there any commitment to curriculum reform and to broadening the offerings of our secondary schools? Where in this Budget is there any direction of funds to assist schools with low retention rates? Those measures cannot be found. Where in this Budget is there any recognition of the need for education in the new technologies? We will not find it. In this respect I must commend the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) for his announcement last week of the computeach program. It is the Australian Labor Party's policy to provide government secondary schools with equipment for computer education. It will be a very successful policy with the honourable member as Minister for Education in a new Labor Government.
Looking at the performance of this country in the area of tertiary education, we are faced with figures that illustrate a falling percentage of final year secondary students proceeding directly to tertiary education. It has fallen quite dramatically over the years. In 1974, 52.6 per cent of males completing secondary education went on to full time tertiary education. In 1980 that figure had fallen to 44.6 per cent. The figures for females illustrate an even more dramatic drop. In 1974, 57 per cent continued, compared with only 40.5 per cent in 1980. If those peak rates had applied an additional 36,000 students would have entered

universities and colleges of advanced education over that period. Those students have been lost. Again, we have performed poorly compared with other OECD countries in the tertiary sector. Where in this Budget will one find measures to arrest this loss of talent? They are not there. One will not find in this Budget measures that in any way seek to address or even to recognise the great problems facing education in Australia today. The Government's failure to devise a set of national objectives in education, its failure even to recognise the potential of education to achieve social change and the vital role it could play in economic recovery, is a national scandal and a national tragedy. There is no doubt that many of those who would have gone on have postponed or put off altogether their entry into tertiary education as a result of starvation level tertiary allowances in recent years. While I concede that the Budget provides for some increases in student allowances-I fear that these increases are too small and come too late to arrest this trend.
In conclusion I wish to say a couple of words about the loan scheme. I hope that this illconceived scheme will not be operating next year not just because I fear that it will be used by this Government in the future as a substitute for decent levels of student allowances but also because similar schemes have failed so clearly overseas. Overseas experience has shown that there is very little prospect indeed of such schemes becoming self-financing and, in addition, governments which have introduced these schemes overseas have had enormous problems with those who have defaulted on their loans. For these reasons I commend the action of the Senate on the loan scheme and I sincerely hope that it will not be operating in 1983.
Proposed expenditure agreed to.
Department of the Treasury
Proposed expenditure, $392,451 ,000.
Department of Finance
Proposed expenditure, $49,789,000.
Advance to the Minister for Finance
Proposed expenditure, $125,000,000.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (4.44)-ln the context of the estimates for the Department of the Treasury I wish to raise a matter related to the issue of tax avoidance and evasion. I refer to the staffing of the Australian Taxation Office. I raise this issue particularly in the context of the Government's gross negligence of its duties in respect of defending the revenue. It has allowed to develop the most extraordinary explosion of tax

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2201

avoidance and evasion in the history of this country. Although other countries have their problems in regard to tax avoidance and evasion, I know of no other country which has experienced anything like what has happened in this country in the last several years. The losses in this country through tax avoidance and evasion have been enormous, running at several billion dollars a year. This is quite undeniable, and although it is sometimes protested by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and by other members of the Government that we are beating up figures and that these figures are implausible, they are in fact quite plausible. We have defended them vigorously on previous occasions. I am pleased to have available to me the endorsement of one supporter of the Government, the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock). My colleague the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) drew to my attention a pamphlet which was circulated in the electorate of Dundas by the Federal member after the recent Budget. In this pamphlet concerning the 1982 Federal Budget the honourable member stated:
Continuing action will be taken to reverse the trend of tax evasion which is losing thousands of millions of dollars in revenue each year from Government reserves, thus reducing its capacity to provide more services and benefits.
Of course we agree with what he said. I hope that no other Government members or Ministers will say that we are grossly exaggerating the extent of loss in this area. Quite clearly, the extent of the loss is believed by the honourable member for Dundas and doubtless by most other members as well. It is indeed a serious issue.
The McCabe-Lafranchi report and the Costigan Royal Commission report have shown in graphic detail how tax dodging has exploded during the term of this Government. The details revealed in these reports only reinforce other indicators of the huge growth in this area, such as the figures revealed in the annual reports of the Commissioner of Taxation which show that the number of identified tax avoiders has risen 26 times since 1975. That is quite an extraordinary explosion of identified participation in tax avoidance schemes. These reports also revealed deficiencies within the Australian Taxation Office in relation to its failure to follow up adequately a 1975 decision to prosecute persons involved in bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. Although I say 'deficiencies' within the Taxation Office I think the Taxation Office is to be excused in large part for any such deficiences because it was sabotaged by this Government at a time when the Taxation Office was facing the most tremendous array of

difficulties caused by this explosion of tax avoidance and evasion. The Government was busily hacking away at the staff of the Taxation Office and was reducing the number of persons to cope with that problem. That, of course, is an extraordinary course of action for the Government to take but it is undoubtedly what it set about doing. It set out to reduce the staff of the Taxation Office, to cripple it, to reduce its effectiveness and to reduce its ability to overcome the problem of defending the revenue, which of course is its basic task.
In this regard the Government was not unaware of the concern of the Commissioner of Taxation over the years about what was happening to his staff levels. He was saying in his annual reports, and undoubtedly was saying also to the Treasurer in less formal ways, that his staff needed to be increased and that he could not cope with the problems with his staff being reduced. For instance, in his 1978 report the Commissioner said:
The necessity to deploy staff for these basic purposes caused some curtailment of enforcement activities and this must be regarded as having brought about at least deferment, if not loss, of some revenue.
There is the Tax Commissioner saying, certainly in a somewhat muted form but nevertheless saying clearly, that he has not been able to gather revenue because he has a deficiency in his staff levels. Again, in his annual report for 1981, he said:
. . . resources employed in enforcement activities have had to be considerably reduced owing to the recent decrease in staff ceilings. The combined effect of this reduction and the need to deploy substantial resources to the investigation of tax avoidance activities has seriously affected capacity to detect and control tax evasion, and, as I have stated in previous reports, is a matter of considerable and increasing concern to me.
That 1981 statement is a much stronger statement and I think probably reflects the desperation the Commissioner of Taxation was feeling about what was happening to his staff levels. This, we must recall, happened at a time when the Taxation Office was facing this enormous array of tax avoidance and evasion schemes, was imploring the Government to take much stronger effort, and was furiously writing letters of request to the Treasurer-so far 18 requests from the Commissioner were published by the Treasurer-to do something about bottom-of-the-harbour schemes before he actually took any action. It was clear that the Taxation Office was battling against extraordinary odds at that time while its staff was being reduced. It is no wonder, therefore, that the Commissioner of Taxation was so concerned in those statements in his annual report. Let me look at what was happening to those staff levels. In this

2202 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

regard I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables which relate to the staffing level of the Australian Taxation Office.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-
TOTAL NUMBER OF STAFF EMPLOYED AT 30 JUNE EACH YEAR BY THE AUSTRALIAN
TAX OFFICE

Number of staff

Numberof
returns lodged

Number of staff per
'000 returns

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1878-79 1979-80 1980-81

12,401

7,733,000

1.60

11,870

7,917,000

1.50

11,841

8,128,000

1.46

11,802

8,254,000

1.43

11,910

8,405,000

1.42

12,323

8,487,000

1.45

12,311

8,693,000

1.42

Source: Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Taxation.

NUMBER OF INVESTIGATION OFFICERS EMPLOYED AT 30 JUNE EACH YEAR BY THE
AUSTRALIAN TAXATION OFFICE

Number of staff
employed

Number of staff per
'000 returns

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

938 1,024 1,028
974 937 1,013 983

0.121 0.129 0.126 0.118 0.111 0.119 0.113

Source: Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Taxation
Mr WILLIS-The first table shows the total number of staff at 30 June each year from 1975 to 1981 employed by the Australian Taxation Office, the number of tax returns lodged each year and the number of staff per 1,000 returns. One can see from that table that there has been clearly a reduction in the number of staff between 30 June 1975 and 30 June 1981-a reduction of almost 100 over that time. Indeed, in intervening years the reduction was several hundred at the lowest point in 1978. At the same time the number of returns lodged has increased dramatically, and so the number of staff per 1,000 returns has diminished considerably. In 1975 there were 1.6 staff members per 1,000 returns. By 1981 there were 1.42 staff per 1,000 returns. That is a considerable reduction and an indication of the enormous stress put on the Taxation Office in this cutback in staff levels not only because of the sheer increase in the volume of work per tax officer to deal with but also because of the increasing complexity of gathering tax caused by tax avoidance and evasion schemes which were proliferating.

The burden on the Taxation Office was made enormous.
The second table relates to the number of investigation officers employed by the Australian Taxation Office at 30 June each year from 1975 to 1981 and also shows the number of staff per 1,000 returns. One can see from that table that in 1979 the number of investigation officers was in fact lower than in 1975 and in 1981 it was only slightly higher. The investigation officers undertake investigations, audits and inspections to detect avoidance and evasion of tax. These are crucial people in the fight against tax avoidance and evasion. What is the Government doing? It hacked back their numbers until 1979 and then increased them slightly from that time.
This is evidence, I believe, which we have not been able to bring to light in previous debates of another aspect of the Government's negligence in this area. It simply was not properly concerned with this issue of tax avoidance and evasion. Not only was it extraordinarily lax in its treatment of this subject in ways which I do not have time to refer to now but which have been canvassed in this House in the last few months, but also it was cutting back on the ability of the Taxation Office to deal with this problem by reducing the number of officials overall in the Taxation Office, and in particular in the investigation area which is so crucial to detecting avoidance and evasion. This proves once again how uncaring and how lax the Government has been in respect of tax avoidance and evasion and is further evidence of the fact that the Government has been totally negligent in its prime duty to defend the revenue against the exploits of tax avoiders and evaders.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (4.54)-1 am glad to have the opportunity to deny the cant spread around by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). It is incredible that any member of this House would say that there has been great laxity on the part of the Government in respect of pursuing tax avoiders and evaders. Claims amounting to something like $3,000m have in fact been knocked off as a result of the Government's non-stop legislation against tax avoidance. The only reason the bottom-of-the-harbour schemes that have received so much publicity developed to any extent was because of the success of the antiavoidance policies of this Government-a program of anti-avoidance legislation never matched by any government in the past, particularly by the Labor Government, of course, under which the bottom-of-the harbour schemes were first introduced. The Committee should not forget that.

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2203

I stress that the reason for the development of illegal evasion schemes-rather than legal avoidance schemes-such as bottom-of-the-harbour arrangements was because avoidance schemes involving legal devices were successfully blocked by this Government. It is about time the Opposition recognised that. Unfortunately, the propaganda it has been spreading has totally confused the Australian people. I think it is worth recognising that the pressure which resulted in these illegal evasion schemes clearly developed after $3,000m of evident claims under these schemes which were being pursued by avoiders was knocked off by the Federal Government. The fact that this $3,000m was blocked prompted great interest in schemes which we now know to have been illegal, which have received a great deal of publicity, and which, in terms of their evasion, totalled something like $350m or about one-tenth of the total amount that this Government successfully blocked. In case anyone thinks that this $3,000m has been lost forever let me say that that is also totally untrue. The Commissioner of Taxation has at no stage conceded that that money is lost. He is still pursuing it. In fact, many of the claims were effectively blocked by the legislation without resulting in any loss to revenue. For example, the carry-forward losses involved in one tax avoidance scheme which was blocked resulted in $490m being saved in one hit. We never hear members of the Opposition giving any credit for this enormous amount of successful activity.
I stress that the recoupment legislation, which will soon be coming into this House in a revised form, will be recouping the proceeds of the bottom-of-the-harbour schemes which have received so much publicity. So the allegations of enormous loss which have been made by the Opposition are total and self-evident bunkum. I hope that those people who keep reading in the newspapers about bottom-of-the-harbour schemes, tax evasion and so on, recognise that those schemes were blocked by this Government in 1980. There is no evidence of any continuation of such schemes since then in any sense, although I think there have been a couple of instances of people trying it on and being caught out. In effect, these schemes have been blocked by this Government as a result of its very strenuous activities. To suggest, as the Opposition does with no evidence whatsoever, that these schemes are continuing is mischievous and malicious and cannot be supported. I have challenged the Opposition time and again to provide evidence of any continuation of schemes, such as bottom-of-the-harbour schemes

and other avoidance measures which this Government has knocked off. I have sought that evidence. None has come because none can come. The Opposition has no evidence. It is totally incompetent in this area. It introduced very little legislation when it was in government anyway. Continual nonsense has come from the Opposition about this whole matter. These schemes were all knocked off. The tax avoidance industry in this area is totally dead. It is absolute nonsense for any member of the Opposition to pretend in this House that is not so, without having the capacity, the intellect or the honesty to come forward with any evidence whatsoever. When the Opposition has the honesty to come forward with some evidence then it should be listened to. In the meantime, the empty vessels opposite should put a plug in it.
Let me stress that the tax reductions which were introduced in the Budget, along with many other benefits, in effect will come into operation on 1 November. I think it is worthwhile recognising this because I am certain that most people do not realise that the impact of the tax concessions this Government has introduced will be very significant indeed on all Australians. For example, the average rate of tax paid by a family man on a wage of $300 a week and with a dependent wife and two children will be cut. His average tax rate will be only 10 per cent compared with 27 per cent for a similar income under the 1975 Hayden Budget. The average tax rate on such an average worker's wage would have been two and a half times bigger if the tax rates of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) still applied, instead of having been cut so dramatically by the present Government. Those who complain that the Government has done nothing to cut taxes should go back to the 1975 tax levels, as I have done, and see for themselves. It is very revealing to compare average tax rates when the Leader of the Opposition was Treasurer with average tax rates on the same income under the present Budget of the Treasurer (Mr Howard). The tax cuts spread far wider than simply to the average worker on $300 a week. For a man on $200 a week with a wife and two children the Hayden tax rate was 17 per cent of income. From I November this year tax on that level of income will just about be wiped out altogether. For someone earning $400 a week the Hayden tax rate was 34 per cent, compared with 16 per cent from November, or less than half as much. This should serve as a sharp reminder to those who pay attention to the words rather than the deeds of the Leader of the Opposition.
There is no doubt that the Australian Labor Party is the high tax party. If it had not been for

2204 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the Fraser Government's program of cutting tax rates and the Hayden 1975 tax scale still existed, most taxpayers would have been paying more than double the income tax that they do now, with many on lower incomes paying three times as much or even more. In fact, the lower the income the worse off workers would have been under Labor's tax scale. Of course, it could be argued that these cuts in tax rates were automatically required because inflation pushed people into higher tax brackets and so the Government really had no option. This simply is not true. Labor refused to implement such a cut in 1975. It strongly opposed the Fraser Government's tax cut proposals during the 1977 election. In 1980, at election time, Labor was even recommending that some other taxes be introduced. The Australian Labor Party is always very reluctant to cut taxes.
Even when inflation is taken into account, the November tax cuts will mean that there has been a real cut in taxes compared to the 1975 Hayden Budget. Someone whose income has risen since 1975 to keep pace with inflation will be paying a smaller percentage of his income in tax compared to seven years ago. Apparently this is not the sort of news that most people want to write about, and I suggest that the Press Gallery take some notice of it. The extent of this real benefit can be seen from an examination of the family man's $300 a week income, which is equivalent to an income of about $151 a week in 1975 after taking inflation into account. Under the Leader of the Opposition's tax scales a person on that income would have been paying 11.1 per cent in income tax. This will fall to 10.3 per cent in November. The same sort of improvement applies to other salaries. For example, a family man's income of $400 a week will attract a 16.2 per cent average tax rate from November against the higher 17.4 per cent tax rate on an equivalent income of $201 under that tax scales of the Leader of the Opposition. These figures are adjusted for inflation. What we are clearly showing is that, under the present Government, the proportion of real income being paid in income taxes now is lower than it was under the Hayden Budget of 1975. So there is no doubt that the Government has gone quite a way towards providing the tax cuts that this community has been demanding. There is no doubt that the Opposition is talking bunkum on this issue.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (5.4)-One can only hope after that speech that the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume), soon to be

the (ormer member (or Macarthur, fights his election campaign in that electorate on the subject of
tax. If he does there is no doubt at all that the Australian Labor Party will win the seat. I do not want to spend very much time debating this mat-
ter, but in terms of the essential argument about relative taxation I think the issue of tax avoidance has been well covered. In aggregate terms, if one looks at page 312 of the Budget Papers, which deals with the incidence of taxation and Budget receipts, one can see the situation. In 1975-76, Budget receipts represented 25.1 per cent of gross domestic product. In 1982-83 it is estimated that they will represent 27.7 per cent of GDP. That is a very significant increase over that period under conservative governments. That is not, in itself, remarkable but it is quite remarkable when it is set against all of the claims that were made at the time of the first Fraser Government's election in terms of what it would do to tax incidence in the community. If one looks at the question of the distribution of the tax burden over the period that is covered by the Budget Papers, one se~ a remarkable change. This, the honourable member for Macarthur would do very well to study. For example, one finds that income tax for individuals
represented, as a percentage of gross domestic product in 1972-73, something like 9.5 per cent. By 1981-82 it had become 14.3 per cent. This is an absolute massive increase in income tax that has occurred over the Fraser years. If one looks at company tax over that period one finds that it has declined from 3.8 per cent to 3.5 per cent. If one looks at the amount of money paid by individuals, one finds that income tax has gone up over that period from $1,975 to $3,121. One finds that company taxes have actually marginally declined over that period. The Budget Papers go on to say that over that period we have seen a massive transfer. The major share of the increase in total personal income tax has been borne by pay-asyou-earn taxpayers. So rather than the picture being as the honourable member for Macarthur has been describing it, it is quite the reverse. The Fraser Government, which promised tax relief reductions in taxation has, in fact, shifted the burden massively both in terms of direct and indirect taxes so that this Government is now the highest taxing government in Australian history.
I want briefly to talk in more general terms about the effects of the Budget and Fraser's economic philosophy. During the Fraser years we have seen a massive redistribution of income and wealth. The rich have got richer and the poor poorer. This Budget marks the point for the Fraser Government of no return, the point at which it becomes clear to the Australian people

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2205

what Fraserism, what monetarism, means. It means very much higher unemployment, half a million on the dole and perhaps as many again discouraged from registering for the unemployment benefit. Fraserism means an unfair distribution of the economic burden. Where company taxes fall as a share of GDP income tax and indirect taxes keep rising. This means falling income for wage earners who are always told that times are hard and that belt tightening is necessary. People on social security payments have seen the real value of pensions and unemployment and sickness benefits fall. Fraserism-has meant the progressive destruction of the welfare state in this country, public services constantly downgraded in priority and services cut back particularly if they are services directed towards people.
During the past few years we have seen massive cuts in public housing, a destruction of universal medical insurance, a redirection of funds from public education to private education, the elimination of Federal Government support for public transport, attacks on basic public services such as postal and telecommunications services and cuts in the Australian Broadcasting Commission. We have seen cutbacks in funds for special programs. For example, community health centres, school dental programs and community child care centres are now to be moved more to the private sector. These reductions in people's incomes and services represent a reduction in their real incomes, that is, their total command over goods and services. They mean cuts in people's standard of living. Australia is a country in which people have prided themselves on a high standard of living. Those same people are now moving into a situation of despair. How much worse can things be expected to get?
It is important to emphasise that the effects of this redistribution in the name of monetarist economic philosophy does affect some people more than others. It is important to emphasise in the context of an apparently classless society, such as Canberra, that Australian society is not now, and has never been, lacking in class structure. This Government seeks to reinforce that class structure. During the Whitlam years mildly reformist efforts were made to tackle the geography of class. The Government sought to direct funds to poor regions, to pockets of poverty in what was believed to be a generally affluent society. The reality today is that we are all very much aware not only of the geography of class but also of the existence of widening class divisions in every aspect of society. Many people are calling for greater social harmony and for greater consensus. They ask:

'Why must politicians argue? Why all the bitterness?' However this bitterness is inseparable from policies which are designed to set one section of the community against another. That is what Fraserism is about. This Government seeks to divide the community along the most traditional of class lines. In no area is this more apparent than in the area of employment.
The Government has never asserted that every Australian has the right to work or even the right to adequate unemployment benefit; rather it has sought to scapegoat the unemployed or to argue that the unemployed are the responsibility of their own class. No sacrifice will be made by the rich to ensure that the unemployed work. Quite the contrary. The rich are to be given more by way of investment allowances, depreciation allowances, tax holidays, et cetera. On the other hand, workers are to take less payor to work part time so that the unemployed can get to work, perhaps then only for a few hours a week. On the whole, government programs have never been assessed for their distributional impact. There has been no interest on the part of this Government in the suggestion that capital or technology intensive development may be labour displacing. The Government has placed no obligation on the corporate sector to ensure security for workers in any industry. There is no thought of legislation which might guarantee job security and which might even ensure adequate redundance payor programs which might seek to transfer workers from inefficient industries to more efficient industries without loss of payor even with some assistance by way of retraining.
The Government has this myopic belief in the private sector, in the largest corporations, that they have some commitment to the welfare of Australian workers wherever their board rooms may be located. There are, of course, apparent in this society deep divisions, divisions which were obvious in the 1930s and which will be just as obvious in the 1980s. People no longer have any confidence in governments as being even marginally committed to providing some kind of security for people and some minimal measure of equity. That is not surprising because, stripped of appearances, that is what free enterprise capitalism is all about. It is about dog eat dog; it is profits or else. It is about setting people in opposition to one another. It is, in essence, a modern form of social Darwinism.
Unfortunately, I do not have the time to expand on these remarks. I think it is extremely important to suggest to so-called dries that if they follow the logic of their philosophy or even half the logic of their philosophy as we have seen from

2206 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

the Fraser Government the bitterness and the divisions in this society are now minimal, compared with what they might be. That is what the Fraser Government has been about. It has been about exacerbating class conflict. It must be removed so that we can begin to tackle some of these problems, not in a way which is so divisive, but in a way which draws upon people as society's most important resource. That is why unemployment is a scourge-because people who want to make a contribution to this community represent a resource. The Government, essentially through its budgetary policy, is denying people that
opportunity.
The DEPUTY CHAIMAN (Mr Jarman)- Order! The honourable member's time has
expired.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (5.14)-1t is interesting to listen to a noted and stated conservationist and a person with a great commitment to nature describing all the things that do not happen in nature. I am not here to address honourable members on that particular matter. The Treasury estimates that we are debating today revolve naturally around Australia's economy. Unemployment has become a major factor in both budgeting and economic decision-making. Unemployment figures have grown above the Treasury
estimates although the extent to which this will continue lies with the Australian work force and its employers. Currently the estimated additional cost of paying the unemployment benefit will represent an increase of approximately $300m to Budget expenditures. The eastern half of Australia has suffered severe drought. The economic effect of this catastrophe will be far-reaching both throughout the economy and the government revenue. The revenue impact will arise later; the immediate effect is one of expenditure by government to give relief to people whose ability and willingness to produce and to suppport themselves have been removed by a decision of nature. Government expenditure will rise by an estimated $356m to meet the cost of fodder and interest rate subsidies. I say how pleased I am with this Government's speedy response in that area.
These matters that I have mentioned have consequently become a reason for great glee by members of the Opposition, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in particular. They gloat at the fact that the Government might no longer be able to achieve a domestic Budget surplus of $230m as predicted in the Budget Speech of the Treasurer (Mr Howard). As our Treasurer has stated, the final outcome of the Budget will yet be affected by many factors, both positive and negative, which will materialise from our volatile

economy and the even more volatile world economy. We on this side of the chamber hope and trust that the management abilities of our Government will achieve the best possible result so as to minimise the amount of borrowing that this Government must undertake in competition with more worthy applicants whose intention it is to develop Australia and create the revenues necessary for prosperity and to finance our welfare state.
The important factor to remember is that when the Leader of the Opposition raises his criticisms of my Government's attempts to manage a difficult financial situation he, by his own admission, would start well past the point where in terms of the domestic deficit this Government might leave off. Page 855 of Hansard of 24 August tells the story. The Leader of the Opposition said:
Let me deal with some positive propositions we have.
That is, the Australian Labor Party-
Our plan of rescue in the short term would aim at a prudent level of expansion in the economy. This would be aI'propriate to the circumstances and genuinely fair to those who will do the work that pulls the economy around. A domestic deficit of $1 billion to $1.5 billion . .
That was the suggestion that he made. He went on further to state:
A Budget deficit could be financed by a net addition to money supply financed by Treasury bills bought by the Reserve Bank of Australia.
We can compare this with the Government's estimate of a domestic surplus of $230m. Even burdened additionally, as the Government may be, by drought and unemployment, such a suggestion, which took no account of drought and many other imponderables, is simply massive in proportion. To criticise the Government in this arena means that the Opposition does not support its own rhetoric. Or does it believe in big deficits for Labor governments and small deficits for the coalition Government? All of the figures that occur in these Estimates before us today will be affected by Australia's economic performance during the balance of the financial year. Government can give some leadership in this area but only our people can resolve the problem.
During previous speeches I have argued that Australia need not be affected to the same extent as other world economies, especially when recession strikes. I say this because Australia has a small population and a relatively small share of world trade. World-wide business never gets so low that Australia's physical share disappears. It is won from Australia by more competitive countries. These countries do not all have low standards of wages and living conditions. Many rank

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2207

higher in this regard than Australia. They generally have a work force whose members recognise the necessity for their employers to prosper along with themselves. They have a work force and union leadership which can recognise that to increase the cost of the product they make is to decrease the value of wages that they use to buy that product.
In response to similar remarks to those referred to above, the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) chose to criticise me for producing simplistic Ayn Rand bulldust. In his speech on the Budget of 8 September he said:
I ask honourable members to look at the mining industry. One could work Hat-tack at the moment mining everything and one would not sell an ounce of it. Nobody wants to buy at the moment.
Let us look at retailing. I happen to be in the retailing industry. I am one of the few people in this Parliament who is a businessman, who has business experience.
I am prepared to compare my personal business experience in breadth, length and success, with that of the honourable member for Robertson at any time he chooses. The point I make is that in these hard international times certain nations are expanding their economies and raising the standard of living of their citizens-Singapore being such an example, with a growth in gross domestic product last year of plus 10.3 per cent while Australia achieved a growth rate of 3 per cent. Today's Australian Financial Review, in quoting a Western Australian Labor Party document, highlights the loss of competitiveness of the Australian iron ore industry and puts the lie to the quotation I have just read to the House. These words appear on page 7:
Japanese sources estimated that the landed cost of ore from South Africa was now only I per cent higher than from Pilbara (II per cent higher in 1979), Brazilian ore 6 per cent higher (16 per cent more three years ago), Canadian 8 per cent (25 per cen't) and Chilean 16 per cent (29 per cent).
The ALP paper also pointed out that other producers had been willing to accept lower price increases recently. Brazil, for example, settled for 13 per cent, compared with 17.5 per cent for Australian suppliers.
In another part of the article it is pointed out that in one year in particular 20 per cent of production was lost by strikes. But that would not have any effect on the Australian cost of production-not much! Even the Western Australian Labor opposition can recognise and document the fact that it is not that the world does not want to buy but that it is buying elsewhere.
Let us now return to the area of personal expertise of the honourable member for Robertson. He said in his speech:
How much harder do honourable members think one can work in the retailing sector and how much more money do honourable members think one can take if there is no demand

and the consumers are not buying? One could stand on one's head and wave one's legs in the air; consumers are not going to buy anything.
Consumers will not buy if they do not want to. My understanding is that the honourable member for Robertson operates a number of clothing stores in suburban Sydney. He is to the Sydney rag trade what Australia is to the world manufacturing market. The time will never come when there are so few consumers in the Sydney area that there is no trade for the honourable member's store. It is all a matter of how he competes for those customers. Presumably, his stores occupy some highly advantaged sites. His philosophy to competitive marketing as expressed in his speech on the Budget indicates to me that as a storekeeper he would probably make a fairly good politician.
Mr HoweHe treats his customers better than you.
Mr TUCKEY-Do not worry about me, son. I started with nothing and I can buy and sell you. You started with nothing and you will probably end that way. That gives me the right to talk about the economy,
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Jarman)- Order! The honourable member will address his remarks to the Chair.
Mr TUCKEYI repeat that in my view the Australian economy and the success of these Estimates do not rely on reducing the revenue of Australian workers. We should restructure the economy certainly, to relate it better to productivity. We should work towards raising living standards through cheaper consumer goods. Whilst the Opposition would print money to increase the amount in circulation, I applaud the Government for its decision to release some real moneynamely, the one per cent of the statutory reserve deposits that the Government has requested the Reserve Bank of Australia return to the trading bank for lending to the building sector. On 28 July SRDs stood at $2I04m, which represented 7 per cent of trading bank deposits.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (5.24)-The Department of the Treasury estimates provided for a sum of $1.5m for an unspecified but so-called 'special information program'. Australian Labor Party members of the Senate Estimates Committee had to demand further information from the Minister for Finance (Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle) and from the Treasury about that item. That information, when eventually provided, revealed vague plans for a $1.5m propaganda campaign in

2208 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

support of government budgetary and economic policies. That sum of money is more than the Liberal Party spent on all radio and television advertising in the 1980 Federal election.
However, it is going to take more than a massive taxpayer-financed propaganda campaign to hide from Australians the realities of the Fraser Government's economic incompetence and mismanagement. Almost daily we receive further confirmation of the deepening economic malaise into which the Government's policies are leading Australia.
Budgetary policy has moved into the realm of Alice in Wonderland economics as the estimates of receipts and outlays are progressively laid bare as being totally shonky. The Government has no wages policy-or rather, it has two policies, that of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and that of the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee). The Government's excessively severe monetary policy has contributed significantly to Australia's unreasonably high level of interest rates and rising unemployment.
The rapid deterioration of the Australian economy shows the absolute irrelevance and inappropriateness of the 1982 Budget. The number of Australians out of work already exceeds half a million, months before the seasonal influx of school leavers during the summer months. The Treasurer has conceded that unemployment this year will go higher than 8 per cent. Indeed, many commentators speak in terms of 9 or 10 per cent as a likely unemployment rate for Australia before too long.
South Australia already has the highest unemployment rate in mainland Australia and among the young people of that State the unemployment rate of nearly 30 per cent is of Depression levels. The combined mismanagement by Fraser and Tonkin could see that rate soon well into double digits overall. Numerous manufacturing industry surveys indicate the gloomiest prospects for that sector since 1974. Production levels are sliding and sackings of employees are becoming commonplace. Manufacturing investment plans are being cut back, with detrimental flow-on effects throughout the economy. The mining sector is in retreat. And, of course, drought is devastating Australia's agricultural sector. Retail sales figures reveal a fall-off in consumer spending; hardly surprising when, even after the so-called family Budget, consumer confidence is at its second lowest point for nine years.
The fact is that the Government is only fiddling at the edges of the housing industry collapse: Home building approvals in the September

quarter are down by a quarter on last year's level, pointing to little prospect of recovery in this important sector before the end of the financial year. Inflation is likely to remain in double digits for some time yet as a result of decisions already taken by this Government, including inflationary increases in taxes and charges-and this at a time when inflation is falling in most other member countries of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development to a rate half that of Australia's.
Official interest rates have recently eased back from the extraordinary level of a few months ago, but they still remain destructively high. The recent falls in official treasury bond rates were welcome. However, they reflect more the heavy buying of bonds by Japanese investors and the effects of the depressed level of economic activity than any success for Government policy.
The real task for Government now is to ensure that these rates stay down-as they appear to have overseas-and for the reductions to flow on to home buyers, farmers and consum~s, the groups who have paid most for the Government's high interest rate policies. Unfortunately, my suspicion is that the Government is not capable of sustaining the recent falls in official rates in full. I hope I am wrong.
The 1982-83 Budget should have been designed to lay the foundations for sustained economic recovery in Australia. Instead, it will ensure that the recession will be even deeper than it need be in any circumstances. Certainly the overseas economies are experiencing bad times, but at least the recession overseas appears to have bottomed out, and with inflation and interest rates in single digits. This Government has no policies to tackle the problems of unemployment and inflation simultaneously. Labor, on the other hand, urges the Government to adopt some specific measures to promote a non-inflationary recovery. Firstly, the Government must abandon its current incomes policy consisting of the law of the jungle in wages determination combined with the bludgeon of more than half a million unemployed. In its place the Government must implement a prices and incomes policy in which wages are weighed and planned for in an orderly economic system in which all relevant factors have their place. Those factors must include non-wage incomes, taxes, social security programs and prices, as well as wages.
The Government must recover some influence over wage determination through support for a centralised wage fixing system. The Government should also restore a pricing authority with

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2209

powers to assess price rise proposals within its jurisdiction. Trade practices legislation, watered down over the Fraser years, needs to be strengthened to promote more effective competition and to reduce excessive prices.
If the Government were fair dinkum about smashing tax avoidance and evasion, the only growth industry in Australia under the Fraser Government, then genuine tax reductions could be made for low and middle income earners. Wealthy people will continue to become millionaires at the expense of ordinary wage and salary earners until the Government adopts Labor's IS-point plan to smash tax avoidance and evasion. Such an attack on tax bludgers will be a crucial component of a successful prices and incomes policy. With such a policy in place the Government could set about selectively boosting economic activity and employment through the Budget in the areas of housing, public works and a specific jobs growth program which could create up to 150,000 job opportunities in public and private industry in a full year. Such policies could serve as a circuit breaker to what otherwise promises to be an inexplorable and destructive rise in unemployment. A prices and incomes policy could accommodate this more expansionary fiscal policy and the associated easing in monetary tightness without a resurgence in inflationary pressures. As recovery develops through 1983, the operation of a prices and incomes policy will be essential to prevent inflation from causing a further deterioration in our international competitiveness.
The decline in our exchange rate against the United States dollar has probably gone as far as can be comfortably accommodated without having an adverse impact on inflation. Future improvements in our competitiveness must come through a lowering of inflation. Lower inflation, aided by a prices and incomes policy, would also provide the basis for a sustained reduction in interest rates that benefited all Australians. At present, no such basis exists.
An overriding concern for the Government must be to take action to curb the disastrous growth in unemployment. The present Budget contains no measures to boost employment. Instead, the Budget strategy is to wait for an overseas recovery eventually to provide jobs. With over 1,000 jobs disappearing every day, that policy is simply not good enough.
Labor does not pretend that the measures it proposes will restore full employment overnight. That task will take a number of years. In the meantime, the Australian economy urgently requires measures to halt the slide. I fear that this

Government will fail to stop the rot, because it must first admit that it has made mistakes-and Malcolm Fraser is not big enough to make such an admission. Instead, he searches for scapegoats. For as long as he does, Australia will continue to slip down the world standard of living ran kings to join the also-rans.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Jarman)-I remind honourable members that Government members or Opposition members should be referred to by their titles rather than by their personal names.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (5.34)-Party games intended to appeal selectively to community demand, and wishful thinking about Budget aggregate which would increase expenditure and cut taxes at the same time-not the least as expressed in the speech just delivered by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden)-prompt me to quote from a speech made by Sir Geoffrey Howe, the Chancellor of the Exchequer in Great Britain, at the Brighton conference of his party the week before last. He said:
This Government is not in the business of cutting taxes to buy votes. Of course tax cuts are desirable: More importannt for the sake of enterprise and for the sake of jobs, tax cuts are necessary. But I give this assurance: Those reductions will be made only as and when we can afford them.
We have not, and we will not, put at risk the progress we have made towards lower inflation and lower interest rates. We are not going to pile up problems for the next government, because we intend to be the next government.
In the past three years the Government had been laying the foundation for the future and now looked forward to its second term.
That was said by Sir Geoffrey Howe about the Conservative Party in Britain to the Conservative Party. The Australian Labor Party has criticised the most recent Australian Federal Budget for being in its words, 'rubbery'. I take it that it means that the figures are erroneous. By and large, that is not the case. Certainly, there was an error with the employment figures. That has been acknowledged and a corrected figure has been announced to the House. It is a relatively minor matter in a big Budget. There has been some additional expenditure since the Budget-the drought relief-but the ALP has not criticised that. The drought has reduced the tax base. Again, the ALP has not been critical of that fact. It is far bigger than the one error it has been able to point to. What the Government should do now is bring the Budget back on target. Business budgets have the same problem that national budgets have. They include many items. Some of them will be off target. What is lost on the swings can be picked up on the roundabout so that the bottom line comes out right. That bottom line is as

2210 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

sacrosanct as any other part of the Budget. Again, the ALP has been somewhat inconsistent in criticising overruns. I remind members of the ALP of the second Crean Budget and the Hayden Budget. The Budget we brought down was essentially the Labor Party's first choice. Before it got wind of it that was the sort of Budget it was advocating. Opposition members should not be so churlish about it now. When they got wind of it they then advocated a bigger Budget deficit. That is the Budget that they suggest may now be the outcome. Again, their hypocrisy is as breathtaking as their churlishness.
A more fair criticism of the Budget would be that it is too much like a Labor Budget-that it is not monetarist but too socialist. The full year effect of the expenditure and in revenues of this Budget, with no real change in policy, could lead to a Budget deficit of $4,OOOm to $6,OOOm next year. That is a fair criticism of the Budget-that it is too much like a Budget that the Labor Party would have brought in and too much like what the Labor Party was advocating. It certainly is not monetarist or hard line. I remind the House that deficits still make money management difficult. Nothing has changed in the last 12 months. It is difficult to manage the money supply if the public sector is putting too much pressure on the capital markets. That has been known for donkey's years. It was true last year and it is still true this year. Deficits push up interest rates. If the public sector has to borrow it competes with the private sector and drives up interest rates. That remains true. In the end deficits must be financed by taxes. If they are not paid by the current year's taxpayers they must be paid by the taxpayers of the future. We put off the problem for our kids. That might be justified in wartime but it is not justified in peacetime.
It also remains true that deficits damage our standing in international eyes. People who would invest in Australia get more worried about what our exchange rate might do in the future and are less likely to invest here. Deficits remain a problem. On the other hand, it makes little difference to demand management whether the moneys are taxed from the public or whether they are borrowed from the public. Those resources are still taken out of private hands and put into government hands. It is expenditure matched by borrowings or taxes-of course it is matched by boththat is transferred from private hands to public hands more, in most cases, but not all from more efficient use to less efficient use, that will cause a problem. It is a problem because we have not tackled the expenditure side of our Budget. If a Budget deficit were not financed it would increase

the money supply. That would give us inflation and inflation still costs jobs. Inflation can give rise to employment only if that inflation results in a fall in real wages but if real wages are maintained an expansionary Budget or monetary policy will not give rise to any employment. If real earnings are maintained the unemployment problem will continue. This year we do not expect a growth in gross domestic product. Probably, thanks to the drought, there will actually be a fall. If there is not a matching fall in real earnings unemployment must rise. Those who are in jobs gain their wealth at the expense of the very sharp loss of wealth of those who are thrown out of jobs.
In recent times we have noted that the difference in interest rates between Australia and the United States has widened. I suggest that one likely reason for that is that the perception of our exchange rate is not quite what it was. The Budget deficit is likely to have been a cause of that perception. We should adjust the Budget at least to maintain the deficit that we budgeted for. It is early days yet. One item in the Budget is a very small part of it but, as the year goes on, we should look carefully to expenditure and revenue items so that at the end of the year we at least hit the bottom line we aimed for although it might be difficult to get there. We have real hope that in the next calendar year inflation will fall, if we do not blow that hope with loose fiscal or monetary policy that will, in turn, be reflected in increasing employment. It is a long haul. It will be very easy for us to blow it on the way. We can opt for the sort of monetary and fiscal management adopted by France and Canada or we can opt for the monetary and fiscal management adopted by the United Kingdom and the United States of America. I suggest that if we opt for the latter Australia, a few years down the line, will be much stronger.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (5.43)-If Diogenes were going around with a candle looking for an honest man he could do worse than find the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde). He at least has the courage of his convictions. He does not like this Budget any more than we do. We know why it was brought down. It was brought down purely as an election Budget in the hope that the Fraser Government would be able to go to the polls early with the promise of some election goodies for the voters. Then the Costigan report put paid to that and any plan for an early election in September was put off. Although the Budget still provides some attractions for the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to go to the polls early, it does not provide much attraction for

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2211

those of his members sitting behind him, particuWhyalla. Tasmania generally has a very high de-

larly those in marginal seats, such as the honourgree of unemployment; overall it has the highest

able member for Perth (Mr McLean) or the rate of unemployment of any State. Unemploy-

honourable member for Moore. It now seems less ment levels seem to be lower in Queensland and

and less likely that the Liberal Party Government, Western Australia. We do not know the real

with its National Party supporters, will go to the extent of unemployment unless we know the par-

electors this year.

ticular figures from region to region; otherwise it

It shows the doctrinaire conviction of the honourable member for Moore that he could
speak so kindly of the economic policies pursued in the United States of America by President
Reagan and in Great Britain by Margaret Thatcher, remembering that the figure for unem- .
ployment in the United States has now passed the 10 per cent mark-it is 10.1 per cent, the worst
figure since the depression of the 1930s and that in
Great Britain it is 14.3 per cent. The United Kingdom economy, under Mrs Thatcher, will deterio-
rate even more. Although I understand the argu-
ment of the honourable member for Moore that ultimately the United Kingdom will have a pared
down economy that will be lean and able to re-
cover, there will have been such a collapse of pur-

is a matter of making educated guesses. I think it is
a reasonable estimate that in my electorate of
Lalor, in Melbourne's western suburbs, the degree of registered unemployment would be of the order
of 13 per cent. I think that in the electorate of my
colleague the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West), unemployment would be of
the order of 14 per cent or 15 per cent. It is grossly
misleading to talk about an overall national figure. If one looks at the middle class areas which
are represented by members such as the Vice-
President for this and that, unemployment will be
comparatively low compared with the western suburbs of Melbourne and Sydney, although any
degree of unemployment is worrying for a
member.

chasing power within it, with so many people Sir James Killen-Why don't you come to my

moving from relative affluence into penury, that parish?

many industries in Great Britain now will transfer Mr BARRY JONES-I will come any time the elsewhere. If the kinds of intellect and researchMinister invites me. Let me say something about

based industrial enterprises that I have been manufacturing because it is my electorate's econ-

advocating are going to be established they will omic base. I point out a particularly worrying statnot be in the United Kingdom. The United Kingistic. Between 1965 and 1982 the labour force in

dom lacks the educational or skill base which Australia increased by 2,060,000 jobs. I have often would enable a transition from the older and deasked people, particularly people who are in busicaying manufacturing industries to the new intelness and who often do not know the answer to the

lectual or skill-based industries. I agree with the question, what proportion of those 2,060,000 new honourable member for Moore that the Budget jobs are attributable to manufacturing? I do not brought down this year by the Treasurer (Mr know whether the honourable member for Moore

Howard) is not a pure monetarist Budget. Probwould care to make a bid, but the answer is minus ably none of the preceding Fraser Budgets was 7.3 per cent. Of the last 2,060,000 jobs created,

purely monetarist. Those Budgets represent an manufacturing not only contributed none but,

extraordinary and unattractive hybrid between relatively speaking, there was a loss of 150,000 Stone Age monetarism and Easter Island mercanjobs. That means that the prognosis for future em-

tilism of the kind practised by the Prime Minister. ployment and also for future diversification of

The result, is far from the free marketeer apemployment is extremely serious in electorates

proach of Milton Friedman.

such as mine because of their heavy degree of

The current figure of 7.8 per cent registered unover-specialisation in manufacturing.

employed in Australia is, I believe, grossly misOf course, the problem of over-specialisation is

leading. Unemployment is not spread evenly not confined to Australia. Taking an example in

throughout the economy. That is why when we the United States of America, the city of Seattle,

talk about a 7.8 per cent unemployment figure is very heavily dominated by the Boeing corpor-

this is an aggregated figure. Unemployment in ation. If civil aviation is burgeoning, if there are a

Australia is very heavily concentrated in a tremendous number of orders for Boeing aircraft,

number of disaster areas. Those areas are, of Seattle has one of the highest standards of living

course, Newcastle and the Hunter Valley, around anywhere in the United States. Conversely, if avi-

Wollongong and Port Kembla, and around the ation is going down, if there are no orders for

western suburbs of Sydney; in Victoria around the planes, Seattle becomes a disaster area. That

western suburbs of Melbourne and in a number of means that where there is a strong industrial base,

provincial areas; in South Australia around when it is on the upswing the community is going

2212 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

well but when it is going badly the community is in a disastrous situation. In Victoria perhaps the classic example is in the rural area around Kyabram. People there find it impossible to conceive of a future that is not centred on tinned fruit. To them the solution to every economic problem in the area depends on tinned fruit. They have built up an industry which was very important when there was a great and rising demand for tinned fruit. Now, when people's tastes have diversified, when they want fresh fruit or fruit that does not tin readily, Kyabram finds that it is tied to an industrial structure that is no longer relevant.
I draw the attention of the Committee to something which I had incorporated in Hansard in my speech on the Budget on 9 September. A paper by Wassily Leontief, an American Nobel Prize winner in economics, called 'What Hope for the Economy?' appeared in the New York Review of Books on 12 August 1982. I would like to quote a little of what he said. He stated:
Much is said by conservatives about the need to compensate investors for the high risks they take, but not enough is said about reducing risks. One, and possibly the only, effective way of reducing risk-beside taking out insurance that simply redistributes risk without diminishing its level-is systematic coordination of investment based on long-range foresight. That is, planning. All too many corporate leaders bridle when they hear this word, although rational planning requires neither government ownership of industry, nor direct control of corporations, nor abandoning much of the play of the market.
The planning approach is less simplistic than the hit-or-miss approach; it is, however, more ambitious and because of that also more difficult.
Another article by Leontief, which I would like to read at length but will not have the opportunity to do, is entitled 'The Distribution of Work and Income' in the current, September, edition of Scientific American in which he writes particularly about the Australian economy. I conclude by paraphrasing Leontief. He wrote that if one looks at the Japanese statistical data-it is a very capitalist society-and at the 'input-output' figures it has they do have an enormous volume of data on which they can make some rational assessment of risk. When we look at the United States we find that it has very much less volume of data. It is a bigger economy but it has less data. When we look at Australia we could probably put the data available on the back of a postcard. That is the tragedy of this Government. We lack the statistical data to make rational plans.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Jarman)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Proposed expenditures agreed to.

Department of Home Affairs and Environment
Proposed expenditure, $156,975,000.
Department of the Capital Territory
Proposed expenditure, $112,471,000.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (5.55)-This Government has downgraded Federal concern for the environment. The sections responsible for environment in the Department of Home Affairs and Environment receive only II per cent of $171 m. The Environment Division has a staff of only \06. For years it has been a no growth, even a cutback, area under this Government. In the Department's 1981-82 report the Department's Secretary, Dr McMichael, was moved to report:
. . . it was with concern that I found it necessary to accommodate a further reduction in staffing levels during 1981-82. It is my belief that we cannot contemplate further reductions without an accompanying reduction in the functions to be performed.
That statement by the permanent head of the Department of Home Affairs and Environment is, of course, an indictment of this Government's attitude to environmental matters.
I now refer to expenditure for the Office of the Supervising Scientist for the Alligator Rivers Region. This year there was a mild increase in funding which will allow an extra eight staff to be employed and some new housing construction to be undertaken at Jabiru. The Budget contains no allocation for the new $5.4m laboratory which was recommended by the Austr.alian Science and Technology Council. The Budget contains only a $400,000 allocation for extensions to the temporary laboratory. My own inquiries have established that design plans are underway but no funds have been allocated to allow an early start this financial year on the much needed new laboratory. What we need from the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) is an assurance that funds will be allocated and that this facility will be constructed this financial year.
On 22 September last I stated that a major problem had arisen at the Ranger tailings dam and that the Minister had known of this since June but had not reported it to the Parliament. In reply the Minister said the problem was insignificant and that he did not wish to draw unnecessary attention to it. He finally accused me late one night of acting irresponsibly in raising the matter. Energy Resources of Australia Ltd, the company that runs Ranger, also felt obliged to downgrade the matter. Despite the fact that no report had been issued to this Parliament that company issued a statement to its own employees which suggested that a problem did exist but that it had been reported to the Co-ordinating Committee

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2213

and the Office of the Supervising Scientist and that their plans for rectification were being improved and implemented. I now have a copy of a report from the Ranger consultants which at last has been made available to me. I think that selectively quoting from the report I can prove beyond all doubt that the MinisteI's statement that this is an insignificant problem was in fact misleading the Parliament. The report states:
The principal findings of that report are that the high piezometric pressures observed at the downstream toe of the Tailings Dam appear to be related to the existence of an anomalous zone up to 150 metres wide, in which the permeability is more than one order of magnitude greater than the general permeability ufthe Tailings Dam foundations . . .
This zone of high permeability is located generally between about 18 and 22 metres below the ground surface.
The report continues:
This is a very high value for foundations of a major dam: it is possible that higher values could be measured if further investigation was carried out.
The report goes on:
This zone of high permeability has apparently allowed the transmission of pressures which are directly related to the water level in the tailings dam to a position further downstream than would normally be the case if such a zone were not present. As a result, the stability of a part of the tailings dam embankment may be considered to have been reduced to below a desirable level.
The report states that during the 1982-83 wet season there could be an 'abrupt rise in water level within the tailings dam and this will further reduce the stability of the part of the tailings dam examined'. That is very serious yet the Minister has said that it was not a serious or significant matter. Later in the report we find that the construction of a stage II of the tailings dam will involve the r~ising of the level of the crest by three metres and an extension of its downstream toe by a further 25 metres. That means that the level and the pressure inside the dam will reach even higher proportions.
It is stated in another section of the report that the construction of stage II of the dam is expected to restore, providing certain engineering methods are undertaken, some stability to an acceptable level although the presence of the high groundwater pressures and the high phreatic surface in this area will render more complicated the construction of stage II of the dam. It is obvious that the Minister should have tabled this report months ago. He has in fact misled the House in stating that the Ranger dam defects are insignificant. They are not insignificant. They are of great concern to the Office of the Supervising Scientist, or if they are not, they ought to be. Obviously they are of concern to ERA as this report shows. It is also obvious that the stage II extension must not

proceed until the Office of the Supervising Scientist can unequivocally assure this Ho"se that the proposed work will be successful, without any ifs or buts, and there is absolutely no possibility of a dam wall breach occurring in future as has already occurred in New Mexico in 1979.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr WEST-When I was interrupted at 6 o'clock I was about to seek the Minister's approval to incorporate in Hansard the report about which I have been speaking; that is, the report by the Ranger consultants into the problem at the Ranger tailing dam. I seek leave to have that report incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
SUMMARY REPORT ON PIEZOMETRIC PRESSURE INVESTIGATION
Northern Embankment-- Ranger Tailings Dam
1. Introduction
In a report made available to the last meeting of the Coordinating Committee, the occurrence of high piezometric pressures in a piezometer located at the downstream toe of the tailings dam was noted and preliminary advice given on the possible origin and significance of such pressure. This zone is located within the former Coonjimba Creek bed adjacent to a zone where foundation grouting had been carried out.
Since the last meeting of the Co-ordinating Committee, a field investigation programme has been carried out to assess the width and extent of the zone over which the high piezometric pressures occur. The initial stage of field investigations has now been completed and the results communicated to Ranger Uranium Mines Pty Ltd in the form of a comprehensive report.
The principal findings of that report are that the high piezometric pressures observed at the downstream toe of the Tailings Dam appear to be related to the existence of an anomalous zone up to 150 metres wide, in which the permeability is more than one order of magnitude greater than the general permeability of the Tailings Dam foundations as observed by previous testing.
The zone of high permeability is located generally between about 18 and 22 metres below the ground surface. Measured permeabilities within the zone range up to 470 Lugeon units or 4.7 x 10(-3) em/sec. This is a very high value for foundations of a major dam; it is possible that higher values could be measured if further investigation was carried out.
This zone of high permeability has apparently allowed the transmission of pressures which are directly related to the water level in the tailings dam to a position further downstream than would normally be the case if such a nne were not present. As a result, the stability of a part of the tailings dam embankment may be considered to have been reduced to below a desirable level.
24th August 1982
Meehan Burgess and Yeates
The piezometric pressure conditions observed at the downstream toe of the dam do not appear to have reached equilibrium yet and thus. this part of the dam remains a potential weak point. The 1982-83 wet season will lead to an abrupt rise in water level within the tailings dam and this will further reduce the stability of the part of the tailings dam examined.

2214 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

The construction of Stage II of the Tailings Dam is expected to restore stability to an acceptable level although the presence of the high groundwater pressures and the high phreatic surface in this area will render more complicated the construction of Stage II of the tailings dam. In particular, it will be necessary to reduce the piezometric pressure prior to commencement of foundation excavation for Stage II of the tailings dam.
The report recommends that immediate steps be undertaken to provide stabilisation for the downstream toe of the dam, firstly by assuring the stability in the short term by installing a deep well point or a system of well points in order to control the piezometric pressures and secondly by providing in the long term stability by the construction of Stage II of the tailings dam.
3. Field Investigations
The field investigations carried out comprised:
The drilling of four cored boreholes labelled PZI to PZ4. These holes were drilled at the downstream toe of the embankment in the area surrounding Piezometer PI O. In addition, a supplementary borehole, PZ2A, was drilled to a depth of 5 metres to observe groundwater behaviour near the surface in the vicinity of PZ2. The holes ranged in depth from 19.5 metres to 25.9 metres, giving a total depth of drilling of 91.8 metres.
A series of static packer tests carried out at approximately 2 metre intervals in the hole below a depth of 5 metres. A total of 39 static packer tests was carried out.
A series of dynamic packer tests carried out at approximately 2 metre intervals below a depth of about 5 metres. A total of 34 packer tests was carried out.
Installation of piezometers in the completed boreholes.
24 August 1982.
Meehan Burgess and Yeates
A series of chemical sampling of water from the piezometers. A total of 8 tests was carried out.
4. Results of Field Investigations
Borehole PZI encountered topsoil, alluvium and laterite to a depth of 3.6 metres. Below this, extremely weathered gneiss was found. Moderately weathered pegmatite was encountered from 7.8 to 10.9 metres. Some interlayers of highly weathered amphibolite and biotite schist were encountered from 9.3 to 10.3 metres with some core loss occurring. Brown, highly weathered biotite schist occurs below the pegmatite to 12.3 metres where the rock type changes to brown, highly weathered gneiss. A highly weathered, highly fractured pegmatite zone occurs from 17.3 to 18.4 metres. This zone gave a very high Lugeon permeability of 470 uL. Below 18.4 metres, the pegmatite is fresh and competent to the end of the hole at 22.53 metres. There are some interlayers of blue-grey fresh biotite gneiss from 19.8 to 20.8 metres.
Borehole PZ2 encountered topsoil, alluvium and laterites to 1.8 m. From 2.2 to 6.8 m poor core recovery was obtained through biotite gneiss with some biotite schist. From 7.0 m to 16.4 m brown, moderately weathered biotite gneiss occurs. From 16.4 to 20.3 m, a layer of pegmatite was encountered. This pegmatite was mostly fresh except for a narrow highly fractured, moderately weathered zone from 16.4 to 17.9 m. The water pressure test performed over this highly fractured section gave a relatively high Lugeon permeability value of 60 uL. Below the pegmatite, blue-grey fresh biotite gneiss was encountered to the end of the hole at 23.9 m.
Borehole PZ2A encountered similar conditions to the first 5 metres in PZ2 except from the ground surface to 0.8 metres which encountered rockfill from the constructed dam toe.

Borehole PZ3 encountered laterite almost at the surface down to a depth Of 4.7 metres. Below this, highly weathered pegmatite occurred to a depth of 9.1 metres. From 9.1 to 12.2 metres a layer of biotite schist was encountered in which core recovery was poor. Below this, biotite gneiss occurs. This biotite gneiss is brown and moderately weathered to a depth of 17.3 metres and then grades into blue-grey fresh rock from 18.3 metres onwards.
24 August 1982
Meehan Burgess and Yeates
Borehole PZ4 encountered topsoils and laterite to a depth of 1.3 metres. Below this, a residual soil layer was encountered to a depth of 2.8 metres. The main rock encountered below this was moderately to highly weathered, yellow brown amphibolite. This amphibolite was generally very weak and in some sections contained thin, horizontal clay bands. Below the amphibolite at 14.1 metres biotite schist was encountered to the end of the hole. This biotite schist is moderately weathered becoming slightly weathered with depth and is highly fractured. Borehole PZ4 was terminated at 19.52 metres due to hole instability.
5. Stability Implications for the Existing Embankment
5.1 Embankment Stability
In order to investigate the stability of the Stage I embankment stability analyses was carried out using both the Bishop Method and the wedge method. The Bishop analysis found the minimum factor of safety out of a total of 225 failure surfaces to be 1.24 (see Figure 8). This factor of safety is directly dependent upon the foundation pore pressures assumed in the design. Generalised strength parameters for weathered rock, recommended by S.M.E.C. were used in this analysis.
The wedge analysis confirmed the factor of safety as being around 1.24. An indication of the reduction in the stability of the downstream toe following a one metre rise in piezometric pressures which could occur upon wet season filling of the tailings dam was also examined. This indicates that without remedial action, the factor of safety during the 1982-83 wet season would be reduced to about 1.2 if there is a metre rise in the tailings dam level and a corresponding rise in the piezometric pressure.
5.2 Local Foundation Stability
In the case of the Ranger Tailings Dam, the current investigations have revealed a zone of very high permeability at a depth of 19 metres below the ground surface. This zone has a permeability in excess of 470 Lugeon units or 4.7 x 10 (-3) cm/sec. and constitutes a major potential drainage zone beneath the dam along which the pressures can be transmitted from the reservoir, undissipated, further downstream than would normally be the case. This has resulted in the artesian pressure conditions which have been observed extending well downstream from the crest of the existing embankment. The fact that this condition has occurred in the central part of the former valley and as a consequence in the lowest topographic section of the dam may explain some of the observed features found during the investigation.
Stability Implications for Stage II
The construction of Stage II of the tailings dam will involve the raising of the level of the crest of the tailings dam by 3 metres and an extension of its downstream toe by a further 25 metres to take into consideration both Stages II and III. This work is due to be completed in 1983.
The excavation for the foundations for the Stage II and III zones in the downstream toe area of the existing tailings dam will involve excavation to a depth of 2 to 3 metres below the existing ground surface.

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2215

The effect of the foundation conditions revealed by the investigation on Stage II and subsequent stages of the tailings dam is currently being reassessed to take into account both the construction conditions and the ulitmate design of the embankment.
Current Investigation Programme
As part of the design measures for the Stage II construction works, a pump test is now being undertaken at the downstream toe of the dam for the purpose of assessing the:
Appropriate stabilisation measures for the dam during the coming wet season; and
The appropriate design measures to be incorporated into Stage II and subsequent stages of the dam.
Meehan Burgess and Yeates
Mr WEST-I thank the House. I now turn to the situation in South West Tasmania. The Department of Home Affairs and Environment is responsible for submitting to the World Heritage Committee nominations of areas for inclusion on the World Heritage List which was set up by the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation convention for the protection of world cultural and national heritage. This Government and the previous Tasmanian Labor Government nominated this unique temperate wilderness area for inclusion in the World Heritage List. The Committee knows that successive Tasmanian governments have been determined to proceed with the $1 billion 178 megawatt Gordon below Franklin dam fiasco which will inundate 36 kilometres of each of the beautiful and unique Lower Gordon and Franklin rivers. How disgraceful it is that the Liberal Premier of Tasmania, Mr Gray, has described this area as a worthless area that is not worthy of protection when it has been nominated by both Federal and State governments for inclusion in the National Estate List.and the World Heritage List. Despite the assertion by the present Tasmanian Government that this issue is for Tasmanians and their Government alone to decide, there is both a national and an international responsibility involved here. Only the Federal Government can now save this area as it is obliged to do as a signatory to the UNESCO convention. It has been said that it does not have the powers to act. This is incorrect. As a report from the Attorney-General's Department points out, there are adequate powers under sections 51 and 96 of the Constitution, involving external powers, fiscal powers-that is powers to make financial grants to a State contingent upon certain agreements and responsibilities under section 96 of the Constitution-the implied power and the acquisition of land powers for this Government to act. It should do so. The Gordon and Franklin dam projects is an economic and environmental disaster. The Minister for Home Affairs and the Environment has indicated that he would be quite happy to have this opinion from

the Attorney-General's Department incorporated in Hansard. I seek leave to have the document incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT
I July 1982
Nomination for South-West Tasmania for World Heritage Listing
I refer to your memorandum dated 30 June 1982 requesting advice today concerning the Commonwealth's nomination of South-West Tasmania for inclusion in the World Heritage List established under the UNESCO Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage ('the Convention ').
2. The nomination was made on the recommendation of the former Tasmanian Government. However, the present Premier has written to the Prime Minister asking him to arrange for the nomination to be withdrawn.
3. Your questions involve both constitutional matters and the interpretation of the Convention. In the time available it has not been possible to examine the 'travaux preparatoires' for the Convention and some of the answers given below might need to be modified or supplemented when that examination has been made.
4. Your questions, together with my answers and an outline of the reasons for them, are set out below.
Question (a): Is the Commonwealth obliged to accede to the Tasmanian request that the nomination be withdrawn?
5. The answer is 'No'. Nothing in the Convention requires a Party to withdraw a nomination where a body on whose recommendations the nomination has been made has requested its withdrawal. Nor is there anything in Australian law that obliges the Commonwealth Government to withdraw the nomination.
Question (b): If the Commonwealth does acceed to the request is there anything to prevent withdrawal of the nomination?
6. The answer is 'No', subject to the comment in paragraph 24 below. (It would be prudent to seek the views of the Secretariat to the World Heritage Committee, in view of the time already spent by the Secretariat in considering the nomination. There might be legal aspects which do not appear on the face of the Convention.) Article II of the Convention provides that the inclusion of a property in the World Heritage List requires the consent of the Party concerned. Subject to anything to the contrary in the 'travaux preparatoires', I think that, in so far as the Convention is concerned, the consent implied by Australia's nomination of South-West Tasmania can be withdrawn at any time before the property has been included in the World Heritage List. In so far as Australian law is concerned, I do not think that a Commonwealth decision to withdraw the nomination would be subject either to the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act 1974 or the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975. Although such a decision might conceivably have some effects in relation to the proposed dam project, it does not seem to be a decision that would 'affect' the area in the sense relevant to these Acts.
Question (c): What, if any, legal consequences might there be in the event of such a withdrawal?
7. Some of the provisions of the Convention would not then apply to South-West Tasmania. For instance, the area could not be included in the List of World Heritage in Danger, since

2216 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

that List is limited to property appearing in the World Heritage List (see paragraph 4 of Article II). Moreover, international assistance under the Convention is limited to properties that the World Heritage Committee 'has decided, or may decide' to enter in one of the two lists (see Article 20). Thus such assistance would not be available so long as Australia withheld its consent to inclusion in the World Heritage List. However, many provisions of the Convention~-in particular, Articles 4 and 5 (see below)-- would apply even though the area was not included in the World Heritage List.
Question (d): Is it possible that the Commonwealth, by virtue of having become a Party to the Convention, might, under Articles 4 and 5, have current conservation protection responsibilities in relation to the South-West even before consideration for inscription of the World Heritage List?
8. The answer is clearly 'Yes '.
9. Under the Convention, Australia has the international obligations set out in Articles 4 and 5 in relation to property constituting the 'natural heritage' whether or not it is included in the World Heritage List.
10. The 'natural heritage' is defined as follows:
'natural features consisting of physical and biological formations or groups of such formations, which are of outstanding universal value from the aesthetic or scientific point of view;
geological and physiographical formations and precisely delineated areas which constitute the habitat of threatened species of animals and plants of outstanding universal value from the point of view of science or conservation;
natural sites or precisely delineated natural areas of outstanding universal value from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty.'
II. Article 33 provides that it is for each State Party to the Convention to 'identify and delineate' the different properties constituting its 'natural heritage' as mentioned in Article 2.
12. The question then is whether Australia has yet 'identified and delineated' South-West Tasmania as part of its 'natural heritage'. In my view, it clearly has done so by nominating the area for inclusion in the World Heritage List. It is irrelevant whether or not it is included in that List (Article 2 expressly provides:
"The fact that a property belonging to the cultural or natural heritage has not been included in either of the two lists mentioned in paragraphs 2 and 4 of Article II shall in no way be construed to mean that it does not have an outstanding universal value for purposes other than those resulting from inclusion in these lists.")
13. I do not think that it is now open to Australia to 'undo' the identification and delineation constituted by its nomination, except by a bona fide decision that the area should no longer be regarded as an area of 'outstanding universal value' in the respects specified in Article 12. For example, [ do not think that a Party, having identified an area as part of its 'natural heritage', can claim that it is no longer such an area simply because its preservation is politically difficult or expensive, or because it is an impediment to industrial works. The reasons stated by the Premier of Tasmania in his telex of 29 June 1982 are clearly not grounds on which Australia could claim that the area is no longer part of its 'natural heritage'.
14. It follows that the area has been identified by Australia as part of its 'natural heritage' within the meaning of the Convention, and would therefore seem impossible for Australia to deny that it is part of that heritage within the meaning of the Convention, and that it has international obligations under the Convention in relation to it.

15. In particular, Article 4 refers to the duty of ensuring

the 'protection, conservation, presentation and transmission

to future generations of the natural heritage', and obliges each

Party to ensure this 'to the utmost of its own resources and,

where appropriate. with any international assistance and co-

operation, in particular, financial,

scientific and

technical, which it may be able /0 obtain.'

16. Under Article 5 each Party has an obligation to 'ensure

that effective and active measures are taken in the protection,

conservation and presentation of the

natural heri-

tage and to endeavour, in so far as possible, and as appropriate

for each country (inter alia)-

'(a)

to integrate the protection of that heritage

into comprehensive planning programmes;

(c) to develop scientific and technical studies and research

and to work out such methods as will make the (Party)

capable of counteracting the dangers that threaten

its

natural heritage;

(d) to take the appropriate legal, scientific, technical, ad-

ministrative and financial measures necessary for

the

protection (and) conservation

of this heritage '.

17. Since Australia has a federal Constitution, Article 34 applies. It reads as follows:

'The following provisions shall apply to those States Parties to this Convention which have a federal or non-unitary constitutional system:

(a) with regard to the provisions of this Convention, the implementation of which comes under the legal juris-
diction of the federal or central legislative power, the
obligations of the federal or central government shall be the same as for those States parties which are not federal States;

(b) with regard to the provisions of this Convention, the implementation of which comes under the legal juris-
diction of individual constituent States, countries, provinces or cantons that are not obliged by the constitutional system of the federation to take legislative
measures, the federal government shall inform the competent authorities of such States, countries, provinces or cantons of the said provisions, with its recommendation for their adoption.'

Commonwealth constitutional powers:

18. To a substantial extent the implementation of Articles 4 and 5 is within the constitutional power of the Commonwealth.

19. Some of the express constitutional powers are relevant. For instance, the overseas and inter-State trade and commerce power under s. 51 (i) of the Constitution would sup-
port action under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations in relation to overseas borrowings to finance the proposed dams. It would also support Commonwealth action to preserve the area for the purpose of promoting tourist
traffic to South-West Tasmania from places outside Tasmania.

20. The Commonwealth Government also has power under
s. 96 of the Constitution to make grants to Tasmania on such conditions as the Parliament thinks fit. It is therefore constitutionally open to the Commonwealth to make grants to Tasmania for the purpose of financing alternative schemes of power generation, or even to make all grants to Tasmania conditional upon its not building the dam.

21. [n addition to these express powers, the Commonwealth has a so-called 'inherent' power to do all things appropriate for a National Government (see Victoria v. the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2217

Commonwealth "The Australian Assistance Plan Case (1975) 134 C.L.R. 335, especially at pp. 362, 397-398, 412-413). In exercise of this power legislation already exists that would enable the Commonwealth to acquire the area as a Commonwealth national park-see the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975, s. 6 (I) of which provides for the establishment of parks and reserves 'appropriate to be established by the Commonwealth Government, having regard to its status as a national government'. On the basis of the material contained in the Commonwealth Government's nomination of South-West Tasmania for the World Heritage List, it seems clear that this legislation, together with the Lands Acquisition Act 1955, already provides the Commonwealth with relevant statutory powers. (I note that s. 6 (2) of the 1975 Act provides that, without the consent of the State, land shall not be acquired by the Commonwealth for the purposes of Part (( of the Act if it is land that is dedicated or reserved under a law of a State for purposes related to nature conservation or the protection of areas of archaeological or geological importance. However, the areas for the dam project would presumably not be or remain so dedicated or reserved. In any case, the Parliament could repeal the restriction in s.6 (2). Moreover, the further legislation that could be enacted in exercise of the inherent power is not limited to legislation acquiring property. In the time available, however, it has not been possible to consider the full scope of that power in relation to Commonwealth action for directly protectingSouth-West Tasmania.
22. In view of these wide Commonwealth constitutional powers it is unnecessary to consider the external affairs power. I need only say that there is a substantial argument that, under this power, the Commonwealth could legislate to carry out all the obligations under Articles 4 and 5. However, a decision by the High Court on that issue could turn on the question whether the Convention deals with matters of sufficient 'international concern' (Koowarta v. Bjelke-Petersen (1982) 89 A. L. R. 417). However, it would also be open to the High Court to hold that the mere existence of the treaty obligation is sufficient to support Commonwealth legislation under the external affairs power. It is not possible, given the present composition of the High Court, to venture any concluded view on that matter.
The Commonwealth's obligations under the Convention
23. In regard to the scope of the obligations under Articles 4 and 5, I do not think that Australia could justify a failure to preserve its 'natural heritage' in South-West Tasmania if its only reason for the failure was that the preservation was beyond Tasmania's resources. The question under the Convention is clearly one of national resources.
24. If it were suggested that Australia does not have the necessary resources to preserve the national heritage in South-West Tasmania there might well be a duty under the Convention to seek international assistance under the Convention and hence a duty, for that purpose, to seek inclusion on the World Heritage List.
25. In Article 4 the expression 'to the utmost of its own resources' cannot reasonly be read as requiring protection of the natural heritage at all costs, even to the extent of pauperizing the population. However, Article 4 does imply that a very special case needs to be made out in seeking to justify, on grounds of lack of resources, a failure to protect the natural heritage.
26. A related aspect is that, in seeking to reconcile such a failure with the requirements of the convention it would not be enough to show that Tasmania-or even Australian ,_. studies had concluded that the dam project should proceed. It would be necessary for those studies to stand up to scrutiny by critics of international standing.

Question (e): Does the Australian Conservation Foundation have power to seek the inclusion of South-West Tasmania in the List of World Heritage in Danger-the list maintained under paragraph 4 of Article II of the Convention?
27. The answer is 'No'. This list is limited to property 'appearing in the World Heritage List'. Accordingly, no application could be made until the property had been included in that List. Moreover, the List of World Heritage in Danger is limited to property for the conservation of which assistance has been requested under the Convention. Such assistance mayor be sought by a party (see Articles 13 and 19).
Other Comments
28. Finally, I note in the telex of 29 June 1982 from the Tasmanian Premier a reference to Tasmania's 'sovereignty' and 'autonomy' in the matte'r. Of course, such references are constitutionally incorrect. A State only has 'sovereignty' subject to the Commonwealth Constitution, and therefore (by virtue of s. 109) subject to any valid Commonwealth legislation. As outlined above, the Commonwealth has substantial constitutional powers that could be used to preserve South-West Tasmania. Any decision not to intervene must therefore be based on political grounds, not on any constitutional impedement.
(Signed) D. J. ROSE for Secretary
Mr WEST-I thank the Committee. The Fraser Government should offer a compensatory economic package to Tasmania to cover diversification of any demonstrated requirements for increased power production, the identification and establishment of new employment growth industries, the promotion of tourism and the establishment of a South West Tasmanian management authority. This authority should be administered on a State basis with Federal support and it should act to protect South West Tasmania if the Tasmanian Government does not accept such offers.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Before proceeding with the business I will acquaint honourable members with the fact that some concern is felt about the copious incorporations in Hansard. I just give notice that the matter is under consideration and that it could be the subject of a report to the House at some time in the future.
Mr West-Mr Chairman, I raise a point of order. I think, unless I am misguided, that the procedures are such that this matter should have been raised prior to your giving permission. Now that I have formally been given permission to incorporate these documents, they should be incorporated.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The remarks from the Chair did not relate specifically to the honourable member's incorporation; they were an alert to honourable members concerning the whole matter of incorporations.

2218 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Mr FALCONER (Casey) (8.6)~1 wish to take this opportunity to comment on that part of the appropriations for the Department of Home Affairs and Environment which relates to the provision of sporting facilities and support for sporting programs. A number of people come to me from time to time to see whether the Commonwealth can provide assistance for various local programs in which many local people are obviously interested and directly involved. I wish to put the point of view to this Committee which I have put to those people; that is, that Commonwealth appropriations for sport and associated activities ought to be directed towards those sporting activities which cannot be funded by other means and which can be tackled only at the Commonwealth level.
There are available to sporting organisations and people involved in sport various sources of finance from local municipal bodies, State government departments, voluntary organisations, and indeed commercial organisations which are able to give commercial sponsorship. Commonwealth assistance ought to be directed towards catering for our top sportsmen and women and encouraging wider community participation in sport in a way that cannot be provided by other means of assistance. In this respect the Government's sports policy has a number of objectives: Firstly, to encourage and support the growing number of people who play sport at whatever level; secondly, to provide international standard sporting facilities in co-operation with the States; thirdly, to raise the standards of performance of Australian athletes; fourthly, to upgrade the standards of administration and coaching; and, fifthly, to work with State and local government, the private sector and sporting organisations in providing the infrastructure, the funding, the expertise and indeed the enthusiasm needed to support an effective program to develop sport at every level. So it can be seen as a co-operative effort between all levels of government and sporting organisations.
A major part of the Commonwealth Government's expenditure of about $26m for sport in this Budget is directed towards the Sports Development Program, the main vehicle by which the Government provides direct support to major national sporting organisations. This program has a number of elements. One is assistance to national sporting organisations to employ full time administrators and coaching directors so that they can provide the most effective backup services possible to those individuals and groups they represent. I think it is important to note that this type of finance is not likely to be provided by local

municipal bodies, by State bodies or even by voluntary organisations from their membership fees, subscriptions and so on.
Another element of the Sports Development Program is the National Athlete Award Scheme to assist world ranked Australian athletes and teams with competition and training costs and sustaining the rigourous programs needed to maintain and improve their performance. Furthermore, a pilot talent identification scheme has been instituted to pick out these athletes who have the potential to reach world standard and to provide them with assistance to encourage them. Of the approximately $26m to be provided for sport in 1982-83, which includes $7m for capital expenditure on the Australian Institute of Sport, the Sports Development Program is to receive $3.2m to benefit 82 national sporting organisations. Of this, over $Im will be used to meet the expenses of employing 59 administrators and coaches, many of whom can subsequently generate large sponsorship funds, and an amount of $600000 will be spent to help meet the cost of sending Australian teams to compete overseas in 145 events, including the world shooting championships in Venezuela and the world weight lifting championships in Yugoslavia.
I just make the observation~as one who watched on television a number of the events from the recent Commonwealth Games~that I think the weightlifting events attracted a great deal of interest from people who otherwise had had no interest in the sport. The weightlifting events indicated that those who participated were a fine bunch of sportsmen, good humoured and extremely well received by their audiences. They put on performances which, to people with no background in that sport, were very interesting to watch. I think one of the great things about the coverage of the Games was the number of formerly minor sports which achieved a greater degree of recognition. Funds will also be provided towards the cost of conducting major international competitions in Australia such as a world hockey tournament in Melbourne and other events.
The Australian Institute of Sport is another major beneficiary under the appropriation for sport in this Budget. I mentioned earlier that $7m was being provided for capital expenditure on the Institute of Sport. A major initiative of this Government was to establish the Australian Institute of Sport in Canberra in 1981 to provide top athletes and those on the way up with the best in training, facilities and general support. The Institute provides top level specialist coaching training

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2219

for selected athletes and also complementary education and career training opportunities. I make one comment on this aspect. I think eventually the Australian Institute of Sport-indeed, our sporting policy and our sporting organisationswill have to take account effectively of the changing definition of amateur status in sport. Certain games events, as has been shown by the Commonwealth Games, have big potential for commercial development and exploitation. Unless some changes are made to the attitude towards amateurism in sport and the prohibition on athletes taking reward in amateur events I think we will see something, such as the world series cricket events, develop as far as track and field and other events are concerned. That is something of which sporting organisations will have to take account.
Another part of the Government's sporting programs is the international standard sports facilities program. Under this program the government is committed to providing a wide range of facilities around the country which meet the highest international standards at a cost to the Federal Government of $25m over a three-year
period on a dollar for dollar basis with the States. It is important to ensure that that provision goes into major facilities of international standard. As I have mentioned, a wide range of sources of funding for sporting facilities are available at the local level. I make the point that the Commonwealth contribution ought to be made towards those facilities that would otherwise not attract support from local, State or voluntary sources of funding. Some of the facilities which are included in that program in the immediate future include the upgrading of the Olympic Park in Victoria and a State hockey and equestrian centre in Victoria. Overall the objective is to ensure the provision of an appropriate balance and distribution of facilities for a wide range of sports so as to enable major international competitions to be staged in a variety of locations.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (8.15)-Before turning to environmental matters I want, very briefly, to direct the attention of the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh), who is at the table, to some of the problems concerning the National Film Library Archives. The Minister will not be surprised to know that my attention has been drawn to this matter by the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones), who has always had considerable interest in Australian film. I simply want to make a couple of points on the importance of providing the National Library Film Archive with increased and appropriate support for what is, in terms of conservation, a most important area. I heard an excellent program on

the Australian Broadcasting Commission last night which dealt with the recovery of original manuscripts in Poland something like 30 years after the war. These were original manuscripts of some of the great composers such as Bach, Beethoven and Motzart. It was a fascinating story of how those original manuscripts were recovered after being hidden in various places and after, I suppose, a number of adventures.
I think it would be unfortunate if Australia, which at least early in the century had a reputation for pioneering in a number of areas, particularly the area of film, were not to take seriously as a nation the need to restore extant film from earlier periods. For the Term of His Natural Life for example, an extremely important early film, was successfully restored, and I guess that restoration drew the attention of all
Australians to what is possible in terms of recovery and of re-showing important parts of our film heritage. It is my understanding that a number of films already held in the archives are deteriorating, particularly nitrate film, because facilities do not exist to enable preservation work to take place and to ensure that that film is restored to proper condition or translated into a form which means that the original film is at least available to subsequent generations. I simply draw the Minister's attention to that area and ask him to have a look at the problems of the National Library Film Archive to see whether the Government might do something to ensure that an important part of our heritage is not lost.
I want to go from that point to the area of the environment. I begin by referring the Minister to the fact that it is not simply one report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation, a committee of this House, that has failed to get a response from the Government, but at least four reports. These include Environmental Protection, first report October 1979, South-West Tasmania and Hydro Electric Power Development, 27 August 1980, Environmental Protection, second report 22 October 1981, and the report on sandmining on Moreton Island of 29 October 1981. Four reports of a committee of this Parliament have not been responded to within the period of six months, despite the assurances, I think in May of this year, of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that committees would get such a response. Without anticipating what the response might have been in each of those cases, there was not really a lot of point in joint party committees doing all of the work that they did with respect to those reports if the Government cannot get itself together sufficiently to provide a response.

2220 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

In each case the report dealt with an extremely important subject. In the case of Moreton Island and the south-west of Tasmania one is talking about two of the most important environmental situations within the country. Obviously each involves difficult political questions but nevertheless ones of considerable interest not only to the Parliament but to all Australians. With respect to the two reports involving a review of environmental legislation and administrative arrangements. I think that a number of constructive suggestions were made by a joint party committee about the way that that legislation and the administrative arrangements might be carried out. The Government has had plenty of opportunity to consider these suggestions. At least the Parliament might have got some report on current Government thinking was on those questions. We simply have not had that.
I go back to the issue of the south west of Tasmania because I do not think there are too many people concerned with environmental issues who would see a more important environmental issue than that matter. The Minister will remember that the Committee, having made a brief review of the situation with respect to the south west of Tasmania, said: 'Look, this is a very clear case. If it is appropriate from a legal point of view the Commonwealth's powers ought to be invoked to ensure that that area is thoroughly protected'.
Mr Hodgman-The Labor Party in Tasmania supports it.
Mr HOWE-What we have had from the Government is complete silence. No doubt the Government has not been inactive on the matter. But whatever its activities have been it has not been prepared to respond to a committee of this Parliament and to clarify its position-at least with respect to that committee. I think that is most unfortunate. I think the reason the Government has failed to clarify its position is clearly that there are difficult political problems involved, not that there are difficult legal problems involved. The opinion of the Attorney-General's Department which was incorporated by the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) makes it quite clear that the Commonwealth's position is quite secure legally. I just briefly refer to paragraph 28 of the incorporated document. Mr Rose, a First Assistant Secretary in the Attorney General's Department, says:
Finally, I note in the telex of 29 June 1982 from the Tasmanian Premier a reference to Tasmania's 'sovereignty' and 'autonomy' in the matter. Of course, such references are constitutionally incorrect. A State only has 'sovereignty' subject to the Commonwealth Constitution, and therefore (by virtue of s.l 09) subject to any valid Commonwealth legislation. As

outlined above, the Commonwealth has substantial constitutional powers that could be used to preserve South-West Tasmania. Any decision not to intervene must therefore be based on political grounds, not on any constitutional impediment.
If one takes the attitude that has been taken by the Government to the south west of Tasmania in terms of recognising its undoubted environmental importance, recognising its importance in terms of its declaration as a national park and recognising its international importance in terms of nomination to the World Heritage Committee, then one wonders just how the Government will go about ensuring that this important environmental area is fully preserved and is not endangered in any way-certainly not endangered in the way the Tasmanian Government, of whatever persuasion, has in mind, by building a major hydro power scheme on the lower Gordon River. There is no doubt in my view that the development of such a scheme is quite incompatible with the stance that has been taken by this Government, not just by the Australian Labor Party, about the importance of the area from a strictly environmental viewpoint.
I think it is time that the Government came clean on this issue. We know that the Government has been involved in negotiations with the Tasmanian Government. What is the substance of those negotiations? What has the Attorney General-for example, in a recent visit to Hobart-been putting to the Tasmanian Government? If it is good enough for him to put something to a State government on behalf of the Commonwealth Government well it is good enough for the Government to tell this Parliament, which has made some suggestions through a joint committee about what ought to happen in relation to South West Tasmania, what it is about. I think the Minister today indicated that he was prepared to take a national view with respect to this issue, that he was not going to be, in fact, stood over and intimidated by the likes of the Tasmanian members, but that he was going to look at the issue from a national viewpoint. That is the way it ought to be looked at because in talking about South West Tasmania we are talking about Australia's national heritage. We are talking about an important part of the world heritage. There is every reason why the Government at this point ought to declare its position because undoubtedly the Government has a position. It has been in the process of communicating that position to the Tasmanian Government. It is time it communicated it to the Parliament.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2221

Mr UREN (Reid) (8.25)-1 enter this debate only because of what occurred during Question Time today. I think most people who are interested in the preservation of South West Tasmania, which is an important part not only of Australia's national heritage but also of the world heritage, should be concerned that there has been a shift-I think for the good-in the attitude of the national Government. I know that it is probably part of an election campaign strategy in that we know that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is leaving open his options for an election to be held in either late November or early December. It seems to me that even though on the one hand it is argued that the majority of people in Tasmania are in favour of the dam, on the other hand the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh), who is at the table, pointed out that in the confusing referendum which took place more people took the no vote option than--
Mr Hodgman-That is not true.
Mr URENYou can take it up with the Minister, who is nodding to me in agreement. He stated that a majority of people took the no vote option over all other votes in that referendum. I turn to the position of the national Government. The honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) has tabled the legal opinion of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) as to whether the decision is only for the Tasmanian Government. Of course, it has been decided by the Attorney-General that the national Government has the right to make that decision. I hope that the Australian Government, whether out of expediency to try to win the majority of the environmental vote throughout Australia in an early election or out of real conviction, decides that it would be an error to proceed with the proposal in Tasmania.
I was the Minister responsible for instituting an inquiry into the National Estate. That inquiry was carried out by Mr Justice Hope. I commend all honourable members to a reading of that outstanding report. Arising out of that report into the National Estate the Whitlam Labor Government of 1972-75 identified for the first time what the National Estate was. In developing the National Estate we set up the Australian Heritage Commission. Certain powers given under the Australian Heritage Commission Act should be used in working towards the preservation of such a delicate area. We know what occurred previously with regard to Lake Pedder. It was a tragedy that occurred when political parties-I am talking about both sides of the fence-manoeuvred in a

certain way because of the role of the Hydro Electric Commission and its hydro industrialisation policy in Tasmania. Instead of believing in God, people in Tasmania believe in the Hydro Electric Commisson. They have placed it as a symbol and as a solution to all problems. Over the years I have no doubt that the Hydro-Electric Commission of Tasmania certainly did a very fine job. But to my mind it has gone from the sublime to the ridiculous.
The damming of Lake Pedder was a tragedy. It was a tragedy which was perpetrated by the then State Labor Government. The decision was made by the Labor caucus at that time that the national Government would make a certain grant to the Tasmanian Government if it would adopt an alternative to the flooding of Lake Pedder. The
same pressure groups as operated then, controlled by the Hydro-Electric Commission, are now pushing the new proposal to dam the Franklin which will be a further encumbrance on that beautiful and sensitive area which the national Government has recommended to be part of the World Heritage. I believe that all members on both sides of the House should make sure that the Federal Government meets its responsibilities in trying to preserve the precious gem which is South West Tasmania.
As I said earlier, the reason I entered this debate was the question that was asked in Question Time today. I thought that the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh), a conservative National Party Minister, would have received riding instructions from the Prime Minister not to waive the Commonwealth's rights on South West Tasmania. The honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom), a former Minister in the Fraser Administration who was discarded, asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment whether the national Government would stand by its responsibility not to involve itself in the sovereign affairs of Tasmania. The honourable member asked that question under pressure from the Tasmanian Premier. We know that the Premier is in a panic. He thinks that the Fraser Government will sell him out. That is what is going on behind the scenes. Consequently, the honourable member for Braddon tried to get the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment to toe the line. To his credit, the Minister did not. He has left open the position of the national Government so that it need not back the stupidity of not only the Liberal Government of Tasmania but also the former Labor government of Premier Holgate who took a very regressive decision.
The position was set out very clearly at the national conference of the Australian Labor

:222 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

Party. The Leader of the Opposition in the Senate (Senator Button) moved an amendment to be proposed at the conference and the conference supported it.

Mr Barry Jones-It was seconded by me.

Mr UREN-My colleague says that he seconded the amendment. I commend him because he is a progressive fellow. I am sure th~t anybody who has any real feeling about the sen~l tivity of our environment in this day and age WIll be concerned about the future of the real gem of Tasmania. I know that some sections of the trade union movement believe that to proceed with the damming of the Franklin will, in the short t.erm, create employment. It is the role of the natIonal Government and the State Government to find alternative employment prospects, both in the short term and in the long term. There are alternatives to the stupid proposal of damming the river. All people of common sense and compassion should make sure that it do~s not happ~n. Even though I reluctantly give credIt to the MInIster for Home Affairs and Environment, I am glad that he dropped the bucket on the honourable member for Braddon when, under pressure from the Premier of Tasmania, he asked the Minister a Dorothy Dix question, hoping that the M.inister would say that the damming ~f the FranklIn ~as ,he sovereign right of TasmanIa and had nothmg :0 do with the Federal Government. However the \1inister knows that that is not the case. Under legislation, and as a matter of basic principle, the Federal Government has a role to make sure that beautiful South West Tasmania is not destroyed for all time. In fact, it should be included on the World Heritage List.

The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the

Capital Territory) (8.35)-It is a well-known

fact, of course, that the Australian Labor Party

only thinks of Tasmania when it thinks an elec-

or tion is around the corner. I have said before and I
will say again that half of the memb~rs the

Labor Party could not find TasmanIa wIth a

compass and the other half think it is a disease. I

want to say very firmly to the honourable member

for Reid (Mr Uren), who has just completed his

riemmpraerskss~d

that Tasmanians by the attitude of

are not the the Australian

least Labor

Party, as demonstrated in tonight's debate, that

Canberra is the fount of all wealth and knowledge

and that what Canberra says will be the position

in Tasmania. I commend the Minister for Home

Affairs and Environment (Mr McVeigh) and his

Department for approaching the whole question

of South West Tasmania in a genuine, open and honest manner.
Anybody who is listening to ton~ght's debate must wonder how many Labor PartIes there are. As the Minister said in answer to a question earlier today, the Labor Party in Canber!a-the Federal Party-is dead against dammmg the Franklin. I want to tell honourable members opposite that each and every o?e of their Labor Party colleagues in the TasmanIan ParlIament has just voted for it. I suggest to the Labor Party that instead of speaking in two tongues It ought to g~t its act together and vote one way or the other. It IS positively schizophrenic in relation to the South West. Whether the Labor Party likes it or not, the Commonwealth of Australia comprises six sovereign States which have come together--
Mr Cohen-Thank you.
Mr HODGMAN-The honourable member does not like Tasmania and we know why he does not like Tasmania. For the last three Federal elections the honourable member's Party has not won a seat there and it will not do so in the next Federal election. The matter is one of importance because it involves the federal system. What we are seeing here tonight is a classic example of wh~t would happen if Labor were to gam power m Canberra. If Labor were to gain power federally Tasmanians would find that every fundamental decision for our State would not be made by Tasmanians. It would be made by people in Canberra, and that is exactly what we had d~ring the Whitlam years. One could not move a tOIlet on a railway station 50 yards without the approval of the honourable member for Newcastle (Mr Charles 1ones). That is the sort of nonsens~ that we had in the Whitlam years, when TasmanIa became a colony of Canberra. I want to say as forcefully as I can that there is not a Tasmanian worth his blood who will not stand up and fight for his State. The honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe), in what was otherwise a ~ery good speech, actually suggested that TasmanIans we.re going to intimidate the Minister for Home AffaIfS and Environment. Let me tell the honourable member that he is quite right. We do not need to intimidate the Minister, because he is a reasonable person. Each of the five Tasmanians in this place will do as we have done consistently for the last seven years. We will stand up for our State. We happen to believe in Tasmania. We live t.here, we know it and we love it and we are not gomg to be told how Tasmania will be run by 10hnny-comelatelies who visit Tasmania only when they think an election is in the offing.
Mrs Child-Rubbish!

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2223

Mr HODGMAN-I have to concede that the honourable member for Henty is very welcome in Tasmania. She is one of the nicest features of the Australian Labor Party in the Parliament. She is prepared to come to our State and speak with some degree of honesty and sincerity. The fact is that what we are seeing tonight is a warning to nearly half a million Tasmanians. If this country falls under the control of the centralist socialists again, the decision of Tasmania for Tasmania will be made by the Labor Caucus in Canberra. The Opposition does not understand the problem. It does not appreciate that there has been an election. The honourable member for Reid does not even know the name of the former Premier.
MrWest-Mr Chairman, I raise a point of order. The Minister is supposed to be addressing his remarks to the estimates for the Department of Home Affairs and Environment. We want to give him a certain amount of latitude but when he criticises centralist socialists because we are espousing the opinion of the Attorney-General's Department about the fact that-
The CHAIRMAN. Order!
Mr West-There is no sovereignty or autonomy involved in this question.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! I warn the honourable member for Cunningham.
Mr Uren-Mr Chairman, I take a further point of order.
The CHAIRMAN. The Chair has not yet ruled on the point of order. The honourable member for Reid will resume his seat. The Chair is bound to say that under ordinary circumstances and, in a stricter sense, adhering to the Standing Orders I would uphold the point of order but the practice over the years in this chamber has been to disregard that requirement in terms of debate on the Estimates. Most speeches, in all kindness, that have been made have not been consistent with Standing Orders. Nevertheless, the Chair was becoming increasingly interested as to when the Minister might have become more relevant to the question. I cal1 the honourable member for Reid on a point of order.
Mr Uren-Mr Chairman, I can get the support of the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment on this matter. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment gave his interpretation of what the Liberal and National parties believe. They believe that this is not a sovereign matter for Tasmania.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! There is no point of order. I ask the honourable member for Reid to resume his seat. I can the Minister.

Mr HODGMANI would have completed my statement in one minute if I had not been interrupted. The state of knowledge of the Opposition on the matters involving the environment in Tasmania is demonstrated by the fact that according to a very senior member of the Opposition the last Premier of Tasmania was a person cal1ed Mr Holbrook. Holbrook is a sauce and the name of the Premier was Holgate. The Opposition does not even know the name of the last Premier of Tasmania yet presumes to tel1 us how we should run our State. I acknowledge the statements in the chamber of the honourable member for Bass (Mr Newman) and my other col1eagues. In my final words I say to the Labor Party that the people of Tasmania have sent five members to the House of Representatives to fight for them, and fight for them we wil1.
Proposed expenditures agreed to.
Department of Communications
Proposed expenditure, $329,480,000.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (8.43)-On 16 September 1982 the House decided to abolish the Estimates committees. I wil1 quote the Vice President of the Executive Council (Sir James Kil1en) when he gave the reason why these Estimates committees were to be abolished. He said that the abolition would mean that there would be very stringent questioning of Ministers in this place. He stated:
I am deeply convinced that Ministers are responsible to this place. I have said that before and I believe it deserves to be said again. No matter how uncomfortable, no matter how embarrassing, no matter how distressing or hurtful the process of inquiry may be, a Minister must answer.
I say to the House that what I have in prospect is to return the authority of this House to genuine interrogation at an Estimates committee in this place.
I hold the view and I hold it, as I said, very deeply, that the Minister must answer.
If the Minister does not know the answer then the questioner can lacerate him, embarrass him, do what he likes with him. The Minister can be held up to scorn and to ridicule, to laughter and to derision. Honourable members can do all of those things. They can impugn his standing and his reputation in the Parliament.
That is not exactly a very accurate description of what has happened in the Estimates debates. Mr Chairman, I think you would agree that since the previous system the status quo ante has been restored. I must say that where there are points of details which need to be taken up I deplore the fact that we do not have the opportunity to question

2224 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

people in some depth. Certainly the previous system was far from perferct but it did give opportunity to get specific information on quite detailed matters which we really need to do. In leading for the Opposition on the estimates for the Department of Communications, there are four separate matters that I should like to raise for the attention of the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown). The first matter I want to raise is the question of the granting of public frequency modulation broadcasting licences. I would appreciate the Minister's attention because I should like to get his interest in the matter of calling for applications for the issue of these licences, that is to say, the category C community interest licences, in Melbourne. To put the Minister and the House in the picture, recently in Sydney applications were called originally for eight licences. That figure was then extended to a ninth licence. Hearings were held, I think in August and September of this year; eight licences were then granted, after a hiatus of some weeks a ninth licence was granted.
Apparently there have been organisations set up in Sydney for four or five years which have been campaigning for the issue of these special interest licences. As I say, applications have been called in Sydney but not in Melbourne. I must declare an interest. I was the founding chairman of an organisation called Western Regional Broadcasters, with the call sign 3WRB, which was set up in the western suburbs of Melbourne. We want to be applicants for a category 'C' licence. Two experimental broadcasts have been conducted by 3WRB under the auspices of the Minister's Department. I simply make the point about Melbourne's western suburbs that it is an area which has no media outlets other than the written word. There are 17 radio stations in the Melbourne metropolitan area, of which not one is located in the western region. The western region has a population which is as large as the population of Adelaide. It contains an extraordinary diversity of languages and cultures in a rather widely dispersed area. It has very poor physical communications, and our hope was that if a community licence were granted in the area it would be a very effective means of joining together the communities in ways that were specific to Melbourne's west. It would not, of course, duplicate what was happening with 3EA. It would not duplicate what was happening with Channel 0-28. We thought it would perform a useful function.
I understand that there are only two prospective applicants for licences in Victoria. One is the 3WRB group and the other is a group essentially based in the electorate of the honourable member

for Casey (Mr Falconer), with whom I have discussed this matter a good deal. There is a group which is centred in Ringwood-I think it is called Eastern Broadcasters-of which the chairman is Peter Macarthur, the former member of the Legislative Assembly for Ringwood, who would be well known to the Minister and to other honourable members. Of course, that is not to say that if applications for licences are called there might not be some other prospective applicants, but I put it to the Minister that it is about time applications were called in Melbourne.
I think it is a very serious and striking matter that both of the areas in which community radio station organisations have been set up are dispersed areas with large populations that. are not properly serviced by existing radio networks. I hope that the Minister will examine this matter. I understand that the reasons given for not calling applications are simply that the Department of Communications is very much understaffed and at the moment it is particularly concerned with applications for the new television stations which are to be set up over the next few months. That concern is understandable. They are matters of very great importance to a number of honourable members. However, I hope that the Minister will cut the waiting time and call for applications for the granting of these licenses.
The second matter that I want to draw to the Minister's attention is by way of complaint, although I would not say that this is one of the great issues of Western society. There are a number of stamp collectors in the community who are 'philately' opposed, if honourable members will excuse the pun, to the practice of the Department which apparently is to stamp on cards and so on which purport to come from the Antarctic, the Mawson Base stamp. The Australian Stamp Bulletin No. 159 of April-May 1982 says that apparently, contrary to all the rules of the game, the Mawson stamp is applied not down in the Antarctic by penguins but in Melbourne. To make it even worse for the Government, apparently Mr Muldoon recently visited the Antarctic and was photographed in the post office at the New Zealand base applying an honest-to-goodness cancellation stamp. There is concern among the international community of stamp collectors that although it is technically correct that under Article 133 of the Universal Postal Union it is possible for postmarks to be applied by any administration at any place under its control-so Australia Post is technically acting legally in printing the Mawson postmarks on covers which have never left Melbourrie--this

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2225

practice is certainly contrary to the spirit of the game. I hope the Minister has a look at that.
The third thing I want to mention very briefly is that I think we have yet to grasp the social implications of Australia's moving into an informationbased society. I do not know whether the Minister has had a look at the excellent report put out by the Science Council of Canada-the equivalent of our Australian Science and Technology Council but I think with a bit more go in it-entitled 'Planning Now for an Information SocietyTommorrow is too Late'. It was published in March 1982. Earlier I sought the approval of the Minister for Home Affairs (Mr McVeigh) to have incorporated in Hansard Part VI, 'Recommendations', which could be useful for honourable members and others interested in the matter. I seek leave to incorporate Part VI of the document in Hansard.
The CHAIRMAN. The Chair is reluctant to test the chamber for leave. As the Chair mentioned earlier in the evening, some concern is being felt at the increasing practice of incorporating copious documents into Hansard.
Mr BARRY JONES-I checked it out with the Minister.
The CHAIRMAN-It need not necessarily be contentious. It may well be that the honourable member has checked it out with the Minister but in the ultimate the Chair has the authority to ensure that the Standing Orders of the House are upheld. The honourable member has asked for leave and the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) has indicated that he will give leave. It is noted on the conditional basis that the Chair may elect in the ultimate to determine the issue.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
VI. Recommendations
The information society is upon us. The manner in which Canadians choose to participate will have far-reaching implications. The microelectronics revolution, upon which the information society is predicated, presents both threats and opportunities. How we respond will determine the shape of our own lives and Canada's future role in the world community.
Most advanced nations of the world are preparing to place themselves at the forefront of the information society. Many of the changes described will take place whether we like it or not. The question that remains is whether Canada will be an active or a passive participant. Canada has been fortunate in having participated in the early stages of this worldwide technological revolution. But what has been accomplished to date has only been a beginning.
Other countries have backed their initiatives with billions of dollars in public and private sector investment. If Canada's present failure to act continues, Canadians face a bleak prospect and the country will be left even more vulnerable.

Many sectors of our manufacturing industry would be rendered obsolete, virtually overnight. Our trade balance, already precarious, might never recover. Structural unemployment could lead to permanent joblessness for many Canadians, a decline in living standards and, for some, emigration. The personal privacy and integrity of Canadian citizens could be compromised in ways and on a scale never before seen in an independent, democratic country; indeed, our cultural and political sovereignty would be permanently jeopardized. Failure to respond adequately to these clear and present dangers could spell an end to Canada as we know it, precipitating a decline which would bring Canadians inevitably to a condition of pastoral servitude by the middle years of the twenty-first century.
If, on the other hand, Canadians are willing to make the political and financial commitments needed to master the new technologies, particularly in the areas of computers and communications, resource extraction and processing, energy, research and education, then we will reap the benefits of new employment opportunities, reversal of trade deficits, and strengthening of our cultural sector and achieve a new and powerful competitive position in the global marketplace.
Many of the recommendations in this report are directed towards governments, in particular, the federal government. This is not to suggest that all or even most of the impulse for development and evolution should come from the public sector. Much valuable and innovative work in the new technologies is being done now by the private sector in Canada. Some Canadian companies are today world leaders in their specialities. With a few notable exceptions, however, Canadian industry as a whole has been slow to recognize the far-reaching impact the new technologies are having on virtually every aspect of Canadian life and business.
We have identified the key actors (governments, labour organizations, educational institutions, professional, commercial and industrial associations), and attempted to alert them to important facts, trends and problems. It is up to them to playa role in informing Canadians of the massive changes being wrought by the mighty chip, and, of course, to frame their own response to the enormous challenges confronting us all. No one is exempt.
The recommendations and statements of concern that follow are based on a spectrum needs ranging from the importance of heightened awareness to requirements for immediate action.
J. The Science Council recommends that the First Ministers of the governments of Canada create an advisory committee on the new information technology. The committee would be a collaborative group of industrial, federal, provincial and information-user representatives. With a small action oriented secretariat the new committee would gather and disseminate information on domestic and international activities in the new technologies, act as an authority on technological trends and make policy recommendations. The creation of this group by the First Ministers would be an expression of commitment at the highest level.
2. The Science Council recommends that the Communications Research Centre of the federal Department of Communications be restructured to form the nucleus of a national research institute for the development of advanced systems and applications software associated with the theory and practical use of the new technologies. It would also stimulate development of the pool of highly trained personnel needed for the rapid expansion of industries based on the new technologies. Financed by industry and government to meet their needs, the new national research institute would be

2226 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

able to second personnel from universities and the private sector.
3. Cooperation and coordination between federal and provincial governments is essential if Canada is to have a role in an information-dominated future. The Science Council recommends the creation of a national communications policy that is forward looking, integrative and comprehensive. It should encompass a wide range of subject areas from distributed data processing to cultural sovereignty to Telidon, and include establishment of standards that will ensure widespread compatibility of systems.
4. Canada cannot duplicate all of the iniatives underway worldwide. We must realistically choose which products will be developed in Canada, which will be imported from abroad and which can or should be licensed for manufacture in Canada. In order to do SO intelligently, we must have state-of-the-art knowledge about the technologies and the ways in which they are likely to develop. In addition, we must understand the costs of the various alternatives-including direct costs and the multipliers, both positive and negative. The federal Department of Communications, together with other federal departments or agencies with responsibility for industrial development, should have such functions included in their terms of reference.
5. Microelectronics will increasingly permeate all facets of Canadian society. Of special importance is the manufacturing sector, where microelectronically controlled machines of all types will be used. The Science Council supports the recommendations of the CAD- /CAM Technology Advancement Council in its report, Strategy for Survival: The Canadian CAD /CAM Option (September 1980), concerning the diffusion of the technologies throughout Canadian industry.
6. Canada is a resource-rich country and derives much of its national wealth from resource extraction and processing for export. In order to maintain our competitive position in the world both in resource exploitation and the technologies used for that purpose, we must ensure that our resource industries are aware of the role the new technologies can play in improving productivity. There are important roles here for the private section on the one hand and the National Research Council and the departments of Energy, Mines and Resources; Industry, Trade and Commerce; Agriculture; and Communications, on the other.
7. Canada is recognized as a world leader in many areas of geophysical exploration, remote sensing and the use of sophisticated electronic techniques (both hardware and software) to identify new resource areas not otherwise accessible. Both government and the private sector must work to ensure that we maintain this lead and build on this strength so that Canada can maintain a healthy economy.
8. Robots, which can be programed and used in automated factories, will change the shape of production in the future. Manufacturing plants can be designed to achieve worldscale economies at a fraction of today's output. Industry, universities and governments are urged to analyze the advantage inherent in the use of robotics. The Science Council recommends that "centres of excellence" be established to ensure the development of expertise in this area so that policy makers and planners can determine the extent to which we build robots in Canada or import this technology from abroad.
9. With the transition to an economy that will be characterized by the increasing use of microelectronically

controlled instruments and machines in the home, office and factory-in fact, throughout Canadian society-R & D takes on a new importance. In developing new programs to support this activity, industry and government must recognise the relative importance of software. In many applications, experience has shown that software costs, in both human and financial terms, exceed those of hardware by several orders of magnitude. With declining hardware costs, this trend can only accelerate.
10. The new economics of customized mass production, based on extensive use of robotics, will present many challenges to industrial designers and manufacturers. The Science Council recommends that industry and government collaborate to develop and maintain a custom siiicon-chip design and manufacturing capability, both to strengthen our domestic high-technology industries and to avoid dependence on foreign suppliers of this vital commodity.
I I. Important innovations in the microelectronics industry tend to originate in small firms that may not benefit from the broad range of R&D support programs. Council recommends that federal and provincial industrial incentive programs should be reviewed with emphasis on this aspect of the industry.
12. Federal and provincial governments should develop new mechanisms to support small, promising ventures in the new technologies, for both hardware and software. For example, a program of grants could be offered, disbursed by a body similar to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council. To assure equal opportunity and to avoid conflicts of interest, a review system should be created to oversee this program.
13. Federal and provincial procurement policies should be designed to provide strong support for Canadian high technologies companies. Such support would be particularly beneficial due to the "multiplier effect" on component suppliers, including microelectronic chip manufacturers, systems designers, software developers, technical schools, universities, venture capital suppliers and many other sectors that contribute to the development of Canadian expertise in the new technologies.
14. Governments at all levels, including municipal, should accept the objective of harmonizing their procurement policies to ensure system compatibility, and should take steps to set up coordinating mechanisms to realize this objective. Just as standardization enables us to direct dial to any telephone in Canada, so the appropriate jurisdictions must ensure the same highquality system standardization for such areas as computer-aided learning, electronic funds transfer, teleshopping, communicating word processors and electronic mail.
15. The rate of diffusion of microelectronics technology will be conditioned by a number of factors. Key among these will be the attitude of workers who are affected or who perceive that they might be affected. There is an important role for Labour Canada and provincial departments of labour to work with companies and labour organisations to provide for dialogue and planning for orderly transition. Reduction in tensions and avoidance of economic losses due to strikes would be among the benefits resulting from such an approach.
16. Canadian trade unions, in contrast to their European counterparts, have not developed a sufficient knowledge base regarding microelectronics technology. Without an understanding of the implications of the

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2227

new technologies the union movement will continue only to react to real or perceived change rather than carryon an effective dialogue with industry, which is so essential. Council recommends that major unions, perhaps in conjunction with the Canadian Labour Congress, establish centres of science or technology policy with the following aims:
to inform workers about new technologies, taking into consideration both threats and opportunities;
to promote understanding of new employment opportunities;
to provide capable and knowledgeable individuals for meetings, conventions and educational programs in order to present the labour position in a creative and constructive way;
to aid in the policy and decision-making process at all levels of government.
17. Despite the great demand for Canadian workers trained to design and build hardware and to develop systems and applications software associated with the new technologies, provincial governments have failed to assess realistically the urgency of this problem and make the necessary realignments of priorities. Rigidities in university funding mechanisms should be removed so that highly-qualified people will be available in sufficient numbers. Both federal and provincial governments should develop capital and operating programs that will increase funding for education in this viial area. An important role also exists for industry, both to make clear its projected personnel needs (expected to be critical by the mid-eighties) and to develop new inhouse training programs, perhaps modeled on the successful apprenticeship programs in Western Europe.
18. Telidon still requires extensive government support to ensure its speedy introduction in Canada. The Science Council recommends that both federal and provincial governments embark on a large-scale introduction of Telidon into their own operations. This will provide a body of operational experience, invaluable in promoting export of the technology abroad. In addition to improving productivity, such an introduction would lead to widespread computer literacy among government workers exposed to the system in the course of their everyday work.
19. The use of computer-aided learning (CAL) is increasing. An entirely new, related area of endeavour is the authoring of courseware. The need for Canadianproduced courseware in both official languages is great and with the adoption of standards for CAL, the demand will grow steadily in coming years. Teachers should be encouraged to participate in authoring courseware for CAL, as they have done in the past in writing textbooks. In this way teachers may be part of development rather than apart from it.
20. In a world where information is power and increasingly proprietary, restricted access to videotex systems and data banks could create a new form of poverty. An information-poor class could emerge, one that is either unable to afford the services or lacks the requisite knowledge to interact with the system. We recommend that governments adopt a national policy aimed at increasing computer literacy among the public. To help accomplish this objective large numbers of videotex terminals should be placed in public libraries across Canada.
21. The widespread use of microelectronics and computerization raises serious questions regarding privacy. It is our contention that use of the Social Insurance

Number as an identifier should be restricted. Further. the sale of information stored on computer tapes to marketing agencies should be questioned. It has been
demonstrated that data banks are easily penetrated and, therefore, either legitimately or illegitimately, the privacy of all Canadians is threatened. The Science Council recommends that federal and provincial departments of justice provide strong legal remedies. bot h civil and criminal. for misuse of personal information.

22. We view with concern the questions associated with transborder data flows. The predicted impact on Canada in terms of balance of payments, employment
and, of course, national sovereignty are serious problems that call for creative solutions. While recognizing the difficulties inherent in this area, we feel there are
some instances where government intervention is justified; for example, in the areas of personal privacy, sovereignty and national security. The Science Council recommends that the work underway under the direction of the federal Department ofCommunications to measure the extent of the problem be intensified. We also encourage government agencies and the private sector to cooperate in support of similar efforts underway at the OECD.

23. The free flow of information is essential to Canada's future. Barriers of geography, culture or language must not hinder individuals from interacting with public in-
formation networks. Federal and provincial regulatory agencies must guard against the creation of un-
necessary artificial barriers.

24. The principle of separation of carriage and content is paramount; that is, carriers must not be allowed affect the content of material. It is recommended that regulatory agencies ensure that public videotex networks ofthefuture meet all reasonable demands for services at tariffed rates.

25. Increased energy costs have become a widespread fact
of life. The use of telecommunications can do much to alleviate the problems we face due to the rising cost of petroleum-based transportation systems. A number of studies have indicated that teleconferencing will become increasingly acceptable. The Science Council recommends the enhancement of the existing and planned telecommunications infrastructure to promote teleconferencing in both the public and private business sectors.

26. The new technologies are fostering a revolution in
health care. Documentation, diagnosis, pharmacology, treatment, prosthetics and research, for example, will be greatly affected. Industry. medical and nursing schools. provincial and federal departments of health. universities and granting agencies. including private foundations. must be sensitive to the changes in this field and their potential benefits to, in particular, the disabled and those suffering from degenerative diseases.

27. Vastly increased public awareness of the problems

and opportunities formation society

inisheersesnetnitnialtheif

transition to Canadians

an are

into

understand and master the new technologies. This

public information function must involve govern-

ments, educational institutions, the print and elec-

tronic media, labour and industry groups.

The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah) (8.53)- Almost exactly 10 years ago in this chamber I

2228 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

spoke about the prospects of communication satellites in Australia. If I may be forgiven for reading out what I said at that stage, I said, amongst other things:
As we all know, Australia has a small population concentrated largely on a few points on the coastal fringe. It has a very great area which is very sparsely populated. Recently the Government introduced what I regard as a highly significant proposal to develop regional centres. Also over the last few years there has been a succession of very exciting mineral discoveries and the consequent build up of small communities at the sites. If one were to introduce a satellite communications system it would provide telephone, radio, telex and television systems, both black and white and colour, over the whole of Australia simultaneously. I believe this could be done at reasonable cost particularly in view of the statement by the Post Office that there is a continuing and accelerating demand for high class communication systems.
That is one of the things I said about the need for Australia to develop its own communications satellite system. Therefore, I would like tonight to speak on the National Communications Satellite System, which I believe to be one of the most important initiatives of this Government in recent years.
The importance that the Government places on this project can be seen in the allocation of a further $18m of share capital in 1982-83 to Aussat Pty Ltd for the continuing development of the system. The satellite system will be in operation in mid or late 1985 and will enable a complete range of broadcasting and telecommunications services to be provided to the most remote corners of Australia. To the Government's credit only about 2t years have elapsed since it was announced that it was in the national interest to establish the satellite system.
The transmission of Australian Broadcasting Commission television and a minimum of two radio services by relay to regional transmitters and by direct transmission from Aussat satellites to remote homesteads and communities will allow approximately 300,000 Australians to receive television for the first time, while a considerably larger number receive only one ABC radio service at present. This satellite will, I believe, help unite Australia as probably never before and assist in the future development of this country. The system will also provide an automatic telephony service to remote Telecom Australia subscribers as well as back-up emergency and temporary main trunk route telephony services. Also, the satellite will provide aeronautical, maritime and land communications for Department of Transport and Construction operational and safety requirements. We all know the importance of the need for additional communications in Australia. We have only to think back to Cyclone Tracy and what it did to Darwin and to the delays involved

in the proper authorities being alerted to the devastation in the Northern Territory. Obviously, the satellite communication system will not be able to avoid disasters but those Australians living in remote areas will at least know that if any accident or disaster befalls them they can be in ready contact with help.
This satellite will greatly assist distance education and tele-medicine services throughout the sparsely populated areas of this country. In regard to educational opportunities, one of the things that I mentioned back in 1970 and again in 1972
was the opportunity which the satellite would give to us for the development of an open university in Australia. I believe that the concept of an open university should be looked at very closely. It would provide opportunities for a great number of Australians in all age categories to advance their education in a way which was not previously possible. I hope that the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) and the Government both now and in the future will look at the development of this aspect of the communications satellite system.
The system will also be of use to our neighbours. Papua New Guinea comes very much to mind. Papua New Guinea, if it desires, could use
the satellite for broadcasting and television services. I personally hope that it will eventually use the satellite and thereby provide the opportunity for its people, who live in very isolated and difficult areas in terms of communication, to take advantage of modern communications systems. I
understand that at present the decision has been taken not to use the Australian satellite but I hope that in the future something may be done about
that situation.
The capabilities of the satellite do not end there, for it will provide opportunities for establishing private specialised communication networks for organisations and public authorities such as the police and education authorities. I am pleased that the Government has acted so quickly in getting this project off the ground, as it will benefit Australian industry greatly in the difficult years ahead. Australian industry could receive orders worth more than $120m from associated space segments and probable earth station contracts. Industry will also obviously benefit from the establishment of major earth stations in all the capital cities. I was particularly pleased that the Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner) and the Minister for Communications announced on 6 October last that the first contract giving Australian industry a stake in the national communications satellite system had already been signed. That contract, worth more than $5m, has been

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2229

awarded by Hughes Communications International to Amalgamated Wireless Australasia Ltd of Sydney for the design and manufacture of two ground station sub-systems concerned with satellite tracking and monitoring.
Another factor which appeals to me about the satellite is that Aussat is being run as a commercial taxpaying enterprise. Financial viability assessments have indicated that Aussat will generate sufficient revenue to meet all costs, repay all debts and interest and begin returning dividends to shareholders during the life of the first generation satellites, which is expected to be about seven years. Investment in Aussat by the public will be allowed and I feel certain that the population will be pleased to have the opportunity to invest in this major national project. There is no doubt that satellite communications have been a growth area around the world and that there is a very real prospect of expansion in Australia and for export in terms of the manufacturing involvement now that the project has commenced.
I hope that Australian industries will take advantage of the new satellite system in producing new products and finding new markets. I believe that this offers a challenge to manufacturing industry in Australia-a challenge which I believe it will accept because, given experience and history, when confronted with a challenge of this nature, Australian industry has done extremely well in accepting it, in developing new technology and in selling that technology around the world. This gives Australian industry that additional chance.
Our satellites will give Australia more flexibility to meet the national demand for broadcasting and general communications services. Satellites have changed our way of thinking about telecommunications and also our notions of the organisational structure of the business of providing telecommunications services. If there is something that we must do, it is this: All of us, no matter on which side of the House we sit, must see that the launch date of 1985 is achieved so that isolated Australians can enjoy the benefits of television, better radio and improved telephone communications. In the same spirit, I hope and I trust that State governments and private telecommunications firms grasp the opportunity to use the satellite and, thereby, to provide services alongside government telecommunications facilities.
Given the experience and the history of the world in the past 20 years, one of the most outstanding features has been the way in which satellites have brought all areas of the world closer together. There is very real truth in the statement that, in comparison with the situation a few years

ago, the world is shrinking. Satellites, obviously, are here to stay. Satellites can and should, given the right development organisation and management, provide a much higher standard of life in all aspects of life for a very great number of people not only in the remote areas of Australia, but also throughout the world. I hope that governments of whatever persuasion throughout Australia will give the Australian satellite all the support it obviously deserves and all the emphasis that they can give in making it an absolute success.
Mr MlLTON (La Trobe) (9.3)-ln this debate on the estimates for the Department of Communications, I wish to draw attention to another of the broken promises of the Government. However, in this case the broken promise relates not to all Australian people but only to the people who live in the Dandenong Ranges in my electorate of La Trobe. At present over 20,000 people in my electorate suffer the frustrating effects of poor television reception as a result of the unwillingness of the Government to honour its promises. I refer to Division 842 of the estimates relating to capital works and services for broadcasting and television, and in particular to Subdivision 3, Item 01 The Australian Broadcasting CommissionDomestic services. Under this item the 1982-83 estimate is $6,090,000 and of that amount $1,210,000 is to be spent on television transmission in Victoria in a number of locations including Warburton and Marysville.
I want to know why the Government has not seen fit to honour its promises made by the previous Liberal member for La Trobe, Mr Marshall Baillieu, and a previous Minister for Post and Telecommunications, Mr Tony Staley, that translator equipment would be installed in early 1981 in the Dandenong Ranges area so that the people living there could have improved television reception. I wonder whether the Government and the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown), who is sitting at the table, realise just how bad is television reception in the Dandenong Ranges. I receive constant telephone calls and letters from my constituents complaining about the situation. I have spoken previously in the House on this matter on 27 August and again on 27 October 1981 so I will not repeat the background to the broken promises of the Government in relation to television reception in the Dandenong Ranges. I should like to quote from a letter from a constituent of mine who lives in Upper Ferntree Gully. She said:
I am writing in the hopes that you could perhaps help me and the hundreds of other people living in the Sherbrooke area with the same problem. Television reception in the Sherbrooke area is almost non-existent. My aerial picks up reception from BTY 6 Ballarat and 0/28 only. I have heard of

2230 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

others only receiving GTS 4-5-8 and BKN 7 from the Gippsland area. We were promised a transmitter (or transceiver, I'm not sure what it is called) February last year, but since then nothing has been done. I pay compulsory taxes and council rates, but still have to tolerate such bad transmission in a fast growing community such as ours. This letter may sound harsh, but if you had to put up with night after night of poor television, the reception is sensitive to weather and other interferences, then you too would want an explanation. I do not wish to sit back and hope that something will be done, the people of Sherbrooke deserve good television transmission especially since we have chosen to live out of the city free of pollution and heavy industrial noise and traffic. We cannot just slip down the road for entertainment, and in these days of high inflation, nor can we afford it. I had hoped to make this letter short and brief, but I get so angry when I think of the poor deal we are receiving.
That is typical of the letters I am receiving from my constituents. Whilst I appreciate that the estimates relate only to television transmission by the Australian Broadcasting Commission, it is quite clear that the installation of translators would improve the television reception for the commercial television stations from which recoupment funding could be recovered. If funding can be provided for the installation of translators in the hilly areas of Warburton and Marysville why can funding not be provided for translators in the Dandenong Ranges? Why is the Government discriminating against the people in the Dandenongs in this way? In answer to a question on notice asked by myself, the previous Minister for Communications, Mr Ian Sinclair, was irresponsibly vague on the matter. I shall quote two extracts from his letter which indicate the vagueness of his reply. He said:
When my Department has completed assessment of the responses received following circulation of the draft proposal a final planning proposal will be prepared. Should I then decide to invite applications arrangements will be made for potential licensees to be advised accordingly. Final technical operating conditions would be co-ordinated with the successful applicants in the normal manner after the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal has offered the grant of licences. Considerable study has been undertaken to expedite the granting of licences by the ABT should that subsequently be appropriate.
At this stage in development of the Australian domestic satellite it is premature to comment in regard to possible direct broadcasting consequences, particularly as actual transponder arrangements have not been finalised . . .
You may be interested to learn that an inquiry into cable television is currently being held by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal and that the Tribunal has been asked to report by 30 June 1982.
The references to the Australian domestic satellite and the inquiry into cable television in that reply are particularly disturbing. Was the Minister implying that people in the Dandenong Ranges would have to rely on some future development of cable television or the domestic satellite, which could be years away, before they could expect an improvement in their television reception? I hope that the present Minister for Communications is prepared to be more forthcoming

regarding the plans of his Department in relation to this matter.
On 18 March this year Senator Button asked a question in the Senate of Senator Peter Baume, the Minister representing the Minister for Communications, in relation to the proposed installation of new television translators, referring in particular to the Dandenong Ranges area. In his question Senator Button also drew attention to the fact that the current backlog of planning proposals for new translators and new radio services would now take 10 years to implement. Senator Peter Baume replied, in part, as follows:
A draft planning proposal concerning the provision of television translator stations within parts of the Sherbrooke Shire, in the Dandenongs region in Victoria, was prepared by the Department of Communications in September 1980. This document was circulated to the industry for comment as part of the normal planning process.
As a result of comments received it became clear that further investigatory work would be necessary before a final proposal could be prepared for the Minister's consideration.
Negotiations concerning the establishment of these stations have been continuing between the Department of Communications and the licensees of the Melbourne television stations. Further field work will be undertaken in this area within the next few months.
Due to the nature of the terrain in this area there is no simple solution which would overcome television reception problems. Therefore it is imperative that this proposal be considered fully before the final recommendation is made concerning the most appropriate method of improving television reception within the Sherbrooke Shire.
With regard to the backlog of planning proposals Senator Button may be aware that the administrative procedures for planning broadcasting and television services are presently under review by the Department of Communications, in consultation with broadcasting industry representatives. These new procedures are to be implemented in an effort to streamline the planning process and consequently enable the planning backlog to be cleared within the shortest possible space of time.
Senator Button, the shadow Minister for Communications, has pointed out that whilst there are a number of areas in Australia with similar problems, in no other area have people been so irresponsibly treated. Is the Government's shabby treatment of people in the Dandenong Ranges because it does not see the people of my electorate supporting the Government at the next election? If that is so, it is disgraceful. The Minister for Communications should give some assurance of a firm date for the installation of the translators. After the promises made by a previous Minister and the previous member, it is the very least that the Minister could do. I urge him to answer the questions that I have raised in this debate, or else the Government will lose all remaining credibility which it it retains in the eyes of the residents of the Dandenong Ranges.

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2231

Mr IAN CAMERON (Maranoa) (9.12)- First, I congratulate the Australian Broadcasting Commission on its splendid effort in telecasting the Commonwealth Games. All credit is due to that organisation for the world-wide standard of telecasting while the Games were taking place. All those Norms who sat at home and watched the event might like to know that it cost them $4tm. I hope that everyone will agree that every penny was well worth spending. I am sure that the entertainment enjoyed by the l3t million Australians who could not get to the Commonwealth Games to see them live was well worth it. In most cases it was probably better to stay at home and watch the Games on television than to be there in person. I was fortunate in being able to do both-to watch them live and on television at home. I thoroughly enjoyed both. Full marks to the Minister for Communications (Mr N.A. Brown), to his Department and to the Australian Broadcasting Commission for running such a splendid spectacular for us Australians over the last few weeks.
Another thing mentioned in the estimates is th~ subtitles that will be put on ABC television for deaf people. About one million Australians are partially deaf. They will be able to have small black boxes which will allow them to transpond the titles for viewing. Not everyone will see the titles. Boxes will be able to be attached to television sets which will allow people to read captions on the picture.
It may also be of interest that Radio Australia is to spend $7.8m this year. That is a very worthy cause. Radio Australia is transmitted throughout the Near East and the Far East. It gives coverage to all those millions of people whom we meet and trade with. I am sure that it is a splendid way of keeping in contact with those parts of the world and letting people there know exactly what goes on in our country. The total domestic expenditure for radio is $61 m. The ABC radio network does a splendid job, particularly in rural Australia. Although we receive the signal free of charge, as taxpayers we spend, indirectly, $61m on it.
I must say how very pleased I am, as the member for Maranoa, about another matter. My predecessor, Mr Jim Corbett, fought very hard to get an ABC radio station esta?lished. ~t Charleville. There is a $90,000 allocatIOn for It m the estimates. I see some members of the Department nodding. I am pleased that they have had their pens out and put some wet ink on the paper for $90,000 for Charleville. That will enable the Department to acquire some land there, and we expect to have an ABC radio station operating

from Charleville within the next two or three years.
I point out to some people who live in the cities or metropolitan areas and who are used to half a dozen radio stations broadcasting throughout the day that people in that part of the world are not able to hear any radio at all once they are removed a certain distance from the small commercial radio station that operates in Charleville. Once the heat of the day builds up it is impossible to hear the radio at all. Of course, there has never been any television in most of those areas but there is hope for those people with television. The ABC spends $127m on television, which is a very large sum of money. But as I have stated, it is money well spent. I believe that the ABC is improving with new technology. With better programs and wonderful sporting coverage it is improving all the time.
The honourable member for Warringah (Mr MacKellar) spoke at length on the satellite system which is coming into operation in mid-1985. Presently we are using the Intelsat program, which is changing over only this week from a spot beam to a hemispherical beam. That will be a continuing program for the benefit of those people who live in isolated Australia. By putting up a dish antenna they will be able to receive an ABC signal which will be bounced off the present Intelsat satellite placed above the Equator to the eastern part of Australia. That beam has been enlarged, this has caused the transponder to become weakened. We now have to spend more funds to purchase a single transponder whereas before we got away with a half transponder.
Today the Minister for Communications has been good enough to give me considerable time ~o introduce to him some people from TV Australia who are prepared to help to take commercial television to the people in those parts of rural Australia who do not have any television. At present a million people in Australia recei~e no commercial television whatsoever. Pnvate companies in Australia are prepared to take cO.mmercial television to those people. I am hopmg that the Minister will amend the Act as soon as possible-no doubt members of his Department will help to amend that Act-so that we can get on to that Intelsat system and get some commercial television to people in outback Australia. It is not necessarily just the people of outback Australia who are without television. We have just heard from Opposition members that all s?rts of areas in Australia are cut off by wheat Silos, mountains, big trees and so on.
Mr Milton-You cannot even get the ABC.

2232 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Mr IAN CAMERON--They are cut off from the ABC beam and also from commercial television. The domestic satellite in particular the Homestead and Community Broadcasting Satellite Service I program will allow people to put up a very small one-metre dish antenna to pick up the ABC program. There are problems with the commercial aspect-HACBSS II-about which we have again been talking today. It is my hope that the beam configuration will remain at 30-watts and will remain a spot beam so that it may be concentrated into isolated Australia. Approximately 30,000 people in isolated Australia will not get a commercial program if the beam is enlarged and brought down to 12-watts. There is plenty of l2-watt capacity on the satellite for people to use between capitals if they want to do so. So there is no need for them to have to go to a 30-watt beam to transmit from Sydney to Brisbane.
We set out to give television reception to rural areas, isolated Australia and even isolated pockets
within the densely populated parts of Australia, such as the middle of Sydney which, because of high buildings, et cetera, cannot get a perfect signal. With the direct beam off a satellite and a dish antenna in the appropriate place people will be able to pick up a much better signal. I believe that the Government must be congratulated on its HACBSS program. An amount of $470,000 has been allocated to start field work on testing the dishes, et cetera, that will be used by people to pick up that beam.
I conclude by congratulating Telecom Australia on the excellent job that it has done. Along with other members of Parliament, I have done a lot of work in the last 18 months to reduce the installation charges for subscriber trunk dialling telephones in rural Australia. The previous Minister for Communications, now the Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair), along with the Department, reduced the cost to a minimum of $600 a phone.
People complain about Telecom making a profit. This is not really a profit because if Telecom did not make any money it would not be able to complete its capital program. People in metropolitan Australia do not seem to understand that many Australians still do not have access to subscriber trunk dialling. Telecom should be allowed to generate large amounts of capital so that it can reinvest money into the system and enable people to have access to STD facilities. Of course, a number of very isolated areas in Australia will be connected to telephones through the domestic satellite. There are about 1,000 spots on the satellite which people will be able to hook into. This is

a very expensive exercise because it involves a 2-way signal. Bill Pollock and my own local people including Angus McDowell, John Lister, the area manager at Roma, and Murray Brodrick, who is Telecom's Toowoomba manager, have worked very closely to see an improvement in that program. They have also decided-
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Armitage) -Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (9.22)-1 simply acknowledge the contributions made by honourable members and say that those matters certainly will be pursued, particularly the specified local electorate matters that the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) and the honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) raised. I do not want to take the time of the Committee to go into the detail. Detail is available but I can assure both honourable members that those matters will be pursued.
Proposed expenditure agreed to.
Department of Employment and Industrial Relations
Proposed expenditure, $414,709,000.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (9.23)-At the outset I want to say that it is regrettable that the Committee has been denied the opportunity of questioning the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) and officials. 1 think it will be well within the recollection of most honourable members that the process last year was extraordinarily productive, that--
Mr McLean-And a little bit political.
Mr HAWKE-I reject any amicable intervention that it was political; it was conducted in the untarnished search for truth. As the honourable member will recall, the edifying spectacle of bipartisanship was quite apparent on that occasion because I was joined by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) who approached the matter with total objectivity. Between us we were able to address very searching questions to the then Minister and elicit from him and his officials information which was of great use subsequently in many places. But that, of course, is now denied to us.
I want to pick up within the short time that is available some matters of very considerable importance which are available to us in the estimates. First of all, I go to the question of manpower and training programs. Mr Deputy Chairman, you will recall very clearly that last

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2233

week the figures of the Australian Bureau of Statistics showed that unemployment had broken through the half million barrier mark and that brought about a record situation as far as Australia was concerned for the whole of the post-war period and, as I have had occasion to point out previously, exceeded the figures of the 1933 census. I hasten to add, of course, that one has to take into account the fact that the labour force was very much smaller then so the percentage of unemployment is now nowhere near what it was at that time. But in absolute terms we have got back to that sort of figure. So while we now have this record high in post-war unemployment and all the trends are showing a significant upward movement into the forseeable future, we are faced with the situation revealed by the papers before us that the expenditure on manpower and training programs is totally indequate. The estimates in fact show an increase of 21 per cent for the year 1982-83 in the estimated expenditure on total manpower and training programs. Honourable members will recall that in the period since the Budget was delivered on 17 August, a number of honourable members have used the figure of 21 per cent as though they are able to find within it some justification for arguing that this Government is displaying an understanding of the needs that exist in this area when of course the opposite is the case.
I preface the specific remarks which I make on this matter by reminding honourable members of the position of the Government in regard to its total expenditures on manpower and training programs. Despite the increase that is involved this year, 1982-83, there has in fact been a reduction in real terms of some 38 per cent in expenditures in this area since the Government came into office. I appreciate that that includes-as the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations and I have exchanged in conversation on this matter-the expenditures on the early stages of the Regional Employment Development scheme. I suggest that the rapidly increasing figures for unemployment show that the Government, at some stage in the remaining months that it has in office, was going to change its views about the question of job creation programs. In fact, the Minister's own Department has shown in the analysis that it made of the RED scheme-I am sure he must be aware of that analysis-that while there were deficiencies in the operation of the scheme, and everyone acknowledges that there were because it was a new experience, inevitable mistakes would be made. Nevertheless on balance projects undertaken under the scheme were particularly useful. The deficiencies

were there. They were a fact of life. The fact is now that we have had a 50 per cent increase in unemployment. The need for that and other sorts of programs has manifestly increased the expenditure, in real terms, is down some 38 per cent overall.
Having established that as a fact, let us put that matter to one side. Let us look at the claim and the proud boast that is made about a 21 per cent increase in estimated expenditure in 1982-83. When one adjusts for the underspending on just two programs last year, that is the Special Youth Employment Training Program and the School to Work Transition Program, there is a rise in fact of only 12 per cent. In both those programs, as the Minister will understand, there was a significant underspending last year. So the 21 per cent increase that is spoken about so proudly has to be taken into account. Last year the Government in fact intended to spend a considerably greater amount than it, in fact, did.
Mr Macphee-We overspent on the total of the programs.
Mr HAWKE-I am talking about the two programs. When the facts of the two programs are taken into account-what the Government is in fact estimating that it will expand this year compared to what it intended to spend-there is a rise of only 12 per cent. That is just enough to accommodate the inflation which the Government anticipated would occur in the Budget in 1982-83. In other words, in real terms there will not be any increase in expenditure in 1982-83 over what the government intended to expend in the year 1981-82. There is just enough to accommodate inflation while the bottom is falling out of the labour market. This is some indication of the Government's priorities.
I will move quickly to the question of Commonwealth Employment Service staffing. The Government is not just creating significantly increased unemployment in this country but it is as well squeezing unemployment benefits in real terms. It is not providing the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations with the staff needed to cope with increased unemployment. Unemployment in fact increased by over 100,000 in the year to September. Obviously further massive increases will occur during the rest of the 1982-83 financial year. The Government now assumes-after the adjustments made last week-a 37 per cent rise in the number of unemployment beneficiaries in 1982-83. Yet the average number of staff employed by the CES is assumed, on these estimates, to be 3,763 for 1982-83. In other words, that is just 1.4 per cent

2234 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

above the figure for 1981-82. How is the CES to cope with such a strong work load increase when it has virtually static staff numbers? After the questioning last week the Government acknowledged that there would be a 37 per cent increase in unemployment beneficiaries, yet there is to be a 1.4 per cent increase in staff employed by the CES. Obviously in these circumstances there will have to be a squibbing on services. I quote what Mr Cooley, a senior officer of the Department, told a Senate Estimates committee on 10 September:
We have a 'formula', if you like, a system of assessing staff requirements for the offices of the CES.
The system is such, though, that should a ceiling be determined to be inconsistent with our expectations to meet that work load we can adjust the work load to suit the ceiling increase.
Who suffers when the CES 'adjusts the work load'? Of course, it will be the unemployed. In respect of overtime in the CES the estimates document states that there will be 'a reduction in the level of overtime worked in the CES network to accommodate the reallocation of overtime priorities, particularly Job Bank'. What will be the effect of this 'reallocation of overtime priorities' in the CES? Another senior officer of the Department, Mr Macdonald, told the Senate Estimates committee on 10 September:
I think it is wrong to say that there will be a one for one adjustment and that because we have less overtime the service will go down commensurately. If we really are determined to maintain the service we will do it in other ways. We will find that the final output of the CES will not be affected. That is our hope.
My colleague in the Senate, Senator Robertson, then said:
That is your hope, but that is a pious hope.
It would be impossible, in circumstances of an enormous increase in the level of unemployment with virtually a static staff level, for this Government to offer to the increased number of unemployed anything like adequate services.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Armitage)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations) (9.33)-1t might be helpful to the debate if I reply briefly to the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). In respect of the estimates of the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations there is a global vote. The global vote for the Department for its training programs is up by 21 per cent; that is, it has moved from an actual expenditure of $206m, or $2 10m if one embraces

the total programs, by $44m. There is a $44m increase in actual expenditure in the total programs. The purpose of the global vote is that we can adjust each of the programs according to needs. The fact that there was a shortfall last year in actual expenditure of the Special Youth Employment Training Program has been explained before by me in this chamber. There was a number of administrative rigidities in the program. Those rigidities have now been eliminated. Also, the fact is that in the previous Budget we did not increase the subsidies which exist under the program. They have now been considerably increased and they will be more attractive to employers than was the case before.
I make it clear that there is a 21 per cent increase in actual expenditure-not in anticipated expenditure. Frankly, it does not add to the quality of this debate or an understanding of the subject matter to talk of one-line expenditures being adjusted by 12 per cent. The needs as we discern them, as the picture unfolds, will be met. The picture now is for more adult unemployment. This is particularly so in places such as Wollongong and Newcastle. That need will be met. It may be that in a year from now we will see a shortfall in the Special Youth Employment Training Program because the greater problem might be not in placing school leavers and other people in the youth category but in placing people in the more mature age categories. The whole point of the global vote is that it gives us flexibility. The honourable member for Wills, to his credit, acknowledged that the figure of 38 per cent about which he spoke involved the Regional Employment Development scheme. We have been through the costeffectiveness of that scheme. I do not think that it adds to the figures that have been mentioned tonight. If we were to take the statistics back far enough we could probably show that there had been an increase of 107 per cent or thereabouts on the figures of 10 years ago. That really would not add to our understanding of the problems facing us today.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. I am about to call the honourable member for Henty. I point out that, whilst the Minister was given the call, I would normally have called the honourable member for Mitchell. The Minister has spoken, and in accordance with custom and the traditions of the Parliament the Chair calls one honourable member from each side of the chamber alternately.
Mr Macphee-Mr Deputy Chairman, with your indulgence I ask for clarification. I understand that the position is that, in order to help the debate, Ministers can come in for an unspecified

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2235

period at any time after each speaker. I only hope that that does not prejudice my side of the House and that at the erid of the debate Government members are not disadvantaged.
Mr Scholes-Some Ministers talk for half an hour.
Mr Macphee-There is no way that I will talk for half an hour. I just seek the guidance of the Chair so that my colleagues are not disadvantaged. We have certain time constraints on us. I am trying to intervene only because I think it is helpful.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. I advise the Minister that the position is that he has the right to come in at any stage in order to clarify the debate but in doing so he speaks from the Government side of the chamber. In accordance with the traditions of this Parliament the Chair calls one honourable member in order from each side of the chamber. As a Government member has spoken I now have to call somebody from my left.
Mr Macphee-Mr Deputy Chairman, if I want to seek to clarify something that comes from the Government side, what then? Do you deny me the right to follow a Government speaker?
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. If that were to occur I suggest that the Minister would use his common sense. I call the honourable member for Henty.
Mr ShiptonMr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order. I would not want to disagree with your ruling because I think you are in a difficult position. You referred to the traditions of the House; I understand that. The debate on these Estimates follows the abandoning of Estimates committee hearings. The discussion came back to the chamber from Estimates committee hearings. Honourable members were feeling their way, and we felt that a new practice would develop in the chamber. At the Estimates committee hearings, which we have recently abandoned, the Minister was questioned. He entered into discussion in answer to questions from honourable members on both sides.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. I ask the honourable member to come to the point of order.
Mr Shipton-My point of order is that perhaps the history and traditions of this chamber might have changed. One might need to apply new procedures in relation to the Minister entering into the debate on the Estimates in the Committee stage.
Mr ScholesMr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member will resume his seat. I will reply to the point of order that has been raised. What the honourable member says is correct. There has been a movement back to debate in the Committee stage in the chamber after abandoning consideration in the Estimates committee hearings. The Estimates committee hearings were completely separate. I have been in the chair prior to the consideration by the Estimates committees. Unless a decision to the contrary is taken by Mr Speaker and by the chamber, we will act in accordance with the practice that occurred before the Estimates committees were ever started. That practice is that the Chair calls an honourable member from each side of the chamber in order. The honourable member referred to the fact that I am in an awkward position. I wish to say that is the case. I felt it was the right of the honourable member for Mitchell to come in on the debate, but I must rule in accordance with the practice of the past.
Mr Giles-Mr Deputy Chairman, I raise a point of order. I wish to back up what you said entirely. It is quite possible to presume that, on this side of the chamber, the Minister could get up after every speech by an honourable member. If that were so, of course, a number of honourable members on the Government side would not have a chance to speak. I think the matter really is in the hands of the Minister. I agree with what you said.
Mr Macphee-Mr Deputy Chairman-
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. I think we have had the point made. I really should not have called the honourable member for Wakefield. I do not think he raised a point of order. I am not trying to make things difficult. We just have to realise that this is the normal practice under the Standing Orders of this Parliament. I am going to implement those Standing Orders, even though I feel in a difficult position in doing so. I again call the honourable member for Henty.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (9.39)-1 draw the attention of the Committee tonight to the extraordinary decline in employment and career opportunities for women over the past seven years and the failure of the estimates under consideration to provide job creation schemes. This is a government which has presided over consistently high unemployment for both sexes and for all age groups. However, I believe its policies have discriminated against women of all ages in practically every policy it has pursued. In employment, education, child care and access to legal protection this Government has contributed to

2236 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

downgrading the role of women within the community. The labour market has collapsed and the unemployment figures are devastating. The latest figures available show that half a million people are out of work and these are the recorded unemployment figures. Hidden unemployment would account for thousands more. Many of the long term unemployed are young people. The stark fact is that one in five between the ages of 15 and 19 cannot get a job. In 1975 the average unemployment duration was 13 weeks. After seven years of Liberal-Country Party government the average duration is 30 weeks. This makes a mockery of the 1975 and 1977 campaign speeches of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). In 1977 the Prime Minister said:
Because of our policies new jobs are being created. Our training and assistance schemes are getting the unemployed into real jobs productive jobs that they can keep.
Tell that to the hundreds of thousands of people who cannot even get a job, to the women who have been discarded from the work force. The Prime Minister also said: 'We will be generous to those who can't get a job and want to work.' The paper, 'Commonwealth Social Security Cash Benefits since Federation: A Chronology of Major Events to November 1982', compiled by the Parliamentary Library, provides a chronology of how generous this Government has been to those who want ajob and cannot get one:
1976 . . Single people over 18 could be expected to change their locality to find a job.
The work test could be failed by a person on the grounds of unacceptable dress or appearance.
Section 120 re-introduced: it allows the Director-General of Social Security to postpone benefits 'for such period as he thinks fit'.
Skilled workers who have not found an appropriate job within six weeks may be required to accept an unskilled job even though this involves a reduction in wages or status.
People who become unemployed voluntarily to wait six weeks before they are eligible for benefit.
So generous! The paper continues:
Fortnightly income statement to be lodged in person with theCES.
- . . unemployment, special benefits and sickness benefits made taxable.
Concerning 1977 the following appears:
- . . benefit to be paid two weeks in arrears.
- . . legislation amended to preclude payment of benefit to school-Ieavers for six weeks after they ceased full time secondary education.
Concerning 1978 the following appears:
Unemployment benefits removed from automatic indexation except for those beneficiaries with dependants.
That is hardly a record of generosity. Listen to the Prime Minister in his 1975 campaign speech misleading the voters once again:

Only under a Liberal Country Party Government will there be jobs for all who want to work.
Tell that to the unemployed and to the women who want to work. This Government has had seven years to find jobs for all and it has failed miserably. But before we finish with the Prime Minister and his famous promises let us listen to a promise reported in the Daily Mirror of 9 September 1974. He is quoted as saying that the Government should pay the minimum wage of about $80 a week if the number of people out of work reached a quarter of a million. He is not prepared to pay the $80 a week now and unemployment is over the half million mark. Even if he did, the $80 of which he spoke would need to be about $100 to have the same worth now.
Unemployment is high among young men but it is even higher among young women. An enormous number of women of all ages are not eligible for unemployment benefit so their numbers swell the hidden unemployment figures. Unemployment cuts off opportunities for all, but women suffer more, and rural women suffer even more than do suburban women. One of the greatest handicaps for women in seeking jobs in non-metropolitan areas is the narrow range of occupations in which women are concentrated. In rural and provincial areas it is particularly important for women to break into the non-traditional areas of employment. Rural and provincial women must diversify to get jobs and to do that they need government assistance to obtain the necessary training. Getting appropriate training is more difficult for rural and provincial women as training facilities are generally lacking outside the cities and large towns. Married women, because they lack mobility are frequently denied retraining opportunities. Young women often find they must move to a metropolitan area if they are to obtain the training they require.
The current economic situation is exacerbating employment problems. Rural and provincial youth unemployment has reached crisis proportions in some areas. The Fraser Government has responded to this by ordering the Commonwealth Employment Service to stop producing regional unemployment figures, the only figures by which unemployment rates in rural and provincial areas can be established. While the current Liberal and National Party Government is not prepared to do anything about rural unemployment, it is very sensitive to publicity on the situation. By its abolition of the CES figures the Government is suppressing information which would clearly demonstrate that a government dominated by farmers is pursuing economic strategies damaging to the rural areas. By pursuing a

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2237

no-growth strategy and doing little to encourage decentralisation of industry, the Government is ensuring that rural employment figures will not improve.
The brunt of such policies, as the figures show, is being borne by women, who are the first to be forced out of employment in such situations. Women should be able to exercise the right to reenter, or remain continuously in paid employment on the same basis as men, uninhibited in their job opportunities and career prospects. Women do not have full opportunity during times of full employment, but again are very seriously disadvantaged and are hit hardest during times of unemployment. This Government has done nothing for them or for their futures. Similarly, while figures for the young unemployed have been bad for seven years, we now have wholesale retrenchment of workers who have not before been unemployed.
This Government's economic strategy is not working. It has a deplorable record on unemployment. It reacts to the figures as if they were a personal insult. This Government believes that women are secondary income earners only, primarily reliant on their husbands' incomes, despite the increasing proportion of women who are heads of their own households. Perhaps the Government is unaware of the increasing number of women who head their families. One in four families in Victoria has a woman as head of the family. I think the figures would be the same across Australia. This Government has done nothing to ensure that a climate would be created in which these breadwinners could find jobs. Unless and until the Government takes seriously the creation of jobs for women-in fact, for all the unemployed-we face a very bleak future in Australia. It may well be that the Government feels secure with the discredited idea that women traditionally tend to support the conservative side of politics. If Government members believe that they can safely ignore the issues which concern Australian women, they are kidding themselves. A woman does not have to be a radical feminist to know when she is being taken for granted.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Armitage) -I am glad to be able to call the honourable member for Mitchell.
Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (9.48)-Thank you for that, Mr Deputy Chairman. In the discussion which is taking place in the chamber tonight concerning the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations some consideration must be given to the policies that are applied by the Department in relation to the Australian work force.

Present circumstances, I believe, demand an analysis of labour demands and underlying factors on employment and employment prospects. Indeed, the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee), as recently as 30 September, said:
Industrial relations must move with the times. I believe that the industrial relations framework, based essentially on conciliation and arbitration, has served Australia quite well over many years. But there is now a need to stand back and take a good hard look at the present system, assess its effectiveness and examine alternatives.
Indeed, that is a point that Australia has reached at the moment. These are points that have been ignored by previous Opposition speakers. It is obvious that both of the speakers for the Opposition-the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child)-have dwelled on negative factors. For a period of 12 months it has been obvious that excessive wage demands and demands for extra conditions have been factors that will create massive unemployment. During that period not one comment came from the Opposition spokesman the honourable member for Wills, or from the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) to recognise the fact that one man's pay rise was another man's job. In Australia at one stage, we had a Treasurer, a member of the Australian Labor Party, who was brave enough to say this. Today, unfortunately, there are no members of the Labor Party with a modicum of common sense or real ability who can make those sorts of assessments. The Australian trade union movement, employers and govenment, I believe need to take this opportunity to examine carefully the policies of industrial relations and prospects for a growing Australian economy to be able to take advantage of prospects for the future.
In this discussion, the debate about centralised versus decentralised wage fixation has an important part. I believe that there is mutual benefit to be shared between employers and employees. Unfortunately, in the area of Australian industrial relations, we tend only to see an area of conflict. Employers and employees in large corporations and organisations tend to see their objectives as different, exclusive, not related and, in fact, in interminable conflict. The mutual benefits that can flow from satisfactory industrial relations will in fact return for employers and employees a reward for effort, stability for their future and a continuity of prospects for a growth and an increase in their prosperity.
These factors have not been recognised by the Australian Labor Party. It is unfortunate that

2238 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

some of the main features of centralised wage fixation as compared with decentralised wage fixation have not yet been brought to the fore. The only constant cry we have in fact from the Australian Labor Party is for comparative wage justice. That seems to me to indicate a centralised process of wage fixation which means that a mechanic is paid at the same rate as the village smithy. Indeed, in this day and age that is just not a proposition. To compare a man who is technically skilled and in demand with one who is partially skilled and not in demand is impossible but, indeed, it is embedded in the framework of the current situation of conciliation and arbitration. We need to move away from those concepts so that, indeed, a man's worth is assessed by his pay, and his prospect in difficult times to continue employment in a marginal area of profitability is guaranteed.
What the Australian Labor Party and the union movement at large fail to recognise is that the employment prospects of this nation are tied up with the capacity of both employer and employee to benefit mutually by a profitable relationship. A lot of artificial techniques can prop up this relationship. Tariffs can be used. The value of the Australian dollar can be changed. One can in fact try to use some sort of propped up centralised wage fixation. Ultimately what it means is that industries, such as the metals industry, which are marginally profitable will suffer. It will mean that industries are likely to fail and there will be increased bankruptcies caused by a process of coercion, of blackmail, exercised through the processes of industrial relations and carried into the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
There is no need for conflict between employer and employee. There have to be mutual objectives. Indeed, there must be a capacity within the work force to share and to understand the problems of employment. I should like to refer to remarks made by the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) in this respect. He, of all Labor Party members, has offered constructive comment in this area regarding the legalising of job sharing arrangements. He said that the legalising of job sharing arrangements was appropriate where there was agreement between the parties but that such agreement must not be imposed. The Leader of the Opposition has not said that. He is taking exactly the opposite view. The Leader of the Opposition is hanging in with the oil industry workers and with the metal trades workers who will try to squeeze as much out of the system as they can which will lead to loss of jobs and will be to the detriment of their own members. One has only to follow the record of Mr

Carmichael and his union in the metals industry
and to see the dramatically reduced number of employees in the metal trades industry to find out
how effective they are. The metals area of Australia's manufacturing industry was one of Australia's greatest industries. In fact, it is on a
fast decline, brought about by a totally fallacious
concept exercised by the union leadership. The honourable member for Wills is saying-I believe
that this would find general support with both
employers and employees-that where possible, when agreements can be met and legalised with no
detrimental effect, those agreements should proceed.

It is enlightening to find on the same theme that

a senior member of the Conciliation and Arbi-

tration Commission, Mr Justice Ludeke, also con-

siders that this is an appropriate process. Yet the

Leader of the Opposition says: 'We will force in-

dustry and employers to a situation where the last

man to go broke is the one who wins'. In these

days in Australia. I think that is an unrealistic ap-

proach to be adopted by the Leader of the Oppo-

sition. I do not think that the Labor Party in

Australia has been able to sort out what its poli-

cies are in this area. It does not know where it is

going on the issue of centralised or decentralised

wage fixing. It does not know what is most im-

portant to it and the 60 per cent of trade unionists

who are compulsory members of all major com-

mittees of the Labor Party.

.

What is happening is a clear demonstration that the Australian Labor Party is controlled by
people such as Mr Carmichael. It is not prepared
to think of the jobs of members of the Australian Labor Party or the Australian union movement. It is a disaster to read in the Press that trade union
leaders today are seeking an increase in salaries of
more than 15 per cent, plus marginal benefits. On top of that they are seeking tax reductions of 7 per
cent. The calculations made before tax indicate that they are seeking 15 per cent, plus 9 per cent, a total increase in salary for 1982-83 of 24 per cent,
plus marginal benefits.

Mr Holding-What are you quoting from?

Mr CADMAN-I am referring to Simon Crean and the oil industry. The honourable member knows that very well. The storemen and packers would hold this country to ransom by their con-
trol of a small section of Australian industry. I believe it is time that there was some bipartisan approach in this area. Those members of the Labor
Party who claim to be so concerned for the Australian worker should put their concern on the line and open up their caucus to proper discussion
in this area instead of splitting on ideological lines

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2239

with one group backing the Leader of the Opposition and the other group backing the honourable member for Wills.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Armitage) -Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (9.58)-1 start my speech in this debate on the estimates for the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations by paying a compliment to the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee). It is the only compliment he will get from me but he has certainly shown that he is prepared to act in the spirit of the former Estimates committees and answer the questions asked by member on the subject of employment and industrial relations. I think it is an important area on which we should get responses. I regret that when the Estimates committees were abandoned the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) suggested that that procedure could be followed. I think he forgot how the procedures of this Committee normally operate. I commend the Minister for showing his willingness to answer questions. I turn first of all to the Community Youth Support Scheme. I suppose I cannot cQmplain because the electorate of Scullin received $204,900 in the Budget allocation. This included a grant of $54,000 for a new scheme for Bundoora and Watsonia.
Mr Scholes-That is because you have more unemployed than anyone else.
Dr JENKINS-That is right. That is what I want to get on to. That new project now has premises and is developing programs. The Preston Employment Action Group, which serves the Preston and Reservoir area in my own electorate and those of the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) and the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), has found it necessary to have a separate girls group in training. The local technical college and its instructors have been prepared to help to develop the skills of the girls in that group and train them. There is a demand for those with some secretarial training, including typing and shorthand and so on. In that area and in several other areas of training in skills that centre has been very successful in that those who have passed through it have obtained and kept employment. The result of the reduced grant in real terms has been that the centre has had to close. One of the other difficulties found by the Community Youth Support Scheme groups in knowing how to provide for the area-
Consideration interrupted.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Armitage) -Order! It being 10 p.m., I shall report progress.

Progress reported.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr Macphee-I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
In Committee
Consideration resumed.
Dr JENKINS-I was referring to the problems that CYSS groups have in identifying the number of unemployed young people in the area. The fact is that the only statistics available are of those registered for unemployment benefit and they are far from accurate. With a team I was able to organise a household survey of every twentieth home in the Bundoora, Watsonia, Mill Park and Kingsbury areas. The team took a questionnaire to every twentieth house to try to find out the incidence of hidden unemployment. A total of 345 households were surveyed. I think honourable members will agree that statistically that is an important number. Thirty-nine unemployed people were discovered at home, of whom 14 were registered for unemployment benefit and 25 were not.
There is a variety of reasons for that. One of those reasons is the psychological attitude that many people in those sorts of suburbs have imposed on them of the bludging syndrome. There are also problems with the location of the offices. There is one Commonwealth Employment Service office in the Scullin electorate-at Lalor. Preston and Montmorency are outside. the electorate. Transport arrangements do not make it very easy for the unemployed to get to those offices. Similarly, with social security, there is no office in the electorate. There are offices at Greensborough and Preston. There are problems for people in getting transport easily to those areas. The number of unemployed in the area is undoubted. The Victorian Ministry for Employment and Youth Affairs has placed the area on its priority list for the employment initiatives program.
Another of the schemes in this area is the fares assistance scheme. The fares are refundable. The people who are out looking for jobs must first outlay the cost of the fares and then seek their refund. Of course, they must be referred to the job by the Commonwealth Employment Service if they are to receive a refund. In my area the fares of getting to the Commonwealth Employment Service are

2240 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

often more than the fares of going for the interview for the job. One must ask how many people are missing out on seeking employment through the Commonwealth Employment Service. I did a survey with questionnaires of years 10, II and 12 students at six local secondary schools. The survey covered 924 students. Of that total, 631 said
they would register with the CES and 117 said they would not. Over 400 suggested they would register with private employment firms. Would those who registered with private employment firms receive any fare rebate if they travelled to those firms looking for employment? A number of these factors need to be considered when one is looking at the true unemployment figures in an area. There are problems other than just with obtaining jobs.
The Minister spoke earlier about the increase of
21 per cent in the overall departmental expenditure. The honourable member for Wills has challenged the reality of this increase. One wonders how one compares it with the increase in unemployment. How do we relate it and what does it mean? Are there listed in this expenditure any programs aimed specifically at increasing employment levels? I do not think there are. The Special Youth Employment and Training Program that was mentioned is a major program for young unemployed. It does not require employers to expand the work force. I ask the Minister: How many of the subsidised positions under the program have represented additional positions and how many have just been a Mexican tap dance in producing people in the same positions?
The Minister made some comment that the global sum--I think he called it-in the Department was there to allow some flexibility for training programs for unemployed adults, the more senior section of the unemployed. What percentage of total expenditure in manpower and training is represented in programs for adult unemployed? What is its decline in real terms over the last four or five years? What percentage of these adults will be offered training positions in 1982-83? I think it has been stated that 12, I00 adults will be offered training positions. I can cast some doubts on that figure by quoting a local survey that was done. What percentage of unemployed adults does the number of registered unemployed represent? I think the real problem is that, although there are some band-aid programs which have their benefits, there are no initiatives that really seem to get at the base problem of increasing the employment levels.
Mr BURR (Wilmot) (10.8)--1 would like to endorse the comments that were made by the

honourable for Scullin (Dr Jenkins). I too think it appropriate, in this revised system of Estimates debate, that the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) should respond at an appropriate time in order to assist the debate. I realise, as does the honourable member for Scullin, that we are experimenting at this stage with revamping Estimates debates. I agree with the honourable member and the Minister that it is appropriate that he intercede at any appropriate time to assist the debate and provide information. I think that can only assist the Committee, and I urge the Government and those who might be concerned with the Standing Orders to take that into account when they are looking at this revised system.
All of us on both sides of the chamber, in considering the estimates for the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations, would agree that the most important problem facing the Government and the country at this stage is that of unemployment and how we go about providing more employment opportunities for the people of Australia. Speakers from both sides of the chamber agree on this. The Government's policies are directed towards providing or trying to assist in providing employment opportunities. There seems to be no dispute on either side that the most important problem is to provide more employment opportunities. But in looking at that it is quite wrong to try to assess that problem on a partisan basis and assume that it is only the Government which bears the responsibility for trying to provide employment opportunities. The problem of unemployment is not one that only the Government can take a part in. It is not one that only the Government can provide solutions to.
I think, in looking at this problem, that we must assume at the outset that the provision of employment opportunities depends on Australia's capacity to be able to compete in the international market place. Australia is a trading nation. We produce both rural and manufactured products in this country and we rely on the international market place to be able to sell them. If we can produce those products and sell them in the international market we will provide employment opportunities for our people. Therefore, the sale of our products on the international market is absolutely central to the provision of employment opportunities.
In looking at the problem of unemployment we have to look at why we are not competitive in the international market place. A number of speakers-my colleague the honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman) included-have said

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2241

that one of the major inhibiting factors to our international competitiveness is the level of wage structures in this country. That is one of the things-I do not say it is the only one-pricing this country out of the international market place. It is not the only thing but it is one of the things, and we should not be partisan in looking at that. What has happened is that over the years the Government-we must admit this despite our partisan opinions in this place or outside-has correctly said: 'Look, if the unions continue with their wages policy we will price ourselves out of the market place'. That argument has been put before the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, unions and employers in private consultations over a number of years. Over those years people have chosen to ignore the counsel that the Government has put forward with the result that we have priced ourselves out of the international market place. But now we are criticising the Government and saying that unemployment is rising.
I think we have to look constructively and ask why this has happened. The Government forewarned us. The Government forewarned the union movement and the employers in this country that this would be the inevitable result. Despite those warnings the union movement, the employers and everybody proceeded to increase the cost of production in this country through wages, better conditions and whatever you might have to the point where we now have priced ourselves out of the market place.
Mr Holding-What crap!
Mr BURR-I interpolate to mention that my friend the honourable member for Melbourne Ports--
Mr HoldingPure unadulterated crap!
Mr BURR-I urge my friend from Hansard to record that because--
Mr HoldingThat is spelt C-R-A-P.
Mr BURR-I thank the honourable member very much. I urge my friend from Melbourne Ports to consider the facts because what he is saying is that workers in this country have a Godgiven right to a high standard of living. I remind my friend from Melbourne Ports that people in this country or any country have a right only to a standard of living that they themselves are prepared to work for. If we are not prepared to work in this country for our standard of living we have no right to it. I urge the honourable member to take that back to his friends in the union movement. This country has great standards of living

available to it but it has that standard of living available only if we work for it - -
Mr HawkeYou are a hypocrite.
Mr BURR-And if we are prepared to produce our products in this country so that we can sell them on the international market.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order! The honourable member for Wills will withdraw the unparliamentary word he used.
Mr Hawke-Mr Deputy Chairman, withdraw.
Mr McLeanWhat did you say?
Mr HawkeHypocrite.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member for Wills will not trifle with the Chair. I asked for a withdrawal and the honourable member repeated the word quite unnecessarily.
Mr Hawke-I answered my friend.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The Committee will come to order. I call the honourable member for Wilmot.
Mr BURR-I remind the honourable member of what is happening in this country, not just in one particular part-in Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd or in any other company. We are seeing sweetheart deals being negotiated between the bigger companies of Australia and the trade union movement throughout Australia. Those agreements may be convenient to the bigger companies or they may be convenient to some of the union movements. But what happens as a result is that the negotiations and the agreements that have been worked out between the bigger companies and the union executives and which may be convenient to those bodies are automatically passed down the line to the small business organisations and the small employers at the base level. It is at the base level, the small employers and the small businesses, where the real strength of this country lies. Sweetheart agreements are being reached between the big companies and the unions which are forcing the small employers to layoff their people. That is the root cause of unemployment.
I am quite certain that all of us in this chamber would agree that unemployment is our key social problem in this country. If we are to solve this problem what we need to do is to gear our conditions of employment to suit the small employers-not the big employers, not the multinationals. We must gear conditions to suit our small employers. What we are doing is forcing the small employers to layoff labour. I urge my

2242 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

friends on the other side of the chamber and their colleagues in the union movement when they are looking at negotiating agreements for wages and conditions, hours of employment-whatever it may be-not to look at just the sweetheart agreements, not to look just at what they think the unions or the big employers might want, but to look at what the small people might want. If we can employ one more person in every small industry in Australia, and I remind my friends on the other side of the chamber that there are approximately 300,000 small businesses in Australia--
Mr ShiptODHow many?
Mr BURR-There are 300,000 small businesses in Australia, I remind my friend from Higgins. If we can provide one extra job in each one of those small businesses, we will no longer have an unemployment problem in Australia. So let us look at the small businesses. That is where the key to our employment problem lies.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (10.18)-1 think the contribution of the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) would only reinforce the judgment that many of us have made, that the organisation of the Estimates debate this year has been of very little value to the Parliament and has done very little indeed to illuminate what I think everyone agrees is the most important economic, social and political issue facing Australia today. I think that if the Government were serious about the issue of employment and were anxious to see the restoration of something like full employment it would, well before this, have given the opportunity to the Parliament to examine seriously all of the problems associated with employment and unemployment as they exist at the present time.
The proposal has been advanced by a number of honourable members that a select committee of the Parliament ought to be established to look at the issue of unemployment, to try to understand some of the causes and to try to come to some solutions. There is no question that if any honourable member was one of the 500,000 people who are officially unemployed, or was one of the very much larger number of people who are either in the official statistics or, as the honorable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins) suggested, discouraged for one reason or another and do not appear in the official statistics, unemployment would be something of a tragedy. It is a travesty that this Parliament trivialises the issue with the kind of contribution that we have just had from the honourable member for Wilmot. I would say that that contribution reflects a fairly profound prejudice on the Government side. I am sure that the Minister

for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) does not always share that prejudice. It is a prejudice in that in any problem in this country the first group that people seek to use as a scapegoat is the trade union movement. I do not think for a moment that when one comes to the issue of unemployment the trade union movement can be singled out to carry the whole, or even the major part, of the blame.
Throughout the post-war period, until the advent of the Fraser Government, it was recognised that full employment was one of the fundamental objectives of economic policy. There was bipartisan agreement, certainly until 1975, that whatever else governments ought to do they ought to try to ensure that never again do we have unemployment on the scale that existed in the 1930s. It is an unfortunate fact that since the Fraser Government has been in power that has no longer been the most important objective. The fight inflation first strategy, the imposition of monetarist doctrines to restrict wages and the use of unemployment as a means of controlling wages have had a quite catastrophic effect. Neverthel~ss, it is important that we do try to understand what is behind the present situation and that we try to come up with policies that are, as far as possible, bipartisan policies designed to achieve a resto-
ration of something like full employment. That at least requires recognition that it is not just inflation that is a problem but that unemployment, too, is a problem and that we need a strategy that takes account of both inflation and unemployment. The Opposition has been suggesting that it might well be possible to have such a strategy if, on the one hand, we were to pursue more expansionary not only fiscal but also monetary policies on a consistent basis and, on the other hand, we were to seek to get broad agreement within the community about shares of wealth that may be generated by those more expansionary policies.
The Australian Labor Party has quite seriously been in discussion with the Australian Council of Trade Unions about the possibility of achieving agreement on a prices and incomes policy. Of course, it has to be understood that a prices and incomes policy is not essentially a policy about wage restraint; it is essentially a policy about what represents a fair share in terms of the distribution of wealth. So it goes not only to wage incomes but also to non-wage incomes, to the area of taxation and taxation policy. When we have a debate, as we had earlier this afternoon, about taxation policies-indeed, throughout the whole debate that has taken place over the last six weeks-one ought not to think that that is irrelevant to a prices and incomes policy. If the Government has

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2243

been responsible for a massive redistribution of wealth through taxation policy, as I believe it has been, it cannot at the same time expect the community to be very understanding when it comes to suggesting that there ought to be wage restraint. I think we have seen that the Fraser Government is responsible for massive indirect taxation, particularly through the oil levy. We have seen that this Government is responsible for the elimination of the only inheritance taxes that we had nationally, estate and gift duties, the only taxes that were taxes on capital; we have seen this Government preside over a massive redistribution of wealth in terms of tax avoidance; and, if one looks at the figures in relation to company tax and income tax one can see that pay-as-you-earn taxpayers have seen their taxes go up extremely rapidly under successive Fraser governments. In the area of corporate taxes, company taxation as a share of total receipts has declined dramatically. So this redistribution of wealth through taxation has occurred.
When people talk about the trade union movement they are seeking some kind of consensus, some new sense that within the Australian community we are all on about the same things. I do not think that the Opposition disagrees with that. There ought to be some attempt to reach some new social understanding-some might call it a social agreement-and we have talked about a prices and incomes policy. I think that is quite fundamental, but one does not approach that kind of policy when one attacks the trade union movement in the way that the honourable member for Wilmot has just done. One has to recognise that labour has certain responsibilities and that capital also has considerable responsibilities for the present situ~tion.
I think that it is quite amazing that the Government never fails to attack the trade union movement and yet never discusses the monumental blunders that we have seen on the part of capital within this country. Let me take just one example, and I know it is one that I usually come back to. I refer to the proposed aluminium smelter at Portland. We now have tied up in that smelter half a billion dollars of capital doing absolutely nothing. We have that massive investment, which is creating no employment at all because a company was unable to anticipate the recession in the international demand for aluminium. In other words, it was involved in extremely poor planning. That means that capital resources, largely raised in Australia, that might be available to help stimulate employment are simply not available because that company has made in its own right what I regard as a quite monumental error. It was not able to make a

proper assessment of markets or of the situation in respect of power supplies in Victoria as it discussed those issues with what one would have to say was a very weak and indecisive HamerThompson Government.
If we are to resolve the problem of unemployment in this country we certainly need to be looking for broad agreement and for a new consensus, but if we are to do that we need to be prepared not only sometimes to say hard things to labour but also to say some very hard things to capital. I think one could properly say of the Government that it very rarely, if ever, is prepared to make any criticism whatever of capital. I think that is quite fundamental to its failure to grip the problem of unemployment.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hoo. Charles Jooes)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (IO.28)-ln speaking to the estimates of the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations I refer to the immediate review of Australia's requirements regarding the industrial relations system announced by the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee). I think this review is one of the most fundamental steps to be taken since this Government has been in power in looking at the industrial relations situation and systems in Australia. The Minister has said that his Department will carry out this review. It will look at options that will assist in developing an industrial relations system which is capable of meeting Australia's needs for the next decade. It will look at the present system, assess its effectiveness and examine alternatives. I hope that the review will be concluded as soon as possible and that it will not be one of these endless reviews that get lost in departments. I am sure that the Minister, who is at the table, will see that that does not happen. I trust that out of the review we will see some form of co-operation between the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and State tribunals and the basis of a national wage system that works in the interests of all Australians. However, in the short term we have to look at the existing system. The existing system has to be made to work much more effectively than it does at present.
I wish to speak about the current industrial scene. We are all aware of the enormous cost to the nation of high wage demands that increase employers' costs, leave no money for investment by firms and above all are a prime cause of inflation, cost increases and unemployment. I want to

2244 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

look at the metal trades agreement because I believe that at the time that it was agreed it was held out to be a major breakthrough because it was an agreement between unions and employers based on an industry approach with a no-strike period. However, it has not been without its great cost to the community. Effective wage increases granted under it were far too high and have now flowed on to other sectors in the economy.
There has been a flow on into the rural sector from the metal trades agreement and from the meat workers awards. We must ask what this has to do with the metal industry. It proves that the industry by industry approach at present will not work. The solution to industrial relations in this country does not lie in the area of an industry by industry approach. I think the metal trades agreement has proved this. The only hope in the short term future is for a strong and firm Conciliation and Arbitration Commission backed up by firm government policies. If the Government were to back the Commission and the Commission were to stand up for itself as an independent force, I am confident that it could operate effectively in the existing split jurisdiction system. A firm Commission could, and I assume would, influence State tribunals.
To prove my point in regard to the metal trades agreement let us look at what has happened in the economy and in the community. Prices have risen by approximately 10.7 per cent from June 1981 to June 1982. That is a 10.7 per cent increase in prices in the economy. In that time metal workers have received under their award agreement wage increases of an effective 24 per cent as opposed to a 10.7 per cent increase in prices. This is made of an initial 12.7 per cent, which is $25, plus 6.3 per cent, which is $14, plus 5 per cent, being a shorter working hour equivalent to a 38-hour working week. This makes a total of a 24 per cent increase. So in fact that has been very inflationary and has increased costs for metal employers. It shows that the industry by industry approach is not succeeding and that in fact there is something wrong with that approach.
Wage rises in the public sector have been just as frightening as what has happened in the metals area. The basic Commonwealth Public Service movement in the 12 months has been a $63 a week increase for blue collar workers. Obviously, the taxpayer and the nation cannot afford this. With large public sector increases of this order, with the over-generous metal trades agreement and the flow on to the meat industry that I have referred to, the nation is in real difficulty at present. One has to assume that it is economic stupidity.

Mr Scott-It is all that bottom-of-the-harbour stuff.
Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member for Hindmarsh should listen because I am trying to give a constructive approach to the problems of this nation. That is the trouble with the Australian Labor Party.
The industry by industry approach to industrial relations is not working when rural workers receive the flow on from the metal workers. At this time the rural industry, with its problems of drought and lower commodity prices, cannot afford the increases that have been awarded under the metal trades agreement. It is possible in the one company or one establishment for workers to be covered by different awards. This is well known and understood under the system. I hope it is one of the matters that will be looked at by the departmental review that the Minister has announced. For instance, a clerk may receive a different increase because of a different industrial award. There could be clerks, storemen and packers and metal workers in the one establishment or company receiving different increases. Obviously those covered by the award with the highest increase will be the pace setters in the
company or the firm and the firm will be forced again to follow the highest award and all the others in that industry will receive that increase notwithstanding that their awards are less than the highest one. For instance, manufacturing grocers have had to grant all employees the high metal workers increases because there are some metal workers who are bound by the metal workers agreement in the manufacturing grocery industry. That is really not an industry by industry approach. In fact it is totally unacceptable and shows that the so-called industry by industry approach, with our set of craft unions existing at present covering employees in different industries, will not work. The only way out of our current difficulties is to return to a strong and effective Conciliation and Arbitration Commission where all can accept the umpire's verdict. That is what we need in Australia today-people to accept the umpire's verdict in industrial relations matters.
I refer to a point made by the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe). He called for a bipartisan approach to industrial relations. I congratulate him on that spirit. However, he set out to destroy his own argument for bipartisanship because he then set out to destroy the fundamental basis of the institutions. He said that a different economic approach and changed taxation policies were necessary to get better industrial relations in this country. I say to the honourable

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2245

member for Batman that he failed to recognise and tell this chamber that the major reasons for the economic difficulties existing in Australia today are the excessive demands made by the trade union movement.
Mrs ChildHe made a good speech.
Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member for Batman and the honourable member for Henty, who just interjected, should realise that excessive wage demands and demands for shorter working hours in the current economic climate can only cause more unemployment, put more workers out of jobs and destroy the economy and the nation. People such as the honourable member for Henty and the honourable member for Batman fail to appreciate and to acknowledge that the basic difficulty of the Australian Labor Party is that it is in fact the parliamentary wing of the union movement. They never tell us that.
Mrs Darling-Oh!
Mr SHIPTON-Do honourable members deny that the Labor Party is the parliamentary wing of the union movement? There is a dull silence because the honourable member who interjected knows I am right and is not prepared to admit in this chamber that I am right. The Australian Labor Party can never be completely honest to the Australian people, because it represents a vested interest and in fact is a part of that vested interest.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (10.37)-1 wish to address myself, during the debate concerning the estimates of the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations, to the employment crisis existing in the steel industry. I trust the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) is aware that by the end of this year 7,000 people will have lost their jobs. There will be a rundown of at least that figure in the steel cities of Newcastle and Wollongong-we can add another 340 jobs at Whyalla-and in some coal mines, figures for which I will give in a moment, which are of course ancillary to the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd steelworks. Until a little while ago-last month-the companies were attempting to run their labour forces down by attrition or non-replacement of labour, but now we have straight out retrenchments.
In case the Minister and his colleagues have any illusions about the serious state of affairs in these steel cities-these great regional areas-I shall show them some headlines which appeared in the local newspapers in the one week. One states: '800 sacked! AI & S start culling labour'. That headline refers to 400 people at the Port Kembla steelworks who will be sacked on 14 November. We

can add 250 to that figure next week in Newcastle. There will be 400 more by the end of November. A headline appearing the next day states: '2 mines to close, 443 men sacked'. That headline referred to two Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd coal mines at Port Kembla. The next day an article which was headed '260 apprentices to be sacked' stated that of the 285 apprentices who are to finish their fourth year of training this year only 15 to 20 will be retained by AIS at Port Kembla; 260 apprentices will in fact be sacked. As one union official said to the New South Wales Industrial Commission in Sydney the other day, these are the largest labour rundowns and steel industry dismissals since 1930, the year of the Great Depression. It is little wonder that the Miners Federation members on the South Coast have decided to fight this employment rundown and are, right now, conducting a takeover and a sit-in at a mine at Kemira, that is an AIS mine at Wollongong, New South Wales. It might be of interest to know also that this Thursday there will be a mass stoppage in the district. That is quite understandable because people are terribly frightened of losing their jobs. That stoppage will involve the Miners Federation, the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and the Federated Iron workers Association of Australia. It is not over more money; it is over the right to work: As I have said, 7,000 people have lost their jobs there already. That must mean a total rundown, in Wollongong, Newcastle and Whyalla alone, of something in excess of 15,000 jobs. That is the position.
There is truly a crisis in the steel industry. The reasons are quite plain for all to see. There is the general recession in the domestic economy. It is admitted that the Budget's unemployment figures were wrong. The figure will be 65,000 more than was indicated in the Budget, with a blow-out of $300m on unemployment benefit. Parallel with that situation, we have surging imports. It must be an example of exquisite stupidity on the part of the national Government that, faced with such a rundown of jobs as I have demonstrated and such a problem in the economy, it is prepared to stand by and to see imports rise as a percentage of domestic steel consumption. They are over one million tonnes now, in raw steel equivalent, and John Lysaghts, which has works at Westernport and Port Kembla, is now facing, in products directly competitive with its own products, a 30 per cent import penetration. The fact is that imports are up 100 per cent in the last two years, and 26 per cent in the last year. This is at the same time as the BHP steel division has revised its compoTlent of domestic steel consumption from its production

2246 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

downwards from 5.6 million tonnes to 4 million tonnes for 1983.
What happened when we sought assistance from the Government? We were told that we would get assistance and that imports would be pegged at 1981-82 levels. What that means is an increasing share of an ever-decreasing market, as I have just proved. Certainly the BHP steel division is facing economic problems. This is reflected in its profitability for the year ended May 1982, when before fixed asset value assessment-which is its own bodgie rort-type method of accounting-it lost $12,600,000. But last year before fixed asset value assessment it made $105m from the steel division and this year $268m from the oil and gas division. All up, the BHP group, in the year ended May 1982, made a profit of $364m. Obviously, with that sort of profitability record in the past in steel, and still with an overall profitability with regard to the total operations of the group of companies, it should have been prepared to avoid this rapid disruptive labour rundown, culminating in dismissals that I have just described. It should have been prepared at least not to retrench workers.
Despite that refusal there is a crisis in the steel industry. There is no question about that. There is also a crisis in manufacturing industry all over Australia. In Tasmania Australian Paper Manufacturers Ltd is about to lay off workers. People in small business are losing their jobs in the great regional areas. There have been tremendous increases in adult male unemployment registrations over the last few months, as the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations well knows. Yet he still obstinately refuses to allow Commonwealth Employment Service regional offices to produce figures so that we can assess just how bad the situation is on a regional level. We are still presented with figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics which, of course are only average figures. We cannot see what the figures really are region by region or get them broken up into adult males, adult females, juniors and all the different categories of skilled and unskilled workers. There is still a smokescreen because the Government will not allow CES offices to compile and release the figures.
As far as the steel industry is concerned we need both a short term and long term strategy in order to save jobs. In the short term we are demanding, on behalf of all those people who depend on the steel industry for their employmenthonourable members should not forget that if the steel industry goes down the shute altogether Australia will be faced with an extra bill of $3 billion plus for steel imports, they should consider

what effect that will have on the balance of payments-that this Government immediately reverse its quota decision and restrict imports to no more than 10 per cent or 15 per cent as requested. In return, it should demand from the BHP steel division that there will be no sackings. We can save at least 1,500 or 1,600 jobs for people who may lose their jobs in the very near future in the great regional centres of Port Kembla, Newcastle and Whyalla. Then we can settle down to developing a long term industry policy. This Government has no mechanisms for identifying new industries, no means of financing structural change or new industries when they are identified, no policy to expand the economy to resuscitate demand, no program of community job development and no wages or prices and incomes policy.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hoo. Charles Jooes)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (10.47)-Some honourable members are desirous of perpetuating the myth-it is a myth-that honourable members on this side of the Chamber have no concern for the unemployed and are prepared to encourage a situation where people lose their jobs for some ulterior motive. I make it clear there is no monopoly on conscience. As far as I am concerned the sorts of statements made by the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe), suggesting that this Government would want to use unemployment ruthlessly to control inflation and wages, perpetuate a myth. Clearly, allegations of that sort are misstatements to the Parliament. I am the first to acknowledge that unemployment is difficult for anybody. Losing a job creates tremendous difficulties in a personal sense. I can understand why those who are unemployed are anguished and worried. I think it is cruel to trade on people's hardship by suggesting that others would want to see them deliberately put in that position. Those are the sorts of comments that we have heard tonight in some of the debate; not from the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) but from the honourable member for Batman who suggested previously that this Government deliberately uses unemployment in an endeavour to control inflation.
I have no doubt that high levels of inflation have consequences of their own. One of the consequences of high levels of inflation is that this country loses its competitive position in relation to other countries that are endeavouring to manufacture goods and commodities. The fact of the matter is that when one loses one's competitive position one does not sell as many goods and one cannot provide the same services. Therefore one is

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2247

not in a position to continue to pay the wages that one paid before and very often one is not in a position to keep on the number of staff that one employed before. That is a consequence of a high level of inflation. Wages can be an important component of inflation. I think all honourable members recognise that.
I think it needs to be understood in this debate that the pursuit of unrealistic wage demands has consequences and one of those consequences is the significant loss of employment, particularly when our wage structure is out of currency with that of other nations. At the moment important wage negotiations are taking place. One of the areas in which this is happening is the metal trades area. Some statements have been made on the likely impact of any further wage increases over and above those which have been granted in the last couple of years and their likely consequences as far as employment is concerned. I have put it to the Parliament on a previous occasion that I am concerned at the extent to which some unions are prepared to argue for significant wage increases for those people who are in employment regardless of the likely impact on those who are unemployed and those who are likely to suffer unemployment.
I put it to the chamber that one way in which unions might well be prepared to consider the position of those who are unemployed is if the unemployed members-those former members of the profession or calling-were able to retain their membership in the union of which they had previously been a member. I have had drawn to my attention a. report in the Canberra Times in 1979 about one of the most regrettable incidents that I can recall. The report concerned a situation in which a member of the Builders Labourers Federation who had been unemployed for some two years was told that he would have to pay of the order of $200 in arrears to his union before he would be provided with a union ticket, which it was said was necessary for him to begin work on a three-week job on a construction site. That report alarmed me enormously. Some people suggested, of course, that he might have been able to borrow the money or that he might have been able to make some alternative approaches to other benefactors to enable him to do so, but they were not realistic propositions. The report in the newspaper said that the matter could be referred to the union executive to decide whether the fees could be waived but that would take about a week, leaving the man with only two weeks in which to work. I think that all honourable members would be alarmed about that situation.

I believe that if the Conciliation and Arbitration Act were amended to ensure that unions had to keep on their books as members with voting rights former members who were unemployed it would change their attitude significantly in wage negotiations. I think there should be a legal requirement obliging unions to retain full membership rights for unemployed unfinancial members and to prohibit unions from recouping unpaid dues for the periods members are unemployed.
Mr Hawke-The same with shareholders.
Mr RUDDOCK-I do not quite understand the analogy that the honourable member is trying to suggest is appropriate in this case. Shareholders are not denied their right to vote at annual meetings of companies because they are unemployed. Who would suggest that they should be deprived of their rights to participate in companies in which they hold shares if they happen to lose their jobs? That is the most ludicrous analogy that I have ever heard. However, I think it is important that unions whose decisions affect the livelihood of both employed and unemployed people should have both financial and unemployed un financial members participating in the decisions they make which are likely to lead to increased unemployment.
Mr Bill Mansfield, the Secretary of the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association, was reported in the Age of November 1979 as saying that individual unions tend to be preoccupied with the problems of their own members and that there needs to be a commitment on the part of the trade union officials to represent the interests of unemployed people. One way in which I believe they would have that commitment is if those people who were unemployed were entitled to vote at their annual meetings. There is of course the related argument; that is, that the proposal I have advanced could be moderate union claims for better wages and conditions as a trade-off for more jobs in a particular industry. Since full membership rights cannot be and are not provided retrospectively I do not believe it is appropriate for unemployed unfinancial members to be charged dues retrospectively as they were in the case of that unemployed former member of the Builders Labourers Federation to whom I referred.
The proposal I have suggested would relieve the very financial hardship on unionists who have been unemployed, particularly those who have been unemployed for long periods and who might, on resuming employment, have to pay a large

2248 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

amount of arrears to preserve their rights of membership. I suggest that the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) look at section 148 of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. I think that section is one which would lend itself to providing for the protection of the rights of members who have become unemployed. That provision could ensure that a financial member of an organisation, in the event of becoming unemployed, shall not cease to be a member of a union by reason only of the fact that he fails to pay union subscriptions as they become due while he is unemployed.
I commend that proposal to the Minister as a positive one. It should help in bringing about a different climate in those unions that have been prepared to push on with wage increases in a situation where they know that the only likely result will be increased levels of unemployment. It is a two-way street. It is a matter which concerns all members, not only members of the Opposition but also members of the Government parties. I believe that unions could more readily accept their responsibilities if they had some consequences attached to them as well.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time
has expired.
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Em-
ployment and Industrial Relations) (10.57)-1 will not detain the Committee long. I thank honourable members for their contribution to this
debate. I thank the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock), the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) and the honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman) for their contribution on industrial relations. I will respond briefly to some of the points made by some honourable members regarding unemployment. The honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) has spoken of the crisis in the steel industry. The Government is well aware of that and has made appropriate comments through the operative Ministers. As the honourable member has said, this is essentially due to the downturn in the world economy. It is one of the rare occasions when there has been a drop in the export market as well as in the domestic demand. As the honourable member knows, I had a meeting this afternoon with the coal miners and will be communicating with them again late tomorrow so that they can at least pass an interim message to their mass meeting on Thursday. One of the difficulties which that industry faces is that the collieries depend upon the steel industry. At the moment there is no export market for the type of coal they produce. The coal in fact requires blending for

coking purposes. With the drop in steel demand there are fewer blast furnaces and there is less demand for that kind of coal. If there is no export market for that kind of coal obviously the company concerned must feel the need for some retrenchments.
Imports of steel products which are covered by the general reference at this stage are not markedly affected. The Government has said, through the operative Ministers, that the matter will continue to be reviewed. The Industries Assistance Commission is looking at the matter and will be reporting early in the new year. At this stage the
company has not thought it appropriate to seek another Temporary Assistance Authority reference but is prepared to wait for the lAC report.
The Government has responded and established a steel industry council comprising union and employer representatives. This will assist in the restructuring of the steel industry and in the handling of the inevitable dislocation retraining and relocation of persons currently involved in it. It is not easy. Mr Deputy Chairman, the matter affects your electorate. Indeed, in the long term it might affect your electorate more than that of the honourable member for Cunningham. The problem will be with us for some time. We are grappling with it as effectively as we can.
In respect of the points made by the honourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins) on the Special Youth Employment Training Program, in the order of 60 per cent of employees are still with the same employer after three months of ceasing to be subsidised by the Special Youth Employment Training Program. We are not able to go on monitoring peoples' records, but we do know that over 60 per cent remain with the same employer, so there is less abuse than one might otherwise have thought by the employers in terms of taking someone on in order to receive the subsidy and then dispensing with that person. Likewise the employees benefit from the training and stay with the employer. In the order of 30 per cent represent new jobs-jobs that would otherwise not be created. In other words, there is a net gain from this training program for young people. We regard that as a considerable success. Other matters in this Budget which have a job creating aspect have been referred to several times. They concern matters such as the upgrading of airports, the construction of roads, the Bicentennial Road Development Program and the construction of welfare housing. All of those are relevant. I do not think any of them were referred to in this debate. They are very important measures in this Budget in addition to the substantial increase of 21 per cent in relation to training programs.

Adjournment

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2249

Finally, the honourable member for Scullin raised the question of fares assistance. He said that often it cost more for the applicant for a job to travel to a Commonwealth Employment Service office than it does to go for a job. He said that it also cost money to go for a job. We actually give tickets to unemployed persons, before they leave the office of the CES, to go and have an interview with an employer. They do not have to pay first and then seek a refund. They do, of course, have to be registered with the CES. I do believe this has been a useful debate and I thank honourable members for their contributions.
Proposed expenditure agreed to.
Department of Administrative Services
Proposed expenditure, $500,701,000.
Progress reported.
ADJOURNMENT
Nudgee College-Taxation-Mr A. McAdam-Immigration
Motion (by Mr Macphee) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (11.4)-I rise tonight to speak on behalf of a school in my electorate, Nudgee College, which I feel was portrayed in a misleading light in a recent story on education funding which was published in the National Times. The story sought to illustrate the gross failure of this Government's private school funding formula. The article highlighted such factors as the one that more than 80 per cent of students in private schools still attend schools in the neediest category laid down in the Government's funding guidelines, when its private school funding policy. for the last six years has supposedly been based on alleviating need.
Insofar as the story was an attempt to expose the complete failure of the Government's aims in this regard, it can be judged to have been a success. However, by choosing two private Catholic schools in Brisbane, one needy and the other ostensibly well-to-do, the author cast the so-called well-to-do school in this case, Nudgee College, in an unfair light. The author did this in two ways: In the first instance, because the bulk of the story concentrated on the way in which some wealthy schools rip off the system by diverting income, a strong suggestion was left in the reader's mind that Nudgee College was a party to this practice. Indeed, I understand from discussions with the College principal, Brother Connors, whose integrity is unquestionable, that this does not happen at that school. I should, therefore, like to take this opportunity to set the record straight in that regard.

In the second instance, Nudgee College was portrayed in a less than accurate way by the emphasis in the story on the physical trappings and facilities of the school. The impression is given that Nudgee College is a sort of semitropical oasis, a place of 'marble, 14 playgrounds and a swimming pool' to quote the author. Whilst the school certainly presents an imposing facade to passers-by on the main road on which it is situated, a close inspection of its facilities would show that its marble is actually around 100 years old and chipped in places, that its playgrounds are actually sports fields which are given over to the use of students from other schools from time to time and that its swimming pool is a project towards which the Parents and Friends Association has been working for some years.
Speaking of the physical beauty of the school, the author cites the 'marble staircases, stained glass and lots of cedar' in the administration building. The fact is there is only one marble staircase in the whole place. It, along with the cedar panels and the stained glass, was built nearly a century ago and, as with much of the building, gives the appearance of being a little run down. Further this building is not part of the school, but accommodates the Brothers. Simply speaking, Nudgee College is not the well heeled school the article suggests it to be. While it certainly provides an excellent array of facilities for its students, it is also obvious to anyone who visits the school that those facilities are often housed in less than lavish surroundings and that the implied cushioned comfort of its pupils is a far cry from reality.
The point to be made here is that in the context in which Nudgee College was portrayed in the National Times, the impression that the school is sumptuously furnished and overflowing with resources is a damning one. The reason for this arises as it becomes revealed that many schools, which qualify as needy in the Government's funding formula, divert private funds from recurrent spending to capital projects. Since need is determined in accordance with the proportion of private funds spent on daily running costs, schools can plough huge amounts of these funds into building up their stock of libraries, science blocks and other facilities and yet still qualify for the maximum public subsidy under the formula.
Since the National Times story led with a description of what supposedly are the lavish resources of Nudgee College, the impression was therefore created that Nudgee is party to this sort of scheming. To be fair to the National Times, no such indication was given by the author. Nevertheless, the juxtaposition of the two elements of

2250 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Adjournment

the story could not help but create such an impression in the minds of many readers.
As I have endeavoured to show, however, Nudgee College, although a school of proud traditions, is anything but the students' Taj Mahal we read of in the National Times. It accepts students from a wide variety of income groups and, primarily because of the efforts of past generations, of parents, of dedicated staff and alumni, it can educate these boys in pleasant, happy and unostentatious surroundings. Public funds coming to the school help keep fees at a level such that it is not only upper income families who can afford to send their children to Nudgee. To that end, Nudgee College accepts public money within the best traditions of the Australian education ethic.
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (11.8)-1 draw the attention of the House to what I consider to be an anomaly in the Income Tax Assessment Act which allows a taxpayer without dependants to claim a rebate for a daughter-housekeeper but not for a son performing all the duties that would be expected of a daughter-housekeeper. The situation brought to my attention is, no doubt, only one of a number of similar cases. In the case of my constituent, the lady is a mother, a widow who has been struck down by disease and is now bedridden. Her son, the only member of her family living at home, has given up his work to care for her at home with the help of daily visits from the Silver Chain Nursing Association. I stress that without the son's constant attention his mother would be hospitalised.
My constituent has a small income from her late husband's superannuation. She was, therefore, required to submit a taxation return. On the forms supplied for this purpose provision is made to claim a rebate basically for three categories of housekeeper. These are, firstly, a daughter-housekeeper, defined in the Act as follows:
'daughter-housekeeper' means the daughter of a taxpayer who is a widow or widower, being a daughter who is wholly engaged in keeping house for the taxpayer . .
Secondly, there is the category of a housekeeper. This definition in the Act is more complicated, but briefly a housekeeper is defined as a person wholly engaged in keeping house for the taxpayer and in caring for the child, a dependant or spouse of the taxpayer. The third category is the spouse of the taxpayer. The spouse of the taxpayer is either the wife or the husband. No discrimination appears at this point. Yet it is clear from a perusal of the other definitions in the Act that a person without dependants cannot claim for the services of a housekeeper who has had the misfortune to have been born a son rather than a daughter. In other words, a husband is accepted as being

capable of performing the duties of a housekeeper, as is a daughter, but such tasks are not expected to be performed by sons.
I believe that this legislation should be changed so that those who have the services of sons willing to perform the duties of housekeeper are no longer discriminated against. A daughter-housekeeper can look after a single parent--widow or widower-but a son housekeeper cannot. He can only look after his mother without affecting her
rebate if she has other dependants, thereby satisfying the definition of housekeeper. That is not required of a daughter. Surely this constituent of mine, given her circumstances, is entitled to a rebate, having in mind the principles that are so obviously embodied in the present legislation. I suspect that this defect in the legislation simply reflects the changing values in society and the fact that the legislation has not caught up with the fact that sons may perform some of the family responsibilities which evidently were once attributed only to daughters. Not only is this lady entitled by her circumstances, rather than by the sex of her child, to a rebate but, also, the son is at least entitled to have his services to his mother acknowledged officially by the Commissioner of Taxation, as would be the case if a daughter performed the same function. This seems to me to be an easy matter to resolve. It represents a glaring anomaly and I ask the Treasurer (Mr Howard) to examine this matter and to take whatever action is necessary to correct the situation.
In the recent Budget, and in previous Budgets, the spouse and daughter-housekeeper rebate has been increased in recognition of the obligations which rightly fall on certain members of the family unit in particular circumstances. Therefore, it
is only proper to make this adjustment to restore a fair and non-discriminatory tax in this area. Given that the increased costs of the rebates for 1982-83 will amount to some $133m, and much more in a full financial year, the cost of the adjustments to which I refer would only involve a drop in the ocean. But removing the anomaly would mean so much to the few families involved, and is certainly necessary and justified on the ground of simple social justice.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (11.13)- During the parliamentary recess there was in the Australian Press a development concerning one individual that I believe is of sufficient importance to justify its being raised in this House. The individual was the journalist, Mr Anthony McAdam who, until recently, wrote for the Melbourne Age, the 'Green Guide'. He was sacked. In these times the sacking of one person may not seem unusual,

Adjournment

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2251

and in any case Mr McAdam was quickly snapped up by the Melbourne Herald, but the case has several disturbing aspects.
McAdam is the only effective, weB-informed media critic in Australia. His work is comparable with that of Paul Johnson in the London Spectator. He is at ease in the world of ideas and his political position can probably be label1ed, in the American sense, as neo-conservative. Since his work for the Age was that of a radio critic, and radio is the most politicised of Australian electronic media, in his columns in the Age, as in Quadrant where he also has a monthly column, he sometimes criticised the political programs of stations 3CR, 3RRR and also the Australian Broadcasting Commission's Talks Department. He alerted people in particular to terrorist propaganda on 3CR-its support for the Palestine Liberation Organisation, the Irish Republican Army and Pol Pot. His criticisms were judicious, wel1 researched and we\1 written. In the September issue of Quadrant, in his media column, he wrote that the features editor of the Age had written to him in July that he had no brief to put his own political views into his discussion on radio programs.
Mr Bourchier-That is what the other Age journalist does.
Mr COLEMAN-That is the point. Less than a week after receiving that letter the other radio critic of the Age, a man whose writings would seem to fit him very easily into the prevailing leftist orthodoxy of the Age, published a highly political column praising 3CR for 'catering extremely we\1 for an acute social need'. Remembering its support for terrorism around the world and remembering the then current pictures of corpses and pieces of corpses strewn across a London park after an IRA outrage, McAdam referred to this so-ca\1ed social need by asking: 'Do Australians acutely need a hole in the head?' It was shortly after this that Mr McAdam's services were dispensed with and Age readers lost the services of the best media critic in Australia-some would say the only one worth reading. After a\1, very few people take seriously the Press Councilor the Australian Journalists' Association Ethics Committee.
McAdam was fulfi\1ing a unique role. I do not know as a matter of hard fact precisely why he was sacked, but many observers-I agree with them-believe the sacking has a\1 the signs of a leftist operation against an independent critic. I do not mean a vendetta at board level, but at the so-ca\1ed 'lower' or advisory level. I say 'so-ca\1ed' because in these days of worker control the lower

level is not lower at all. In short, it looks as though the Left was out to get McAdam and succeeded. If there is another and better explanation, however unlikely it may be, the Age could discuss the issue in its columns. When Terry Lane was dismissed from an ABC program the Age said that the ABC was wrong not to allow this dismissal to be discussed on air and opened its columns to a debate on the issues. Mr Ranald Macdonald has said that a newspaper can hardly claim the right to discuss and investigate everything else if it wi\1 not let itself be investigated. But on this matter it has refused to publish any of the many letters to the editor critising the Age's sacking of McAdam. The letters to the editor are from many academics, many we\1 known public figures, at least one Australian Labor Party member of parliament, and other admirers of McAdam's work. This is censorship of a serious kind in what amounts to a public
institution. It is a great pity that the old thunderer, the Age, has come to this-a censor of a writer critical of an aggressive orthodoxy.
Mr MAHER (Lowe) (11.18)-~I raise tonight a matter involving the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. I raise it because a little old lady in my electorate, a Mrs Forrester in Drummoyne, who is extremely frail and quite i\1, is seeking to bring to this country from Scotland a family that she refers to as her daughter and her daughter's husband and children. The problem is that Mrs Forrester's daughter is not actual1y a blood relation. She is rea\1y a foster child, a niece. This lady has become very i\1, has been hospitalised on five occasions during the last two years, has suffered a cardiac arrest, and is indeed frail. The purpose of my raising this matter tonight is to appeal to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) to look at it from a very sympathetic point of view because the Department has rejected the application by Mr and Mrs Forrester to bring out this family from Scotland. The husband is a coal miner and the wife works in a hospital. Because there is actual1y no close relationship, the family cannot be admitted to Australia to care for this aged lady. I made representations to the Minister in May. I wrote again in July. Now the family's application to migrate has been rejected.
It was a most touching thing when this lady, Mrs Forrester, came to see me at my interviews on Saturday morning. She is quite distressed. She has a daughter who is living in Darwin, but the daughter has a husband working there and two sons and cannot just se\1 their house and come to Sydney to care for her mother. It is quite clear that the mother cannot go to Darwin to live. She could not take a hot climate. She is very frail and

2252 REPRESENTATIVES 19 October 1982

Papers

very ill. All she wants is for her step-daughter to come from Scotland, to migrate to Australia with her family, and live here. Mrs Forrester raised this foster daughter, as she calls her, from the age of two until she was married. I believe it is a very common sort of thing for people in Scotland, Ireland, England and even here in country areas to foster a close relation-a niece or a nephewwho is then looked upon as part of the family. They are raised by a family but no actual adoption takes place. Unfortunately now the Forrester family is paying the penalty because technically it does not qualify to bring this family from Scotland to Australia at a time of great need.
I have forwarded medical certificates to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and to his Department for consideration. I can do very little else but put before him the urgency of the matter, the fact that Mrs Forrester is extremely frail, that she is fretting for her foster daughter and that she is unable to look after herself. Her husband is also elderly. He cannot look after her. All they want is for this family from Scotland to be allowed to migrate to Australia, to live in Sydney and to care for Mrs Forrester. I have taken the liberty of raising this matter tonight to appeal again to the Minister from a humanitarian point of view to think of the medical condition of this constituent of mine and to allow this family to come to Australia as permanent resident~.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 11.22 p.m.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 19 October 1982, pursuant to statute:
Automatic Data Processing Equipment Bounty Act---Return---Period29 March 1980 to 28 March 1982. 29 March 1982 to 30 June 1982.
Bounty (Agricultural Tractors) Act-Return for year 1981-82
Bounty (Bed Sheeting) Act Return for period I November 1981 to 30 June 1982.
Bounty (Books) Act Return for year 1981-82. Bounty (Commercial Motor Vehicles) Act Return for
year 1981-82. Bounty (Drilling Bits) Act-Return for period I January to
30 June 1982. Bounty (Injection-Moulding Equipment) Act-
Return - Period23 May 1981 to 22 May 1982.
Bounty (Metal-Working Machine Tools) Act--Return for year 1981-82.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act-- Return for period I January to 30 June 1982.
Bounty (Paper) ActReturn for period 6 February to 30 June 1982.
Bounty (Penicillin) Act - Return Period IJune to 30June 1981. Year--1981-82.

Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act - -Return for year 1981-82.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act ---Return for year 1981-82. Bounty (Refined Tin) Act-Return for year 1981-82. Bounty (Ships) Act-Return for year 1981-82. Bounty (Textile Yarns) ActReturn for year 1981-82. Customs Tariff Act-Orders-
Developing Country-No.9 (1982). Forum Island Country-- No.3 (1982). Defence Act -Determinations-1982No. 33-- Uganda Allowance. No. 34Field Allowance. No. 35-Higher Duties Allowance. No. 36-- Table Money. No.37 In Port Allowance. Income Tax Assessment Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 267. Lands Acquisition ActLand acquired for railway purposes-Crystal Brook
and Hundred of, Barunga, Dublin, Inkerman and Yatala, S.A. Statement of lands acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7(I). Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act --- Return for year 1981-82. Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act-Return for year 1981-82. Seat of Government (Administration) ActVariation of plan of lay-out of City of Canberra and its environs, dated 14 october 1982(3). Ship Construction Bounty ActReturn for year 1981-82. Wireless Telegraphy Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1982, No. 268.
REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Dr Blewett to ask Mr Speaker:
I. What is the current availability of (a) hard copy, (b) audio recordings and (c) video recordings from the Parliamentary Library for the purpose of up-to-date current information on matters of public interest which are (i) printed in newspapers, (ii) broadcast on radio, and (iii) telecast on television.
2. Is there explicit recognition in this practice that radio and television news and current affairs programs have a relevance and importance to Members and Senators comparable to that of newspapers; if not, can the Presiding Officers give assurances that the Library will investigate this matter with a view to recognising this position in its provision of service to Members and Senators.
3. For each yearfrom 1974-75 to 1981-82 and for the period I July 1982 to 18 October 1982 (a) how many, and which, (i) newspapers, (ii) radio programs and (iii) television programs has the Parliamentary Library monitored, (b) how many staff have been employed (i) full time and (ii) part time in providing the services referred to in part (3) (a), and (c) how many representations (i) have the Presiding Officers, and (ii) has the Parliamentary Library received relating to suggested improvements in those services.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mr Barry Jones to ask Mr Speaker:
(I) Are Presiding Officers able to provide details of current arrangements in State and Territory Parliamentary Libraries throughout Australia for the provision to Members of those Parliaments of (i) hard copy, (ii) audio recordings, and (iii) video recordings, for the purpose of up-to-date current information on matters of public interest which are (a) printed in

Requests for detailed Information

19 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2253

newspapers, (b) broadcast on radio, and (c) telecast on television, giving, where possible, details such as costs and numbers of (A) employees who provide such services, (8) radio and television programs recorded and/or transcribed and (C) newspapers which are clipped on a regular basis.
(2) For each of these services are the Presiding Officers also able to state what provisions are made to ensure accuracy of transcripts from radio and television broadcasts.
(3) Has the provision of current information services such as those referred to in part (I) been the subject of discussion at conferences of librarians from Parliamentary Libraries around Australia since 1972; ifso, what has been the (a) substance and (b) results of those discussions.
Parliamentary Departments
Dr Theophanous to ask Mr Speaker:
(I) Has the attention of the Presiding Officers been drawn to the Government policy on employee participation enunciated by the then Minister for Productivity (Mr Macphee) during his address to the annual Industrial Relations Convention of the Victorian Employers' Federation in June 1978.

(2) If so, are the sections of that policy headed 'Government Policy" 'Concepts' and 'Principles' applicable to the 5 Parliamentary Departments.
(3) Will the Presiding Officers provide the Parliament with details of all discussions which have taken place within each Parliamentary Department with a view to implementing the policy; if no steps have been taken to implement this policy, can they say what employee participation policy is currently applicable to the Parliamentary Departments.
(4) What unions have members within each of the Parliamentary Departments.
(5) Have any of these unions, singly or jointly, made representations to senior management of any Department in respect of implementation of an employee participation policy; if so, when, and what was the result in the case of each Department.
(6) Do joint union arrangements similar to the Combined Library Unions Committee exist in other Parliamentary Departments; if so, what are the details.


