House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 126, 1982 Thursday, 18 March 1982
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FOURTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FOURTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

'Prime Minister 'Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources 'Minister for Industry and Commerce 'Minister for Communicatidlfs and Leader of the House 'Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate 'Minister for Foreign Affairs 'Minister for Primary Industry 'Treasurer 'Minister for Defence 'Minister for Finance
'Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
'Attorney-General 'Minister for Social Security 'Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs ~nd Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, KCMG.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

'Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 20 April 1982)

'Prime Minister 'Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources *Treasurer 'Minister for Communications and Leader of the House 'Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate 'Minister For Industry and Commerce 'Minister For Foreign Affairs 'Minister For Primary Industry 'Minister For DeFence 'Minister For Finance
'Minister For Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
, Attorney-General 'Minister For Social Security 'Minister For Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister For Transport Minister For Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister For Science and Technology Minister For Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister For DeFence Minister For Employment and Youth Affairs and
Minister For Business and Consumer Affairs Minister For the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister For Industry and Commerce Minister For Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister For Aboriginal Affairs, Minister For Health and
Minister Assisting the Minister For National Development and Energy Minister For Housing and Construction and Minister Assisting the Minister For Trade and Resources Minister For Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, C.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, KCMG.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
GuilFoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde FiFe
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgma~
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

'Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry AUred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair LeaderoJthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Managero/Opposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader ojthe Liberal Party ojAustralia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. Deputy Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAustralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip ReginaLd Lynch, KCMG. (To 8 April 1982) Deputy Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAustralia-The Honourable John Winston Howard (From 8 April 1982) LeaderoJthe National Country Party oJAustralia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony . Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leaderoflhe Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Han. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas, C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William, CBE. Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.c. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville HaroLd Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson CharLes, David Ernest Child,Joan
Cohen, Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross, Manfred DougLas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertford Duffy, MichaeL John
Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde
Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'HalLoran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
HaIL, Raymond SteeLe Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George
Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John CharLes Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. RaLph James Dunnet
Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W.
Bonython, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld
Parramatta, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qld Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld
Kalgoorlie, WA. Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. BradfieLd, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
LilLey,QLd Fremantle, WA. Herbert, QLd Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S.W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie, N.S.W. Fraser, A.C.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby,S.A.
Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,QLd Denison, Tas. Melbourne PariS, Vic.
Bennelong, N.S.W. Balman. Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A.
Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NCP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP
LP ALP
LP ALP LP LP NCP LP
ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP
ALP
LP ALP ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman. Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson. Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull. David Francis KaUer, Han. Robert Cummin Keating, Han. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel
Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Maher, MichaeL John
(From 23.3.1982) Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Han. John Colinlon Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter,James Robert Robinson, Han. [an Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scott, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roge,r Francis Sinclair. Rt Han. Ian McCahan Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.c. Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Han. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Han. David Scott, M.e. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert [an Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.C Willis, Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonythan Camer~n Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scumn, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld BLaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.CT. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume,N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare,N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic.
Lowe,N.S.W. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trohe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shortland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
ALP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-LiberaL Party of Australia; NCP-NationaL Country Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FOURTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scolt, Mr Tamblingand Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE - Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LtBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, MrO'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Oppo-
sition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jqnes, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and MrHowe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Kalter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKSMr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Teague and Senator Sibraa, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTARY PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariffand Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedurej-H. Evans UsheroJthe Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk oJCommittees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk oJthe House-J. A. PeUifer, CBE. Deputy Clerk oJthe House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Table Office (Bills and Papersj-J. K. Porter
Committee Office-M. Adamson Procedure Office-J. W. Pender Table Office (Programming}-B. C. Wright (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader oJStaJJ(House oJRepresentativesj-R. T. Martin LeaderoJStaJJ(Senatej-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen
x

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
FIRST SESSION: FOURTH PERIOD
Aboriginal Land Rights Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 16 of 1982)An Act to amend the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 and the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Act 1979, and for related purposes.
Albury-Wodonga Development (Financial Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 42 of 1982)An Act to amend the conditions of certain financial assistance provided pursuant to the Albury-Wodonga Development (Financial Assistance) Act 1973 and to repeal section 10 of that Act.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1981-82 (Act No. 35 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1981-82, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1981-82 (Act No. 36 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981.-82 for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Amendment Act 1982 (Act No.5 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Act 1962.
Australian Centre for International Agriculture Research Act 1982 (Act No.9 of 1982)An Act to encourage research for the purpose of identifying, or finding solutions to, agricultural problems of developing countries.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 46 of 1982)An Act to amend the Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977, and for related purposes.
Bounty Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 21 of 1982)An Act to amend the Bounty (Drilling Bits) Act 1980 and the Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981.
Canned Fruits Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 18 of of 1982)- An Act to amend the Canlled Fruits Levy Act 1979.
Canned Fruits Marketing Legislation Repeal and Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 19 of 1982)- An Act relating to the marketing of canned fruits.
Coal Industry Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 25 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Coal Milling Industry Lang Service Leave) Act 1949 and the Coal Research Assistance Act 1977.
Crimes Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 67 of 1982)An Act to amend the Crimes Act 1914, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 30 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs TariffAct 1966.
Customs Tariff Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act 1982 (Act No. 52 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs TariffAct 1966.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act 1982 (Act No. 53 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs TariJf(Allti-Dumpillg) Act 1975.
Customs Tariff (Coal Export Duty) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No.17 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff(Coal Export Duty) Act 1975.
Dairy Products (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1982 (Act No. 10 of 1982)- An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of dairy products for export.
Dairy Products (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1982 (Act No. 11 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dairy Products (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1982.
Domicile Act 1982 (Act No. I of 1982)- An Act relating to domicile.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No.2 of 1982)An Act to amend the Marriage Act 1961 and the Family Law Act 1975 in consequence of the enactment of the Domicile Act 1982.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Act 1982 (Act No.6 of 1982)An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the production of dried sultanas, and for other purposes.
Edible Oils (Export I~spection Charge) Act 1982 (Act No. 12 of 1982)- An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of edible oils for export.
Edible Oils (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1982 (Act No. 13 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Edible Oils (Export Inspectioll Charge) Act 1982.
Eggs (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1982 (Act No. 14 of 1982)- An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of eggs for export.
Eggs (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1982 (Act No. 15 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Eggs (Export Illspectioll Charge) Act 1982.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Excise Tariff (Off-shore Installations) AmendmentAct 1982 (Act No. 540f 1982)- An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Excise Tariff (Coal) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 24 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Excise Tariff (Petroleum) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 45 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Excise TariffAct 1921.
Export Control Act 1982 (Act No. 47 of 1982)An Act to provide for the control of the export of certain goods and for related purposes.
Export Control (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 48 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Export Control Act 1982.
Freedom of Information Act 1982 (Act No.3 of 1982)An Act to give to members of the public rights of access to official documents of the Government of the Commonwealth and of its agencies.
Governor-General Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 44 of 1982)An Act to amend the Governor-General Act 1974 with respect to the salary of the Governor-General.
Health Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 49 ot 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973 and the National Health Act 1953, and for related purposes.
Home Deposit Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 40 of 1982)An Act to assist persons to purchase or build their own homes.
Homes Savings Grant Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 41 of 1982)An Act to amend the Homes Savings Grant Act 1964 and the Homes Savings Grant Act 1976 for the purpose of terminating their operation.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 29 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 38 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 39 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
International Financial Institutions (Share Increase) Act 1982 (Act No.7 of 1982)An Act relating to the purchase of additional shares of the capital stock of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and of the International Finance Corporation.
International Fund for Agricultural Development Act 1982 (Act No. 50 of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the International Fund for Agricultural Development.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No.4 of 1982)- An Act to amend the International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Act 1963.
Loan Act 1982 (Act No. 32 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
Off-shore Installations (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 51 of 1982)- An Act to apply the provisions of certain Acts to off-shore installations.
Overseas Students Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 22 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Overseas Students Charge Act 1979.
Overseas Students Charge Collection Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 23 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Overseas Students Charge Collection Act 1979.
Radiocommunications Licence Fees Act 1982 (Act No. 65 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect oflicences under the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1905.
Radiocommunications (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 66 of 1982)An Act to amend the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1905 and the Overseas Telecommunications Act 1946 and to provide for certain matters consequential upon the enactment of the Radiocommunicalions Licence Fees Act 1982.
Repatriation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 20 of 1982)An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920, and for related purposes.
Roads Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 43 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Roads Grants Act 1981.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 55 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.1) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 56 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 57 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 58 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 59 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 60 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 61 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 62 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 63 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment (Off-shore Installations) Act 1982 (Act No. 64 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Senate Elections (Queensland) Act 1982 (Act No. 31 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the Senators for the State of Queensland to be chosen by the people of that State voting as one electorate.
Social Services Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 37 of 1982)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947 and the Social Services Amendment Act 1979.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No.8 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
StatesGrants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 28 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States Gralils (Schools Assistance) Act 1980.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 27 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Gralils (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981 and the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 260f 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Supply Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 33 of 1982)An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Supply Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 340f 1982)An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FOURTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
iCustoms and Excise Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Defence Force Discipline Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
.rertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
iHoney (Export Inspection Charge) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Honey (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982Inititiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensi~ns) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill 1982Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Questions Without Notice

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1123

Thursday, 18 March 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers.
DEATH OF TAN SRI DATO' SYED NASIR ISMAIL
Mr SPEAKER-It is with deep regret that I inform the House of the sudden death on 16 March of Tan Sri Dato' Syed Nasir Ismail, a most distinguished Speaker of the House of Representatives of Malaysia. I am sure that all honourable members would join with me in an expression of sympathy to the family of the late Tan Sri Dato' Syed Nasir Ismail and to the Parliament of Malaysia on this sad occasion.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY MOTOR REGISTRIES Notice of Motion
Mr FRY (Fraser)-Mr Speaker, I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) condemns the Government for allowing the registration of motor vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory to become subject to unreasonable delays following the Review of Commonwealth Functions, resulting in great inconvenience to A.C.T. motorists and possible dangers from unregistered vehicles, and
(2) calls on the Minister for the Capital Territory to ensure the appointment of sufficient permanent testing officers at least to restore the system to the standard which prevailed before the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
TELEVISING OF MAJOR SPORTING EVENTS
Notice of Motion Mr WALLIS (Grey)-Mr Speaker, I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House calls on the Government to amend broadcasting and television legislation to ensure that, where the televising of major sporting events has been the subject of arrangements between commercial television interests and sporting organisations, arrangements be made that would allow the telecasting of these major sporting events to ABC television stations operating in the more remote areas where no commercial stations operate.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
Mr SPEAKER-Are there any questions? Mr Scholes-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Is it possible for you to take up with the members of the Ministry who do not come into the chamber for the start of Question Time the fact that questions are inhibited if Ministers are

not present until half way through Question Time?
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. It is not a matter for the Speaker.
AUSTRALIAN OVERSEAS INVESTMENTS
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct my question to the Treasurer. I refer to the fact that in July 1981 the Treasurer allowed more portfolio investment overseas by Australian enterprises yet a few days ago, in answer to a question, he said that as a nation we simply do not have the capacity amongst Australian corporations to provide the economic growth and the economic development that we need. Is it a fact that the 1980-81 Australian statistics show a deficit of $5.1 billion on current account and a large proportion of this deficit-namely, $2.1 billion-is due to the fact that we are remitting overseas profits made by foreign corporations? Can the Treasurer explain why Australia, supposedly short of capital for its development, has allowed significant investment overseas by Australian companies but continues to preside over a worsening balance of payments situation caused by massive profit outflows by foreign companies which the Treasurer's Government is falling over to attract?
Mr HOWARD-Frankly, I see no inconsistency between giving a greater capacity to Australian corporations and Australian residents to 'make portfolio investments abroad and the answer I gave to the honourable member the other day. The fact is that the changes I announced in the middle of last year were a necessary freeing of exchange control restraints on the activities of Australian corporations. For example, they made it possible for a number of very great Australian companies to increase their investments' abroad and, therefore, strengthened those companies. In particular the changes made it possible, for example, for Mount Isa Mines Ltd to comply fully with the 50 per cent foreign equity guidelines contained in our foreign investment policy regarding the involvement of Mount Isa Mines in the Oaky Creek project, which is the very objective of the policy and the very direction that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition would want us to go. The change in that policy also facilitated the operations of CSR Ltd in the Delhi project. Without those changes it may not have been possible for those transactions to take place.
I reject completely any suggestion that the freeing up which occurred last year is inconsistent with the answer that I gave the honourable gentleman yesterday. I think both policy stances are complementary. If we are to improve the strength

1124 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Questions Without Notice

and capacity of Australian corporations which, in the long run, is what I hope both of us are about, one of the ways in which we do it is to increase the capacity of those corporations to invest abroad. There are many Australian companies that have the capacity to make a significant mark not only here but also on the world scene generally.
GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE PARK
Mr FALCONER-My question is directed to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment. It relates to some expressions of concern by users of the Great Barrier Reef at the possible implications of the declaration of the Cairns section of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park late last year. Did many of these expressions of concern come from people on the Queensland coast immediately adjacent to the new section of the park? What action has been taken to resolve conflicting views between conservationists and those who live and work on the reef or who are dependent for their livelihood on activities associated with the reef?
Mr WILSON-The progressive declaration of sections of the Marine Park involves a number of stages that take into account public participation. The outer boundaries of a section are drawn only after very careful study which involves communities likely to be affected. Having declared a section of the park, the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority then proceeds to the development of zoning plans so that competing interests can be reconciled and areas set aside for fishing, other areas for scientific research, other areas for the use of tourists, and other areas for the use of skindivers and so on. That process is now under way in relation to the Cairns section. The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority has involved not only the people living along the Queensland coastline near the Cairns section but also people living in other capital cities. In fact, an exhibit in Parliament House this week is part of that process of bringing to the attention of members of the public in other parts of Australia the part they could play in the development of rational zoning plans for the Cairns section.
As a result of these public discussions, the Authority will draw up a preliminary zoning plan. That plan will then be made public. Those who have made a contribution to the discussions and those who, perhaps, have assumed that their interests would be protected without their personal involvement will then have an opportunity to comment upon those zoning plans. The aim of that is to ensure that the zoning plan for the area will be developed in a way that reconciles those competing interests so that the reef can be conserved for use by Australians in a great variety of

ways as well as conserved for continuing use by future generations.
MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY: COMPONENT SECTOR
Mr HURFORD-Has the Minister for Industry and Commerce had drawn to his attention the claims in open advertisements by the Federation of Automotive Products Manufacturers that, with the doubling of export credits under the Government's motor vehicle manufacturing plan from 7.5 per cent to 15 per cent, 60 per cent of the Australian component industry will be destroyed, there will be a loss of 16,500 jobs and production will be $500m per annum less? Is it also a fact, as claimed, that cars will not be any cheaper and that the technology wealth of our motor vehicle industry lies in component production, not in vehicle assembly and further that the State of Victoria will be particularly hard hit? In view of these claims, how can the Minister possibly justify his assertion last Tuesday in Question Time that the fortunes of the automotive component sector will be enhanced by the changes he announced last December?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-I thank the honourable gentleman for the question which he has raised relating to the automotive industry and in particular to the place of the component sector in that industry. Let me say in quite clear terms to the honourable gentleman'and to the House that if the automotive industry is to remain an important force in Australia's industrial structure it will need to become more internationally competitive to keep up to date with the latest technologies which the world has to offer. Let me further say that the recent automotive industry package which has been announced by the Government is specifically tailored to encourage this type of development so that the industry can be more outward looking, inore competitive and more technologically advanced and so that through that process it can ensure greater job security for its employees in the long term.
The export facilitation arrangements which the honourable gentleman queried and which will be expanded from 1985 have already had direct benefits for the industry in-Australia, and I refer specifically to the Victorian industry. The honourable gentleman should be aware of the four cylinder engine plant on a world scale which has been built at Fishermen's Bend at a cost of $300m and another plant for large scale production of aluminium components which is being installed at Dandenong. Other new investment and expansion of capacity for export will result directly from the Government's decision. The Government's policy

Questions Without Notice

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1125

is outward looking and will encourage certainly more exports both from the component sector and the automotive industry generally.
But as against that let me say also that the Australian Labor Party's motor vehicle approach raises more questions than it seeks to answer. It imposes upon the industry a very significant degree of additional bureaucracy of a type that frankly is not the answer to what the industry requires at present. It does not provide a long term policy. There is no indication as to what the level of local content requirements would be. There is no indication of the level of completely built up import competition which would be permitted or the tariff levels or whether there would be any quotas or in fact how they would be implemented. The only major initiative which the Australian Labor Party has put forward in this context is to set up an additional bureaucratic authority without criteria and without any sense of real direction. The simple fact is that the Government's policy is in tune with what the industry requires, that is, a more outward looking approach and a capacity to move into the international technologies which the industry requires at present.

levies, royalties and other indirect taxes which are in existence at the moment.
The point has to be made that any claim on the part of the Labor Party that the existence of a resource rental tax at present would return hundreds of millions of dollars of additional revenue just simply cannot stand up. Not only is a resource rental tax a bad approach to the question of the taxation treatment of mining and other companies in Australia, not only does it ignore the realities present in that industry, but also in present circumstances it completely ignores the fact that it would not meet the revenue aspirations which have been so repeatedly put upon it by the Labor Party. It is just another example of the fact that the alternative arithmetic advanced by the Leader of the Opposition simply will not stand up.
HOME BUYER SUBSIDIES
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister whether he recalls his statement made on 22 February this year that any Federal scheme to subsidise home buyers-

MINING COMPANY TAX REVENUE
Mr HYDE-My question is directed to the Treasurer. Are most recently announced mining profits heavily down and are forecasts for the immediate future poor? If so, could a resource rental tax yield substantially more revenue than the present combination of royalties, levies and excess rail freights which the industry is presently taxed? Is it possible that reasonable argument for a different method of taxing the same amount of revenue from mining ventures is confused with a pot of gold or perhaps the philosopher's stone?
Mr HOWARD-I think it is relevant to the debate on whether there should be a resource rental tax in this country to bear in mind what is implicit in the honourable member's question. It is particularly relevant to the claims that have been made by the Opposition that in some way if there were a resource rental tax hundreds of millions in additional revenue would be available to fund the additional expenditure that the Labor Party would hope to incur if it were in government. The truth of the matter is that even taking a fairly optimistic statistical analysis-I will be very happy to provide some more of that to the House in a few days time-if the type of resource rental tax that the Labor Party apparently has in mind were in operation at present, it is very unlikely that the return from that would exceed the total return which is available under the various forms of

would be considered in the Budget context
and:
we're not going to be run off the mainstream of our policies because of a by-election or a State election, and I believe we will have more respect by sticking with and staying with policies rather than offering some short-term expedient that would not necessarily be a real answer.
Does the Prime Minister stand by that statement or has he decided to forgo any hope of public respect because of something discomforting which happened to him in the suburbs of Sydney last weekend?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Treasurer and I have been making it very plain for quite some time that there are two problems in the housing area. On the one hand, in many areas there is a shortage of capital to enable enough loans to be made and, on the other hand, there is the problem of price; having in mind the increase in interest rates which has occurred in recent times in Australia and in many other places. We have said that when we have the policy package right we will announce that package. We are not going to push something through that we are not satisfied with, which we are not convinced will meet the needs of Australians buying or wanting to buy their own homes. When we are ready to make the announcement we will do it.

1126 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Questions Without Notice

CONSTITUTION: SCHOOL STUDIES
Mr COWAN-I address my question to the Minister for Education, In order that young Australians may be properly informed is any consideration being given to the teaching in our schools of the facts surrounding the Australian Constitution?
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to honourable members on the Opposition benches that if they continue the present noise level I will be forced to take some action.
Mr FIFE-I need to point out to the honourable member for Lyne and, indeed, to remind him and the House that it is a matter for the State education systems, the systems in the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory, and also non-government schools, to determine the content of curriculum in those schools. However, I am advised that certain aspects of the Constitution are already included in most of the curricula around Australia. Certain aspects are taught in history, social science, legal studies and politics. I am able to advise the House that the Curriculum Development Centre, which is now a curriculum unit within the Department of Education, has developed a set of classroom materials entitled 'The High Court and the Australian Constitution'. This material is at present being prepared by the unit and the honourable member will be pleased to know that the material is scheduled for publication during the course of this year.
CAPITAL GAINS TAX
Mr DUFFY-I direct my question to the Treasurer and refer him to an advertisement in the Age newspaper of 10 March 1982 for a real estate development at Tweed Heads. The advertisementclaimed:
. . . whilst your capital invested in real estate appreciates the capital gains of course are not taxable, when the property is held more than 12 months.
I ask the Treasurer: Why is it that the Government allows section 26A of the Income Tax Assessment Act to be treated with contempt? As the section is obviously inadequate, when does the Government intend to amend it to prevent continued massive tax avoidance?
Mr HOWARD-I first make the observation that what the Leader of the Opposition means by tightening up on property speculation is starting, bit by bit, to dribble out from the Opposition at Question Time. It is very interesting that the honourable member for Holt is asking a question which appears to criticise the fact that no capital gains tax attaches to property appreciation. I

thought the new policy of the Australian Labor Party was that it was opposed to it. It is very interesting now that bit by bit it is coming out from the Opposition that maybe it is not.
Mr Duffy-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I did not indicate what the Treasurer said. In fact I was referring him to the fact that section 26A does refer to capital gains--
Mr SPEAKER-I think everybody heard the honourable gentleman's question.
Mr HOWARD-Be that as it may, and given the clear ambiguity of the Opposition's position on the capital gains tax issue, let me address the honourable gentleman's question more specifically. Since 1974, when the present provision, which by definition the honourable gentleman thinks is inadequate, was put into the law by Treasurer Crean--
Mr Robert Brown-You are wrong again.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hunter will cease interjecting.
Mr Robert Brown-I was just trying to help him.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hunter will cease interjecting. I will take action against him if he does not.
Mr HOWARD-The first of the two sections which are relevant is the general section which brings to taxation property acquired for the purpose of resale at a profit. Secondly, there is the further refinement of that which provides that, subject to certain exemptions, it is automatically assumed that property resold within a 12-month period has been acquired for the purpose of resale at a profit. What the honourable gentleman has failed to appreciate in his question is that it does not automatically follow from that that all property sold after the 12-month period was not acquired for resale at a profit.
AUSTRALIAN AMATEUR ATHLETICS UNION
Mr DOBIE-I preface my question, which is directed to the Minister for the Capital Territory, by referring to the Government's decision to support the bid by the Amateur Athletics Union of Australia for the World Cup in athletics to be held in Canberra in 1985. In view of the interest being shown by members of the union within my electorate, I ask the Minister whether he is in a position to inform the House as to what progress has been made in the preparation of Australia's case. I further ask: Can the Minister inform me

Questions Without Notice

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1127

who the members of the delegation to put the submission to the International Amateur Athletics Federation next month will be?
Mr HODGMAN-I thank the honourable member for his question. I congratulate him on his long-standing interest in, and support for, amateur athletics in Australia. The Amateur Athletics Union of Australia decided that it would put forward a case for the World Cup in athletics-
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. I indicate to members on the Opposition benches that if the noise continues I will suggest to the Prime Minister that further questions be put on the Notice Paper.
Mr HODGMAN-The Amateur Athletics Union of Australia decided that it would put forward a case for the World Cup in athletics to be held in Australia, specifically in Canberra. In fact the application is for World Cup Four, which is to be held in 1985, to be staged in Canberra. I am delighted that the Government has come in to support and endorse the application by the Amateur Athletics Union. I confirm that a joint delegation will be going to the International Amateur Athletics Federation Council meeting in Jamacia on 19 April next. The cost of putting Australia's case is to be shared between the Amateur Athletics Union and the Government. The cost of running the games will be shared by my Department of the Capital Territory and the Department of Home Affairs and Environment, and we expect a very substantial contribution from the private sector.
Mr Charles-How much?
Mr HODGMAN-The cost of putting the World Cup on has already been announced. If the honourable member had any interest in it at all he would know the facts.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will not respond to interjections.
Mr HODGMAN-Thank you, Mr Speaker; I will not. The cost of running the games and the returns to Australia are such that, in my view and, I believe in the view of the Amateur Athletics Union, we will be given the chance to hold a most prestigious athletics event in the world second only to the Olympic Games. The members of the delegation are as follows: Mr Tony Blunn, Secretary to the Department of the Capital Territory who will lead the delegation; Mr David Dickson, the manager of the National Sports Centre at Bruce; and Sir Laurence Muir, Chairman of the Canberra Development Board. The members of the delegation from the Amateur Athletics Union of Australia are as follows: Dr Frank Larkins, Mr

Graham Briggs and Mr Clive Lee. I hope that all Australians will support this submission. Our competitor is Tokyo. I believe that the case for Australia and the case for Canberra is very good. I am sorry that the Opposition is not prepared to show bipartisan support in the matter. I am hopeful that we will receive a decision that the 1985 World Cup in athletics, to be held the year following the 1984 Olympics, will come to Canberra. This will put Australia on the map in respect of world athletics.
TOURISM
Mr JOHN BROWN-Is the Minister for Industry and Commerce aware of a recent survey conducted in the United States of America which indicated that American residents generally viewed Australia as the land of kangaroos and exhibited a real ignorance about Australia and Australians? Is it a fact that the Australian Tourist Commission is committed to a budget of only $9m annually to fund the promotion of Australia around the world? Is it a fact also that staff at the Australian Tourist Commission has been reduced by 50 per cent in the last seven years? Does the Minister believe that this paltry expenditure by the Government in the area of tourist promotion is a worthy contribution to an industry which generates $1 billion a year plus extensive employment opportunities? Finally, will the Minister admit that this Government's poor level of promotional expenditure has contributed to the Americans' misconception about Australia?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-I welcome the opportunity to say to the honourable gentleman and the House that no government in Australian history has done more for the tourist industry than has the Fraser Administration. That stands clearly as a matter of record. The Australian Tourist Commission has been well funded-I think properly so-at the level of around $9m for 1981-82. The honourable gentleman will be very much aware that that figure represents an increase upon the much lower base of earlier years. We-n:a-ve"greatly expanded the work of the Commission and the research that has gone into the tourist industry. The honourable gentleman will be aware of the 2t per cent building depreciation allowance, which has seen a major boom in hotel-motel accommodation-of the order at the present time, as I recall it, of $1.5 billion. I do not for a moment suggest that that figure is to be taken without some qualification. Clearly, some of the projects included in the survey will be self-cancelling. Clearly, at present the entrepreneurs of the industry are considering their overall cost structure, the

1128 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Questions Without Notice

extent to which wages and salaries are increasing and the problem of industrial unrest.
The question gives me an opportunity to reaffirm in this House that in this regard I agree with the honourable gentleman: Enormous dividends lie ahead for Australia in the continuing development of this industry throughout the 1980s. It is an efficient industry which brings with it very significant short and long term benefits, not simply for metropolitan Australia but also for country areas. Notwithstanding the very depressed international economic Scene, which in other countries has had a direct impact upon the fortunes of the industry, in Australia the industry is more than holding its own in comparison with other industries. I have informed the House that some 904,000 visitors arrived in Australia during 1980. This represented an increase of 14 per cent on the figure for 1979, when the increase over the figure for the previous year represented a record 26 per cent. The number of tourists to Australia in the first 11 months of 1981 increased by 4 per cent compared with the same period in 1980. Despite the downturn in international tourism receipts, which I have mentioned, in 1981 our receipts from overseas visitors increased by 19 per cent to $1,086m. At the same time domestic tourism also is growing. An estimated 68.7 million trips of one night or more were made in 1980-81. This represented an increase of 7.1 per cent on the figure for 1979-80. The fact is that this is a very efficient industry. It is one that is growing because of the support that the Fraser Administration has provided and its prospects for the whole of the 1980s look very bright.
ROAD FATALITIES: DRINK DRIVING
Mr KATTER-My question is addressed to the very capable Minister for Transport.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will address his question to the Minister without paying him compliments.
Mr KATTER-My question is addressed to the Minister for Transport. Having in mind the slaughter on the roads of Australia, which now totals about 10 deaths a day and God knows how many injured and maimed for life, will he indicate any recent Government action that may have been taken to cope with the more difficult problem of drink driving in relation to road safety?
Mr HUNTI am well aware that my very capable friend the honourable member for Kennedy is greatly concerned about the problem of road safety in Australia and of his advocacy of a national approach to random breath testing. I am

sure he will be pleased to know that the Commonwealth Government has supported random breath testing in principle and would hope to see it introduced on a national scale. Random breath testing has operated in Victoria for some time and in South Australia more recently. In the Northern Territory it is being conducted on a pilot basis. The issue was raised at the recent Australian Transport Advisory Council meeting in Burnie. I am confident that there will be more widespread acceptance of random breath testing in Australia in the not too distant future.
The Government valued very much the report on alcohol and drug abuse. by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety and it has generally supported the recommendations in that report. We support the idea of a national media advertising campaign in respect of road safety. This matter also was discussed at the recent ATAC' meeting in Burnie. Subject to budgetary considerations, I would expect the States and the Commonwealth to join in a campaign to help educate people about the consequences of dangerous driving and drink-driving.
BROKEN HILL PTY CO. LTD: EMPLOYMENT
Mr WEST-My question is directed to the Minister for Industry and Commerce. Is it ~ fact that Australia's largest private enterprise employer, the Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd, plans to reduce total employment in its steel division by 3,000 employees? If so, is the Government concerned and have there been discussions with Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd? Is the Government concerned about the multiplier effect of this loss of jobs and has the Government also sought information from other major companies ancillary to the steel industry as to their plans to reduce employment?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-The honourable gentleman and the House will be very much aware of the problem in the international economic community at present and of the very recessed conditions in so many countries.
Mr Howe-Give us another story.
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-Well, of course that has directly-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will cease taking notice of interjections.
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-That has directly impacted upon the world steel industry which has been going through an extraordinarily difficult time, with Australia being one of the few countries able until now to avoid very substantial cutbacks in employment.

Questions Without Notice

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1129

Mr West-What abQut the effect Qf rising impQrts?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The hQnQurable member fQr Cunningham will remain silent.
Mr West-HQw much are imports gQing up?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The hQnQurable member fQr Cunningham will remain silent.
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-The BHP cQmpany is Qne Qf this cQuntry's mpst significant and greatest corPQratiQns. It has recently nQtified staff cQncerning the difficult periQd which is facing the CQmpany. I understand that the cQmpany's plans fQr reducing emplQyment are Qn the basis Qf attritiQn and nQt Qn the basis Qf retrenchment Qf staff. Steel is that cQmpany's main emplQyment area but I understand that the repQrt which went to. the staff also. mentiQned BHP's minerals and subsidiary areas Qf QperatiQn.
As the hQnQurable gentleman is no. dQubt aware, the cQmpany has previQusly annQunced that capacity in SQme areas Qf its steel divisiQn will be reduced and that this and Qther planned changes will reduce the general plant labQur fQrce in the wages emplQyee area. The cQmpany has said quite prQperly in seeking to. infQrm its staff Qf the difficult circumstances which it is facing that depressed and unecQnQmic Qverseas markets, tQgether with the impQrt cQmpetitiQn facing it, have left it with no. QptiQn but to. reduce the capacity which is available to. supply eXPQrts. To. the extent that the repQrted emplQyment reductiQns reflect the cQmpany's decisiQns to. cut back o.n eXPQrts, they no. dQubt reflect the cQmpany's judgment Qn the realities Qf the WQrld situatiQn bQth nQW and in the CQurse Qf the next few years. The Department Qf Industry and CQmmerce and I, alQng with my cQlleague the Minister fQr Business and CQnsumer Affairs, are very much aware Qf the PQsitiQn.. DiscussiQns have taken place with bQth BHP and JQhn Lysaght (Aust.) Ltd at the mQst senior level. An urgent repQrt is being prepared. When I have studied that repQrt I will resPQnd to. it and the GQvernment will make such annQuncements as it cQnsiders appropriate.
I thank the hQnQurable gentleman fQr the questiQn because I do. understand and am sympathetic to. the CQncerns Qf the wQrk fQrce in the CQmpany's QperatiQns arQund Australia. At the same time. I WQuid hQpe that the hQnQurable gentleman WQuid recQgnise the internatiQnal prQblems which the cQrpQratiQn is facing in its eXPQrt perfQrmance and WQuid be sympathetic to. what at the present time happen to. be cQmmercial decisiQns taken in the reality Qf the market place as the cQrpQratiQn sees it.

NUGAN HAND BANK
Mr SPENDER~I refer the Minister fQr Administrative Services to. recent debates in this HQuse tQuching Qn the Nugan Hand matter and to. an article in tQday's Australian Financial Review which suggests that the terms Qf reference Qf the Stewart RQyal CQmmissiQn may nQt be wide enQugh to. cQnduct a full investigatiQn into. the activities Qf that bank. Firstly, will the Minister infQrm the HQuse Qf the terms Qf reference Qf the royal cQmmissiQn? SecQndly, will he advise the HQuse whether Qr nQt any request to. enlarge thQse terms Qf reference has been received? Thirdly, will he assure the HQuse that he will do. whatever may be necessary in the future to. ensure that, depending Qn the circumstances, the terms Qf reference are and remain wide enQugh to. CQver any matters that may emerge invQlving drug trafficking and the Nugan Hand bank?
Mr NEWMAN-By way Qf preface may I first make several CQmments which I think are imPQrtant. They are certainly impQrtant because Qf debates that have taken place here and because Qf the nature Qf the repQrting that is still gQing Qn in respect Qf this matter. I do. nQt think there WQuid be any member Qn either side Qf this HQuse who. is nQt cQncerned with the very grave dimensiQns Qf Qrganised crime in this cQuntry. It is a matter Qf great CQncern that wQrries us all. In regard to. Nugan Hand, there dQes nQt seem to. be much dQubt from what we have all seen repQrted that Nugan Hand was invQlved in criminal activities assQciated with Qrganised crime, particularly drug trafficking. I want to. make it clear that the GQvernment is equally cQncerned and, mQre imPQrtant than that, is determined that thQse peQple invQlved Qr cQnnected with Nugan Hand who. are assQciated with these criminal activities shQuld be identified and dealt with. We have never mQved from that PQsitiQn.
By the nature Qf Qrganised crime activities in this cQuntry, and the nature Qf the repQrting that has been gQing Qn many peQple will be cQming fQrward with infQrmatiQn. SQme Qf that infQrmatiQn will be accurate, SQme Qf it will nQt. SQme Qf thQse peQple will have proper mQtives, SQme Qf them will nQt. I knQw that it makes gQQd televisiQn fQQtage to. air this infQrmatiQn. I knQw that it means dramatic mQments sQmetimes fQr the OpPQsitiQn to. air such matters in this place. But the impQrtant PQint I want to. make is that, given Qur CQncern to. get to. the bQttQm Qf all these allegatiQns, we have set up mechanisms which peQple who. have infQrmatiQn can use to. have that infQrmatiQn properly investigated. I really want to. make that clear.

1l3(}----REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Questions Without Notice

Dr Theophanous-Why don't you answer the question? Answer the question.
Mr NEWMAN-The mechanisms are there.
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. In the course of Question Time this morning the honourable member for Burke has interjected continuously. I now warn him.
Mr NEWMAN-As I was saying, the Government has set up mechanisms whereby all these allegations, all the evidence that may be around, can be looked at and investigated. There are two mechanisms. One, the Stewart Royal Commission, has been raised by the honourable member for North Sydney. Let me deal with that mechanism for a 'moment.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Why don't you--
Mr NEWMAN-This is a very important matter and I think it should now be--
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will cease taking notice of interjections and continue with his answer.
Mr NEWMAN-A query has been raised about whether the Stewart Royal Commission has terms of reference which can deal with the Nugan Hand group. Unfortunately I do not have the terms_ of reference with me but I will provide those very lengthy terms _to the honourable member and to anybody else who wants them. In last Tuesday's debate-I gave the advice to the House on the advice that I had received-I said I believed that the evidence concerning Nugan Hand could be referred to the Royal Commissioner. After discussion with the Attorney General I sent to the Royal Commissioner, first of all, on behalf of the Prime Minister, a copy of the first report of the joint task force. The report provides some material on Nugan Hand and its activities. There will be other reports. Secondly, I provided to the Royal Commissioner for his information a Hansard record of our debate. The Leader of the Opposition will be moving a motion on that matter at the end of Question Time.
Mr Hayden-I don't intend to.
Mr NEWMAN-I have been so preoccupied with the honourable member's nonsense that I keep forgetting. I should have said 'the Leader of the House'. I believe that, on behalf of everybody who is concerned, this will test the ability of the Royal Commissioner to deal with these matters. Obviously the Royal Commissioner will tell us whether his terms of reference encompass these measures. I want to remind the House of what was said in a joint statement by the Acting Prime Minister and the Premiers of New South Wales, Victoria and Queenslan.d when they announced

the terms of the Stewart Royal Commission on 30 June 1981. They said:
It is considered that the means adopted are the best ones or ensuring that major drug offenders are identified and prosecuted, and exposing their techniques and methods which can then be countered by the authorities.
Importantly, they said:
It is envisaged that the judicial inquiry may be given supplementary terms or rererence referring to the activities or other drug trafficking groups should the occasion arise.
Even though I have already taken action to ascertain the Royal Commissioner's position as regards his terms of reference, I still say to all those people who have information regarding Nugan Hand, or any associates of Nugan Hand, or organised crime in general, that they can come forward and give us the information. The Royal Commissioner is there. For example, there is nothing to stop the Leader of the Opposition giving the information and the documents which he has to the Royal Commissioner. I finish on the point that the second mechanism we have is the joint task force.
Mr Jacobi-Yes, but you haven't given it special powers. What nonsense.
Mr NEWMAN-The joint task force is there to investigate these matters as well with particular reference to Nugan Hand. In response to the honourable member for Hawker I have to make this point: In combination there is a very powerful mechanism that exists to look at all matters. If the honourable member for Hawker wants to put information that he has to the Royal Commissioner he has the powers about which he interjected. The Government is concerned to get to the bottom of these matters. It has the mechanisms where people can go. I ask people to use them.
NUGAN HAND BANK
Mr HAYDEN-The Minister for Administrative Services will recall telling the House on Tuesday that the activities of the Nugan Hand group were of the most serious kind and have been the subject of the 'most serious and intensive investigation'. I ask the Minister whether he is aware of information given to the Narcotics Bureau almost five years ago about these activities. Is he aware that a confidential information report dated 3 May 1977 within the Bureau names Frank Nugan and Michael Hand as 'bigger than anything you have ever seen here in the heroin game and are said to be part of an American security organis" ation'. I ask the Minister whether he is aware that the same report quotes an informant as saying: 'If you caught these blokes, all hell would break loose'. Can the Minister explain why the so-called 'most serious and intensive investigation' which he claims was carried out did not 'catch these blokes'

Questions Without Notice

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1131

until after one of them shot himself two and a half years later?
Mr NEWMAN-No, I am not aware of those reports, nor should I be, because I had no responsibility for the Narcotics Bureau. The question which the Leader of the Opposition asks relates right back to the question which I have just answered. If he has reason to doubt the investigations of the Narcotics Bureau or any of the officers of the Bureau and if he has any information that would lead us to uncover these people, or inefficienci'es or criminal activities-as I have just explained-he knows the way in which he can have them investigated. He knows that, but he still persists in coming in here with unsubstantiated comments.
Mr Hayden-It is on your files, or it should be-unless they have disappeared.
Mr NEWMAN-I ask the Leader of the Opposition to table the information he has. He was asked to do that the other day. Over the last week we have seen unsubstantiated attempts by the Leader of the Opposition--
Mr Hayden-On a point of order, Mr Speaker. The allegation is contrived. The quotations that I delivered came from files within the Minister's Department. It is a matter of substantiating these matters by referring to the files. I should have thought that by now he would have made an effort to have access to them.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. Before I call the Minister I should like to indicate to him that this morning's proceedings have been interrupted by noise and constant interjections. I cannot deal with the interjections if the Minister responds to them. I ask him to continue with his answer and to ignore the interjections. I have indicated that I shall deal with them if they continue.
Mr NEWMAN-If the Leader of the Opposition has evidence.or documents which he wishes to disclose, I have to make the point that he refuses to substantiate those documents by tabling them in this House. We all know that the Leader of the Opposition has refused to table them. That occurred in last Tuesday's debate.
Mr Lionel Bowen-On a point of order, Mr Speaker. What right has the Minister to make that accusation about the Opposition when the Opposition has indicated to the Minister that the information is within his own files?
Mr SPEAKER-The Deputy Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. He knows that he

is debating the issue and not taking a point of order.
Mr Lionel Bowen-I insist on taking a point of order on the question of relevance. It is relevant for the Minister to address his mind to the question and he knows that the question is about information he has.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is making a point of substance.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Seriously, Mr Speaker, how can it be relevant then to ask the Opposition to produce information which the Minister knows that he has? It is completely irrelevant.
Mr SPEAKER-It is clearly relevant.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Chifley has interjected no fewer than a dozen times today. I warn him to cease doing so.
Mr NEWMAN-I make the point again: If the Leader of the Opposition or anyone else in the Opposition has a document which he wishes to have investigated-
Mr Lionel Bowen-You have it. It is in your own files.
Mr NEWMAN-I will come to that shortly. Let us see what those documents are by having them tabled. It is a simple procedure.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a very serious point of order as to either the propriety-I am asking you for some quite genuine advice on this subject-or the wisdom of tabling docum~nts which extensively identify a range of people who were informants to the Narcotics Bureau and whose life or well-being could clearly be imperilled if those documents were tabled and became public knowledge. The Minister is engaging in diversionary nonsense and he ought to face up to it.
Mr SPEAKER-I am very concerned about this matter. It is obviously an issue of partypolitical controversy. The Leader of the Opposition asked a question in the form that he did. The question was in order. The question is being answered by the Minister. It is clearly relevant to the question for the Minister to say: 'Will you table the documents?' The Leader of the Opposition has just made a point which may explain why he will not table them. I think it is within the Minister's capacity to make the request. It is within the capacity of the Leader of the Opposition to decide whether he will comply with the request. The Minister has made his point. The Leader of the Opposition has made his point. I

1132 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Questions Without Notice

think it will serve no purpose to bounce back and forth in repetition.
Mr NEWMAN-I make two more points. First: As I advised the House the other day, I am advised by my Department that the files relating to this matter are now with the Royal Commissioner. I can do no more than that. On the second point: Accepting that the Leader of the Opposition is fair dinkum about saying that it will place somebody's life in danger if the documents are disclosed, he has a simple remedy. The remedy is to give them to the Royal Commissioner. I really cannot say any more. We are getting into fairyland.
Mr SPEAKER-I think the Minister has made his point that he cannot say any more.
Mr NEWMAN-May I just summarise? It is important--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr NEWMAN-It is important to summarise the position. It is important because other people in this country are listening to this broadcast and I am determined that they will know the facts and not what the Opposition would wish them to believe. The position is that there is a mechanism for investigation. One is the Commonwealth-New South Wales Joint Task Force, which is made up from the police force in New South Wales and the Australian Federal Police. That is one course of action that anybody who has information can take. Secondly, if, for example, the course suggested by the honourable member who has been interjecting about a royal commission is followed, go to the Royal Commissioner and give him the information. I do not think anything more can be said.
PERSONAL EXPLANATiON
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in asking me a question said that I had indicated on 22 February that certain matters would be considered in the Budget context. The transcripts of a Press conference that I gave on 22 February and ofan interview on the Mike Walsh Show do not indicate that. They indicate, in effect, that I had refused to answer a question on whether the housing policy changes would be ready before or after 3 April. I continued with the point, as I did this morning, that those policies would be made public when we were ready. We would choose our own timing. There was no question of doing it in the Budget context, which was

an alleged quotation that the Leader of the Oppositiim used in his question. He must clearly have been misinformed in relation to what he said.
JOINT TASK FORCE ON DRUG TRAFFICKING
Ministerial Statement
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-by leave-For the information of honourable members, I present a draft Press release provided with a report of the Joint Task Force on Drug Trafficking. I seek leave to have that statement incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The statement read as follows-
I. In mid July 1979 the Commonwealth-New South Wales Joint Task Force on Drug Trafficking commenced operations. Its establishment followed the implementation by the Commonwealth and New South Wales Governments of recommendations made by His Honour Mr Justice Williams and His Honour Mr Justice Woodward, who were then acting as Royal Commissioners for the Commonwealth and State Governments respectively, inquiring into aspects of the '<:!rug problem'. In May 1980 the Honourable Mr Justice Woodward submitted his Further Report of the Royal Commission into Drug Trafficking to the Government of New South Wales. He said, at recommendation five, that
The evidence concerning Harry Wainwright; Nugan Hand Limited and its associated companies; and the affairs of Murray Stewart Riley (and in particular his associates as revealed in evidence) be referred to appropriate law enforcement bodies for further investigation. I have in the body of this Report referred to the circumstances under which Wainwright obtained citizenship of this country.
2. Subsequently, the Prime Minister and Premier of New South Wales agreed to the widening of the terms of reference of the Joint Drug Task Force to enable it to investigate this recommendation, except that the Force should not become involved in the investigation of the immigration aspects of Wainwright's activities nor in the financial aspects of the Corporate Affairs Commission investigation of Nugan Hand unless the finances related to illegal drug activity. Additional units were temporarily seconded to the Task Force to assist with the investigation. The investigative group of 17 comprised of: II NSW Police, five AF Police and one CAC officer. The clerical facilities of the Task Force were utilized. The inquiry commenced in mid-September 1980.
3. Recommendation five was defined to include, briefly: the identification of past criminal activity (if it existed) by Riley, Wainwright, the Nugan Hand Group of companies and others associated with them, and hopefully disclose hitherto unknown drug traffickers and their associates; the establishment of the nature of relationships between individuals and business organisations, legitimate or otherwise to determine whether or not individuals were/are acting as such or were/are merely part of some larger illicit organisation, i.e., organised crime syndicate/s, the 'mafia', etc.; the assessment of the degree of influence, if any, these people exerted on the drug trade of this country; the use made by these people and organisations of banking and other institutions in their illegal and improper activities; and finally, objectively assess some areas of drug enforcement with a view to improvement.
4. The investigation commenced with the collation of all available information about those under investigation held by the State and Commonwealth enforcement agencies (including the records of the former Narcotics Bureau).

Joint Task Force on Drug Trafficking

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1133

5. Co-operation of the Corporate Affairs Commission was sought and obtained.
6. All records and information received, be it from enforcement agencies, by way of interview with suspects or witnesses, or from confidential informants, was indexed and cross referenced thus providing a detailed retrieval system and increasing the likelihood of identifying common features. In excess of 2,000 people and organisations came to notice during the course of investigations. Each became the subject of some inquiry. Some are still the subject of inquiry. The overseas travel movements of more than 100 people were collated and compared.
7. It was decided that proceedings for any criminal charges detected were not to be lalmched against an individual until the investigators were satisfied that the role of an individual either as a witness or offender could be accurately assessed. The premature launching of prosecutions could have jeopardised the success of the inquiry as a whole.
8. The alleged illegal activities of Riley, Wainwright and their associates, and the Nugan Hand Bank had received considerable public attention in the parliaments, the media and in court proceedings. Every practical endeavour was made and is still being made to secure all possible information about the activities of those under investigation.
9. To avoid unnecessary delay in presentation of the findings made, the report of the investigation will be presented in a number of volumes. The first volume has been now received by the Governments. At its broadest, Volume One deals with the drug related activities of Riley and Wainwright, and their dealings with the Nugan Hand group of companies. It concludes with the arrest of Riley in June 1978 for the 'Anoa' buddah stick importation.
10. The Report in both structure and content is somewhat different to that which might be normally expected from an enforcement body investigating the activities of suspects. This has been brought about by the somewhat unusual circumstances surrounding the involvement of the Task Force in the investigation and some aspects of the purpose of the investigation. The Report does not restrict itself to stating facts provable in a court of criminal law, but in order to present the most complete reconstruction of events possible, many conclusions based on the balance of our probabilities are stated. Where this does occur the relevant information is fully set out and the conclusion is argued out. Only by adopting such a course can the truth ever hope to be known, an objective assessment of anti-drug enforcement efforts made and, hopefully, lessons for future improvement learned.
II. It is realised that there is intense media interest in the activities of Riley, Wainwright and Nugan Hand; in the investigation by the "Joint Drug Task Force of those activities, and in the anticipated report of the Force to the Governments on the investigation undertaken. But there are a number of reasons why the findings of the Task Force cannot be made public. First, the Report includes details of material which is in the process of being forwarded to Crown Law authorities. As a result of this action it is thought likely that in due course criminal prosecutions will be commenced against a number of individuals named in the Report for drug, conspiracy, perjury and passport offences. The questions of fairness and prejudice to both the individuals and prosecution needs therefore to be considered. Second, many serious questions are raised, but not dealt with in the first Report. Primarily this is because inquiries are incomplete. The release of Volume One at this stage could prejudice the success of those inquiries.
12. Action is being taken to bring to the notice of the Taxation Department a number of financial matters, and in addition, a number of discovered irregularities to the attention of the appropriate government and semi-government authorities.

13. Those matters about which the Governments have yet to receive a Report from the Task Force are, broadly, the Nugan Hand group of companies, the associates of Riley and his relationship with them.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-On 2S February 1982, I received from the Chairman of the Management Committee of the Commonwealth-New South Wales Joint Task Force on Drug Trafficking Volume I of a report on the evidence concerning Harry Wainwright, Nugan Hand Ltd and its associated companies and the affairs of Murray Stewart Riley. In transmitting the confidential volume, the Chairman of the Management Committee indicated that it should not be made public, and provided a draft Press release prepared by the Task Force. The draft Press release briefly describes the background to the volume, its nature and the reasons why it should not be made public. If the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) wishes to peruse the volume I would be happy to make a copy of it available to him for his personal and confidential information.
I emphasise that the report that has been incorporated in Hansard was prepared by the Task Force. It has been incorporated as it was conveyed to the Government because it is in the terms which it believes are appropriate for publication in a way which would not prejudice further investigations and other activities that_are proceeding.
I add only, if I may, that, if there is any person anywhere who has any information that he believes would assist the Task Force or the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking, his plain duty to those two bodies, to this Parliament and to the Australian public is to make sure that that information is made available to the Task Force or to the Royal Commission. It is no use people saying that they have information which is secret and which they cannot table because somebody's life is threatened. They can be protected if they go to the Task Force or to the Royal Commission. That course is the only one that can assist the prosecution of most serious inquiries on matters that I am sure are of concern to all members of this House.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Debate (on motion by Mr Lionel Bowen) adjourned.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser).

1134 REPRESENTATIVES, 18 March 1982

Access to House Records

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman wishes to make a personal explanation. He may proceed.
Mr HAYDEN-To put it in context, I asked the Prime Minister a question in which I said that he had made a statement on 22 February this year that any Federal scheme to subsidise home buyers 'would be considered in the Budget context'. He also stated:
, . , we are not going to be run off the main stream of our policies because of a by-election or a State election, and I believe we will have more respect by sticking with and staying with policies rather than offering some short term expedient that would not necessarily be a real answer,
The second quote, the longer one is a direct extract from the transcript of the Australian Broadcasting Commission program PM of 22 February' 1982.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The other quote is a direct one?
Mr HAYDEN-Yes, the second one is. The first quote is from a report headed 'Cash, not subsidy, for home buyers' appearing in the Sydney Morning Herald of 23 February and filed by Mr Paul Kelly, the political correspondent of the Sydney Morning Herald. It states:
During a day of campaigning in Sydney for the Lowe by-election, Mr Fraser warned that a major re-think of housing was essential.
Hesaid--
The article goes on to make a number of points, in particular this one:
Any Federal Government scheme to subsidize home buyers facing stiff mortgage payments would pe considered in the Budget context . . .
My quote stands, my statement stands, the validity of the question is upheld.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Mr Speaker, I table the two documents that are the transcripts of a Press conference I held that day and also the Mike Walsh Show because they show a contrary position.
ACCESS TO HOUSE RECORDS
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the Government) (11.2)-by leave-I move:
That this House grants leave for the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drug Trafficking to adduce the official records of the proce!!dings in the House in which references were made to matters relevant to the inquiry, namely, parliamentary debates, House of Representatives for-
(a) II March 1982, pages 890 to 891, 893 to 894, 921 to 927 inclusive;
(b) 16 March 1982, pages 959, 960, 967 to 976 inclusive and pages 976 to 988 inclusive; and
(c) 18 March 1982.

The date of 18 March being today's date, the relevant pages are not yet numbered but the items to be referred are those pages which contain debate pertaining to the Nugan Hand inquiry. I move this motion as quite obviously there is a requirement for the reference that is sought to be made by my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) to be available to Mr Justice Stewart in such a way that he can use it properly in the conduct of his inquiry. In this House a number. of references have been made which would seem to be embraced within the terms of that inquiry. I think one further point needs to be made; that is, that it would seem that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has access to an individual who has information regarding this event. I hope, first, that the Leader of the Opposition will suggest that that individual should make himself available to the New South Wales Police or the Australian Federal Police, or to Mr Justice Stewart, so that if that individual is apprehensive for his life he can be given adequate protection; and, secondly, that those documents which were presented to this House but not tabled or included in Hansard might also be made available to Mr Justice Stewart.
MrLIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (11.5)-The Opposition has no objection to this motion. These sorts of matters are normally matters of privilege. We on the Opposition side recognise that Hansard is privileged. There have been occasions in the past on which some courts have sought access to and have in fact used Hansard without the permission of this House, and of course we were entitled to take umbrage. On this occasion the proper procedures are being followedin that the House itself will determine whether Hansard will be made available. I think it is important that it should be made available.
In view of the latter remarks of the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair), which I think were out of context in relation to the motion, I think it is important to point out that the informant the honourable gentleman referred to as the person who thinks his life may be in danger was an employee of the Commonwealth and is now being prosecuted by the Commonwealth on a charge for which there was no evidence at a prima facie hearing. So there is serious concern to think that the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) is now taking action against a man who gave some evidence in camera to the Williams royal commission. It is even more serious to find that his in camera evidence was the subject of a search warrant by the Australian Federal Police and was confiscated by the Federal Police. Is it any wonder then that the man feels that he is being attacked

Access to House Records

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1135

by the Government? I make that point so that it is on the Hansard record as well. It is important, instead of making accusations against the Opposition,which is all that has been done, to ask whether this evidence is available from the Minister'sfiles and if so to look at the files, not to look at the Opposition. As to the question of the man concerned, let us have a look at the reasons why the Attorney-General, after nine months, has filed an ex officio indictment.
Mr Spender-Are you opposed to ex officio indictments?
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Well, they are very rare when there has been a prima facie hearing in December 1980 in which the magistrate said he would not--
Mr Spender-Are you opposed to them?
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I am opposed to it in this case. It happens to be- -
Mr Spend~r-Why?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members on my right will remain silent.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Just a moment; do not try to muddy the waters. The man gave in camera evidence of a most important nature to the Williams royal commission. How is it then that he was subject to a charge which has not been proved and subject to a search warrant by which the transcript was confiscated? There will be a record of conversation which I hope he will give to the royal commissioner and which will certainly embarrass the Federal Police. These are matters that ought to be discussed, though not.i.n this Parliament. But they are matters of record. It is important that, instead of the Minister casting aspersions on the Opposition, the Government gets back to the informant. I make the point that the matter is now in Hansard and I hop~ that it is pursued in the context in which I have raised it.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)(11.8)-Mr Speaker; on the same matter and very briefly, I am delighted that the action taken by the Government has in fact been taken. It means that the matter is being flushed out, as indeed is the Government, and that the Government is following the line that I strongly recommended earlier this week and which I was inferring should be followed last week. It is a line that the Government sought to resist, It is one that it has adopted reluctantly. I trust that the matter now will be properly and fully tested.
Mr SPEAKER-Before I put the motion, I indicate to the Leader of the House that in debate he added an authority for the relevant pages of today's Hansard to be included in the motion. If

the House will agree I think it should be a matter for me to determine which pages are the ones to be included so that the authority is there. Somebody will need to determine which pages, and I shall do that. It will mean that the motion itself will have to have added to it the words: 'See the pages relevant to the matter, to be determined by Mr Speaker, of Hansard of 18 March'. Is that agreeable?
Mr Sinclair-I concur.
Mr LionefBowen-We concur.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
STATI~:S (TAX SHARING AND HEALTH GRANTS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
COMMITTEE OF PRIVILEGES
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (11.10)-1 move:
That Orders of the Day Nos I and 2, Privilege, relating to consideration of reports of the Committee of Privileges be pqstponed until Tuesday, 23 March 1982.
Mr Speaker, I explain that the only reason for doing so is that I have asked the Chairman of the Senate Committee of Privileges to advise me of the Committee's reaction on the constitution of a joint committee and I am awaiting his response.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
PROPOSED NEW TERMS OF PARLIAMENT
MrBURR (Wilmot) (11.11)-lmove:
That this House is of the opinion that the term of the House of Representatives should be extended to 4 years and the term of the Senate to 8 years and therefore calls .on the Government to conduct a referendum in conjunction with the next general election to propose to the Australian people appropriate amendments to the Constitution.
This motion is just one of a number of measures that I have suggested, by way of motion in the House and by other suggestions to the Government, for reforms that I believe are necessary to bring the Parliament up to what I consider are modern day working conditions. It needs to be remembered that the way in which the Parliament functions, the way in which our electoral terms are decided, was determined by constitutional conventions over 80 years ago, in fact before the turn of the century. We are living with and operating a parliament which is now that far out of date. We are still operating the Parliament as it would have operated in a managerial way, before the turn of the century. We have not brought our procedures up to date in the modern sense. This proposal is one of the measures that I believe are

1136 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

necessary to bring the Parliament into the 1980s rather than the 1890s.
It needs also to be remembered that, even when the term of three years for the Parliament was determined back in 1897, there was no consensus that three years was the appropriate or the best term for the House of Representatives. In fact, the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, as it first stood, proposed that the House of Representatives continue for three years. That was later changed, in 1897 by the constitutional committee, to four years. At subsequent constitutional convention discussions Sir George Turner moved an amendment that the term should revert back to three years. At that time Sir John Forrest proposed an amendment that the term should be four years.
It is obvious that, even in 1897, there was no consensus of opinion as to whether the term of the House of Representatives should be three or four years. For whatever reasons, and obviously the opinions differed at that time, in 1897 it was finally decided that the term of the House of Representatives should be three years and that was subsequently written into section 28 of the Australian Constitution. That may well have been appropriate in 1897 but I do not believe, in the light of subsequent experience and in the light of developments of parliamentary procedures, that three years is now the most appropriate term for our Parliament. It needs to be remembered that we have now had 80 years of experience of the way in which our Parliament operates and the way in which our Constitution operates. I believe it is now necessary that we look through our experiences to determine in a modern and contemporary fashion what are the best procedures for our Parliament. When we look at our Constitution and our parliamentary procedures, the paramount factor in our minds should be what will provide the best public administration in Australia. That factor should be paramount in all of our considerations. In Australia we operate under the Westminster tradition. That has been adopted and is well entrenched in our system but, even so, we should never lose sight of the fact that the heart of Westminster democracy, the British Parliament, has a five-year term, not three years as we have. That five-year term has been entrenched in the British House of Commons since 1911, but Australia still has a parliamentary term of three years. I do not think anyone can give me any sound reason why. The only reason that I can deduce from speaking to others is that it has always been three years; therefore, why change it. Obviously, if we bear that good management feature in the forefront ?f our minds in considering

what the term of the Parliament should be, it will be apparent that what happens here, what happens in government, has a tremendous impact on all of the business, economic and social activities of the country. Therefore, the term of Parliament and the procedures followed at the Federal Government and parliamentary levels must be contemporary with the demands of the broader community of Australia. Obviously, what happens in this Parliament and in government has a tremendous impact on the broader Australian economy. A great many business and investment decisions are made on the basis of a Government's economic planning.
In view of the enormous investment, and business decisions, required in respect of major developments in Australia, investment planning is not restricted to a three-year term. In many cases investment planning is conducted for a 10 to IS-year term, but at the same time the management of the national economy, as determined by the government then in office; is interrupted by various factors on a three-year cyclical basis. I do not believe it feasible for a government to operate on a three-year cyclical basis while business firms which depend to a large degree on decisions made by government must try to conduct their cyclical management processes on a 10 to IS-year basis. Our parliamentary term, our management procedures, must be made more contemporary with the demands of the broader community.
I propose that the term of the House of Representatives be extended to four years; While I h~ve said that our management procedures in the Parliament should be made contemporary with the modern Australian situation, one must also bear in mind that, as politicians, it is necessary that periodically we go back to face our masters, the people who elected us. It would be very nice, I guess, for us as members of parliament to say that, we will have a six, eight, 10 or 12-year term. That would be very comfortable for politicians, but democracy does not work in that way. Therefore, in considering this matter we must also bear in mind the need regularly to face our masters and thus ensure that governments and parliaments are properly representative of those who elect them. It is for that reason that I have concluded that four years is possibly the most appropriate term. I regard a term of five years, such as obtains in England, as too long and as not giving the electors :mfficient opportunity to change what from time to time might be a bad government. If one has a bad government in office, five years is an inordinately long time to put up with it. A term of four years seems to me to permit good management procedures to be adopted and, at the same time,

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

18 March 1982 , REPRESENTATIVES 1137

permit regular reference back to one's constituents so that they may cast judgment on us.

The next consideration is as to what is to be

done with the Senate. It might be fine to say that

the term of the House of Representatives should

be four years. I believe that such a proposition

would be overwhelmingly' accepted by the Aus-

tralian people at a referendum, particularly when

one has in mind the experience last year in New

South Wales when a similar referendum, con-

ducted in respect of the term of the New South

Wales Parliament, was overwhelmingly accepted.

I believe that the experience would be the same if

we took a proposal such as I have describ~d to the

Australian people as a whole. The vexing question

is: What do we do with the Senate? Section 7 of

the Constitution says ~hat the term of the Senate

will be six years, so if we are to change the term of

the House of Representatives to four years, and

leave the Senate with a term of six years, we will

have repetitive elections that will not coincide; in

other words, they will be out of kilter. I believe

that the Australian people want to go to the polls

as infrequently as possible but at the same time

seek to have an. adequate opportunity to cast

judgment on politicians. However, they do not

want to be going back to the polls every second

year, to cast a ballot for the House of Representa-

tives and then for the Senate, individually. I be-

lieve that they do want to go to the polls but they

want to be able to cast a ballot for both the House

of Representatives and the Senate on the same

d~.

.

If that is a demand of the Australian people, it becomes necessary also to alter the term of the Senate. That is where the difficulty arises. I propose that the term of the Senate be eight years-in other words, twice the term of the House of Representatives with the same procedure taking place as now, whereby half of the numbers of the Senate retire every four years. They would retire in. rotation, as they do now. That is fine. But we have also to remember that the Senate is the State's House. It is not a house of Parliament that elm be dictated to by our legislation. We cannot alter it. In fact, we cannot even provide for provisipns to replace deceased or retired members; suchvacancies have to be filled by appointees of the State
parliaments. So, what happens to the Senate is very much determined by the collective opinion of the State governments. That is where the problem lies. I canriot think or' anythiI,lg on which the States can collectively agree, not even the colour to paint public toilets. They will disagree just for the sake of disagreeing. Here we are considering a major change to the O;mstitution and we are asking the States to agree. I believe that the States

should display a considerable degree of responsibility but unfortunately collectively they have not displayed that in the past.
In relation to get some consensus between the States, particularly over the issue of the Senate, the issue of four-year parliaments is still listed on the agenda of the Australian Constitutional Convention. Unfortunately it did not come up for discussion at the last meeting in Perth, about four years ago, but it is still on the agenda and. I hope that, whenever the Constitutional Convention reconvenes, it will be discussed. I believe that it is necessary for the Constitutional Convention to reconvene as soon as possible so that this and other matters in regard to the Constitution can be considered quickly and currently. At theConstitutional Convention representatives of the three tiers of government in Australia come together to consider our Constitution. Vexing matters need to be considered to bring the Constitution up to contemporary times and yet the Convention has no.t met now for over four years. That is not good enough. I do not consider it responsible. I believe that there need to be regular meetings~ preplanned, so that the various levels of government can do the necessary homework on predetermined agenda items and those agenda items can be considered so that necessary changes can be made.
I believe that what we are talking about here is an issue which is overwhelmingly supported by the people of Australia. They want a four year term of Parliament. As an example, New South Wales proved that conclusively. But, in order for us to put a referendum to the people for a constitutional amendment that affects both the Senate and the House of Representatives concurrently, there has to be agreement among the States through the Constitutional Convention..But the Constitutional Convention just simply does not meet; so the whole thing is in abeyance. I do not believe that is good enough. I believe the Federal Government and the State governments have a responsibility in this matter and their first responsibility is to reconvene the Constitutional Convention as soon as possible. ,
Why is it necessary that we have a four-year term of Parliament? Many people say why not stick with a three-year term, why should not parliamentarians go back regularly to their constituents and electors? Why do they not want to face judgment? As I s,\id earlier in my speech, I believe the most important thing is for the Parliament to operate in an effective administrative way that is contemporary to the 1980s and not to the 1890s. Modern business managements that have to rely on the decisions of government and parliaments for their investment decisions are looking to much

1138 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

longer term planning and we in fact must bring our planning in line with what the business and the broader community expect of us. It is on these grounds-on better planning, better management and better administration that gives more confidence and on which the business community can rely to a far greater extent-that I put this proposition forward.
What happens at the moment under a three year parliament, particularly in a budgetary context, is that everything is disrupted because of an election. An election causes widespread disruptions in the business community and the broader community generally because of the air of uncertainty about who is going to win the election or what policies will be pursued after the election. There is a hesitancy to invest, a hesitancy on the part of people to put on new employees, to take actions that will commit them in the future until they.know the outcome of the election. This disruption is always evident whenever an election is being held. Added to that is the fact that governments always determine their Budgets with an election in mind, whenever that election might be. Therefore the Budget immediately prior to an election is always based on what will best assist the Government in attracting votes. The Budget immediately after an election must implement the promises that were made at the previous election. The mid-term Budget is one that can be responsible, that will allow governments to implement their longer term economic planning. The next Budget is a pre-election Budget and so the cycle starts again. So effectively we have one Budget out of three that is not influenced to a major degree because of an election. I do not believe that is good enough to allow business to make longer term planning.
What I am proposing is a four-year parliament. Certainly a parliament of such length would not entirely preclude all of the problems about which I have been talking, but at least then, instead of only 33 per cent of responsible Budgets not being influenced by the contingency of an election, we would have 50 per cent-or two out of four Budgets-not based on the contingency of an election. I believe that such an arrangement would provide more confidence for the business community and allow businessmen to make longer term planning. It is on those bases that I put forward my proposition which I believe should be given very serious consideration by this Parliament, .the Federal Government and the State parliaments which, bearing in mind the situation of the Senate, also have a responsibility in this area. I thoroughly commend to the House the

motion that a referendum on this matter be held in conjunction with the next Federal election.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the motion seconded?
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (11.29)-1 wish to second the motion proposed by the. honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr). The motion refers to the extension of the maximum constitutional term for the House of Representatives to four years and for the Senate to eight years and to that end, the holding of a referendum in conjunction with the next election to determine the attitude of the Australian people. As the honourable member for Wilmot has pointed out, this is not a new idea. He explained to the House some of the uncertainties and differences of opinion that occurred on this issue at the time of the establishment of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia.
I wish to make a few comments about overgovernment in Australia. One of the reasons why the public at large has become very disenchanted with the electoral process is that they have to vote so often. Why do they have to do it so often? People do not easily distinguish between elections for State governments, Federal governments, referendums, local government councils and the like. Let us look at this situation. In Australia we have a Federal Parliament consisting of two Houses. We have State parliaments which in general consist of two Houses. We have a multitude of local government organisations. Associated with them-for example, in New South Wales-are country councils to which people are elected. These councils attend to the provision of power supply. They run abattoirs and so on. There are even bodies in New South Wales which are called weeds county councils. These consist of elected representatives. Coming further back from the elected representatives we have a multitude of agencies, bureaus, commissions, corporations and semi-government authorities, all of which participate in the process of overgovernment in this country. For a nation that has a population of some 15 million people it is quite astounding when one adds up all the elected representatives and bodies to which we are subjected.
The honourable member for Wilmot comes from Tasmania. There could not be a better example of overgovernment than Tasmania. It has 10 senators provided for in the Constitution, five members in the House of Representatives-again provided for in the Constitution-19 members in the State's upper House, 35 members in the lower House and 43 councils. Tasmania has all that for a population of

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

18 March 1982 'REPRESENTATIVES 1139

430,000 people. There is a total of 69 State and Federal members of parliament. That averages out at one member per 6,000 of the population. Different circumstances exist in the Northern Territory. But even there the Northern Territory is represented by two senators, one member of the House of Representativt:;s and 19 members of the Legislative Assembly. It has four local government councils and about 40 Aboriginal local councils, all for a population of 130,000. It is no wonder that people get a bit tired of being overgoverned. As a necessary process of being overgoverned they have to go to the polls so frequently. I might add that Tasmania, whilst having far too many elected representatives, also has a rather enlightened Leader of the Opposition, Mr Robin Gray, who will soon be the Premier. He has publicly committed his party-the Liberal Party-when in government to a reduction in the size of government. He has advocated a reduction in the size of the Parliament. He has put this into effect to date in that he has a shadow Cabinet of eight as compared with the Government's Cabinet of 10. I think that is a very welcome move. To my knowledge it represents some of the first concrete evidence that a political leader is prepared to come out publicly and say that he intends to reduce the number of elected representatives of a State and the size of his Cabinet when in government.
I wish to discuss some of the views put by the media on this subject. The Australian newspaper has been fairly vocal in its advocacy for introducing a four-year term for parliaments. I think that on some four or five occasions the Australian has given editorial space to this question. Some of the other newspapers have done so too but not to the same extent. I think it would be appropriate for me to quote the editorial of the Australian of 20 September 1979. It stated:
Three years are not long enough for the implementation of realistic long-term economic planning. A government's first Budget is generally devoted to introducing a strategy. The second Budget monitors and fine-tunes progress. A government's third Budget--

Three-year government is out of tune with the problems of the 'SOs-econ'omic recession and entrenched unemployment-~hich need time to respond to treatment.
Often the treatment necessary may in the short term be very' unpalatable. Unfortunately many people cannot perceive the need for unpalatable measures which in the longer term are to their advantage. The ~ditorial continued:
Governments (State and federal . . .) find themselves on the skids tJecal.1se they have promised more than they can deliver in the existing time scale.
Let us look at that time scale. It is not very long. Looking at the history in this country of the frequency of, for example, House of Representative elections, it is seen that whilst there is a maximum term of three years under the Constitution the reality is that over the past 25 years the term has averaged a little less than two years and four months. The frequency of Senate elections and referendums has to be added to that. Why are we so different from the rest of the world? Why, of the 56 popularly elected governments throughout the world, are there only four that persist with a three-year term? Those governments are Australia, New Zealand, Sweden and Thailand. Why of the 56 are there 25 with a four-year term and nearly as many, 24, with a five-year term? The United States of AmeriCa has a four-year term for the House of Representatives.. As has been pointed out, since 1911 Britain has had a . five-year term. The only States in Australia that have a longer term are Tasmania, where there is a four-year term for the lower House and a five year term for the upper House, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly. The referendum held in New South Wales, which was conducted in conjunction with the last State election and whiCh had the support of both parties, was carried very convincingly in favour of introducing a four-year term. The advantages are worth reviewing. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has indicated his general support, perhaps with some reservations, for the idea. He has suggested that it could lead to better government.

Which we do not always see-
is generally devoted to postponing the strategy and priming the electoral pumps with largesse in the hope of winning friends at the next ballot.
The process is destabilising in the extreme. It robs governments of the time they need to set the economy on a path of continuing progress. It stops business and commerce from preparing for the future.
As my colleague the honourable member for Wilmot explained so adequately--
It eliminates the scope for continuity of policy in the event of a change of government.

Mr Young-It would be better than his, whatever it was.
Mr MacKENZIE-Some of the people who are concerned about having a four-year government naturally say: 'Goodness me, what would be the situation if the Whitlam regime had had a four-year term? We would have been completely bankrupt and everybody would have emigrated'. Events have proved themselves. We have reached a stage where a sensible, rational and bipartisan approach to the issue of a four-year term is something that we should seriously look at. I turn to

1140 REPRESENTATIVES i 8 March 1982

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

some of the advantages. Firstly, elections are becoming not only more frequentccertainly they are tiring the electorate at large,; anybody who talks to voters at the time of elections is inundated with complaints about the frequenpy of elections and the politicking that goes on-but also vastly more costly. Longer parliamentary terms will reduce the cost to the community, and it is a cost to the community. We have seen the insidious development of a policy of public funding in New South Wales which is taking taxes from the taxpayers-without their permission, against their will-to fund political parties.' It is a 'policy to which I am totally opposed. Furthermore, it adds funds to the Australian Labor Party on top of the funds it gets from the unions which, in the first place, are tax deductible in the hands of the unionist. So they are getting it both ways. I believe that any measures to reduce the cost of elections--
Mr Young-How are they tax deductible?
Mr MacKENZIE-I thought that union dues were tax deductible. Were not the honourable member's dues tax deductible when he was a member of the Australian Workers Union? Public funding is a very poor excuse to try to overcome the problem of the expense of elections. The cost of elections is escalating rapidly. The introduction of a longer term of parliament would assist very much in that direction. A second advantage that I see is that elections are disruptive. They have a significant effect on the development of long term policies, which I have mentioned previously. The longer the term of the parliament, the greater the possibility of more effective long term policies, which, in this day and age of uncertainty, are most necessary. There also tends to be a breakdown, hiccup or hiatus in the administration of government during an election campaign. This occurs not only before the lead-up to a campaign but also during the campaign and for a significant period following the results of that election. There is, indeed, a question as to who is running the country during an election campaign. In many cases, it would seem to be either the half-Senate or the media. There is a further argument that more frequent elections mean that the community becomes more politicised and more polarised, with consequent divisiveness in the community. Again, that tends to have a destabilising effect on the community, which I think most people do not wish to see. The Economist has argued that Australians have been rotted too much too frequently by politics and elections.

I believe, as does the honourable member for Wilmot, that this proposition would be readily accepted by the Australian community. I see some difficulties with the Senate. That matter has been covered by the honourable member for Wilmot. I do not wish to take up further time because some colleagues wish to speak on the matter, but I have great pleasure in supporting the motion.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (l1.42)-One could be forgiven for thinking that we are in some sort of politic:al madhouse when one sees two representatives of what has been, constitutionally, the most corrupt government that this country has ever had putting forward the view that one of the ways of overcoming the problem would be to extend the term of office of any government that is elected to four years because other countries have that term. This country does not even have a Federal Parliament of three-year terms. One of the reasons for that is the corruption of the Liberal and National Country Party governments that have existed since 1949. When the Australian Labor Party Government was elected in 1972, Liberal and National Country Party members would not allow that Government to exist for three years. They corrupted the Constitution by using the Senate in 1974 and 1975 to force early elections. We have not even averaged two years for a term of government since 1949. Government supporters put forward the view that by going from two years to four years we will overcome all the problems. They should ask the three million unemployed people in Britain whether they like the five-year term that they are putting up with and whether it is solving their economic problems that Margaret Thatcher, the Prime Minister of Britain, happens to have a longer term than three years. What absolute nonsense.
The Labor Party will not have a bar of the humbug that is being put up by Liberal and National Country Party members in this Parliament until they present a proper constitutional reform package which does all the things required to give us proper government in this country. It means debating not only the term of office but also the powers of the Senate and the powers of funding of political parties. It means debating the question of who can force an election and when the Government that is in control of the House of Representatives must go to the people. It is all about accountability to the people. When the Government has done its homework and puts up someone of responsibility to present a case of that nature to the House of Representatives, we shall take it seriously. But when the Government has a couple of lightweight nitwits from its back benches putting up this nonsense about the way in

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1141

which problems will be overcome, we shall not take it seriously.
Let us go through some of the nonsense that those honourable members uttered. The honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) said that the New South Wales Government, by virtue of the referendum conducted parallel with the last New South Wales election, received a mandate for a four-year term. So it did. But New South Wales has a much more uniform constitutional performance than we have in the House of Representatives. The honourable member says, on the other hand, that the New South Wales Government has no mandate for the public funding of political parties. Unless I have missed something, it received that at the same election. Added to that, Senator Sir John Carrick, the Leader of the Government in the Senate, has told the people of Australia that in his opinion the New South Wales Government received a mandate for the public funding of political parties. So there can be no doubt as to that.
We have heard from two lightweight supporters of the Government and we shall be hearing from a third, because the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) will be speaking shortly. How about the crucial question of who is in charge of the government of Australia? Is it the House of Representatives, the Senate, or a combination of both? Where do the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) and the honourable member for Dundas stand on this question? Are members elected to govern Australia if they sit as a majority on the right hand side of the Speaker, or do they have to wait and see what the Senate does with their legislation? That is the real question that must be answered. Do not worry about four-year terms. Governments can be elected for 50 years, but if the Senate blocks the Budget they will be sent to an election every 12 months.
That is the reality of what is occurring in Australia. It is a reality because of the constitutional corruption of the Fraser administration, which will do absolutely anything to maintain power. It grabbed power through Sir John Kerr in 1975. It went to the people in 1977 when it did not have to do so. It was elected until 1978, but it thought after serving for two years that it suited that administration to go to the polls then. Now, 15 or 16 months after the last election, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is already talking abut another election. The Liberal and National Country parties are not sincere ",bout having three-year or four-year terms. They do not want to give serious consideration to that. The honourable member for Wilmot says: 'Why should we be

one of only three or four countries that do not have a four-year term?' Let him tell me how many of the other countries that he cited have an upper House that can throw out the lower chamber. He did not give that information. Why did he not tell us about that? Can the United States Senate or the British House of Lords, throw out the Congress or the House of Commons? Of course they cannot do that. That is the most important question that must be answered.
We in the Labor Party say that what people in Australia must recognise when they go to the ballot boxes and vote is that the people whom them return as representatives of the majority and who sit on the right hand side of the Speaker are being elected to govern Australia, whether it to be for three, four or five years. We cannot take the proposition put forward by the honourable member for Wilmot in isolation. There is one very noticeable link missing from his motion. Why did the honourable member not say 'a fixed term'? Why did he not say that the government had to stay for four years? There must be some reason, which he has not given us. We are told all the nonsense about how difficult it is for people to conduct businesses in Australia because we have a three year term, and yet the evidence is that businesses in Australia, as a result of the way in which the Liberal and National Country parties have governed this country since 1949, have actually been living with two-year terms of government, not three-year terms.
So I should have thought that the business people of Australia, if it is so critical to their management, would love the Liberal and National Country parties to tell them that they are going to stick rigidly to a three-year term, and that if Labor is elected, as it most assuredly will be at the next election, it will be allowed to serve a three-year term, that the Liberal and National Country parties have changed their minds since 1975 and will not use the Senate to block legislation which comes from the House of Representatives and which the Government needs to govern this country. Will they do that? Can the honourable member for Wilmot tell me whether he maintains the view that he took in 1975 that the Senate can
be used to block the Budget? If he does that, he is talking absolute nonsense. If the honourable member for Wilmot maintains that the Senate can throw out the House of Representatives by blocking Supply or the Budget, he is talking absolute nonsense in this debate because we know exactly what he would do under the leadership of Malcolm Fraser or anybody else his party might elect. The first opportunity that came with Labor in office iil the House of Representatives, the

1142 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

honourable member would say: 'Let us do what we did in 1975'. There would be none of this high sounding talk about a four-year term and all the reasons why business houses need to have a fouryear term. He and his party would be grabbing power back in the same greedy way that the present Government did in 1975. Let me say: We are ready at any time when the Government wishes to sit down and talk seriously about the sort of reform that is required.
Senator Evans, on behalf of the Labor Party, will introduce a Bill this afternoon on a fixed term of office and on reducing the powers of the Senate so that the Senate cannot force the House of Repesentatives to an election. If it does force it to an election by the rejection of some Bill, a double dissolution must be held. The Senate is called out too. The honourable member for Wilmot suggests that we will have a four-year term and the Senate will have an eight-year term. Can honourable members imagine: They would forget honourable senators names! That is accountability to the public as far as the honourable member for Wilmot is concerned. If a person of 21 years of age was put in the Senate, which had an eight-year term, that person would have to spend five terms in the Senate before he was eligible for the old-age pension. That would be some accountability for senators-an eight-year term.
The Bill to be introduced in the Senate this afternoon by Senator Evans has to be taken seriously by the Government, by the Australian Democrats and by the Independent, Senator Harradine. If it passes the Senate, it has to be taken seriously by the House of Representatives because that is where the reform is required. We need to have an understanding in Australia about the respective powers of the House of Representatives and the Senate. People have to understand that, when they vote, they will vote for a government that has a fixed term of three or four years. There can be no serious consideration of the proposition put forward by the honourable member for Wilmot unless and until the Government says that what it did in 1975 was wrong.
What this Government did in 1975 has given Australia an instability that it previously did not have. Do not misread what is occurring in Australia today. We are still living in the shadows of the conspiracy of 1975. The truth of what went on in 1975 between Prime Minister Fraser and the Governor-General, Sir John Kerr, is yet to be told to the Australian pUblic. The truth of what occurred in those days that led to the Governor General sacking the Whitlam Government 19 days before Supply ran out and installing the then Opposition Leader, Mr Fraser, has yet to be told

to the Australian people. But the Australian people can understand one thing about it: What occurred was very wrong. Irrespective of how popular or unpopular the Whitlam administration had been, the fact was that it was elected in 1972 and re-elected when forced to the polls in 1974, to govern for three years.
If the Government is serious about the proposition it is putting forward today about a fouryear term,' one looks back with some trepidation at the actions it took in those years when we had a Labor Government. There is no doubt in my mind at all that Government members are of the same ilk as the Liberal and National Country parties which served in this Parliament between 1972 and 1975. The Government is really saying today that this conservative Government is in dire straits. It is enormously unpopular in the electorate because of its economic mismanagement. It is saying: 'If only we could stretch our term of office. If only we were not responsible to go to the people before the end of 1983. If only we could extend it to 1984 or 1985. If only we could do something about the predicament we now find ourselves'in'.
If the honourable member for Wilmot wants to be taken seriously, he should raise the whole package of constitutional reform that is required for Australia and for Australians. Political stability is going to be one of the major assets of any country between now and the year 2000. If we can give the people of Australia political stability, it will be an enormous asset. The only way they are going to get that stability is if all the political parties are playing by the same rules. The Government cannot have us playing by one set of rules and the Liberal and National Country parties playing by another.
As political parties have said since Federation, we say that the Senate should not be used to throw out the House of Representatives. It should not have the power to block Supply or the Budget. Until such times as spokesmen from the Liberal and Country parties have reached the same conclusion in order to give people the political stability which Australia requires, there can be no serious consideration of these mealy-mouthed resolutions which are put on the Notice Paper by anybody. If the Government were serious it would have a serious person off the front bench, notably a Minister, come in here and say: ~Let us lay it on the table. These are our views about the way we see the Constitution operating and the way in which political parties will have to play by the rules.' But Mr Fraser, last Sunday, at the suggestion--

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

18 Match 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1143

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will refer to the Prime Minister as such.
Mr YOUNG-It is very difficult because in my electorate he gets many names.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I am sure that the honourable member has the skill to meet the requirements of the Standing Orders.
Mr YOUNG-Last Sunday, when the suggestion was made that perhaps other people would block the Budget in the Senate, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said that it was hypocrisy. He wanted to know how anybody else could block the Budget in the Senate, as though it were the sole prerogative of the Liberal and National Country parties to play by those rules. No one else should be able to do it, only the Government!
1 will be interested to hear the honourable member for Dundas tell us his view about the powers of the Senate and whether, if we are elected at the next election, he will go into his party room and say to the Senators, as he did in 1974 and 1975: 'Throw them out as ~oon as they become unpopular. Block the legislation. Make Australia ungovernable.' We are ready at any time to sit down and to give serious consideration to the needs of Australia. That is what we are put here for, that is what we are paid for and, as far as the Labor Party is concerned, that is what we will do. But we are not going to go along and allow the Government's moves and tactics to remain unexposed because it is doing Australia a grave disservice by its practices of the last seven years.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (ll.56)-1 will try not to join in the hysteria which has just been created by the speech from the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young), but will try to put quietly and dispassionately the arguments which ought to be looked at in this matter. Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 do not know whether it happens to you-as it does to me, but frequentlyI am approached in my electorate and asked: 'Why is it that when you politicans get down to Canberra, you can never agree on anything?' I must say that when 1 looked at this topic I did not expect there to be a debate because, quite frankly, if there is one matter in which I have perceived a strong degree of unanimity around Australia, it is that parliaments should have, for their lower Houses, a four-year term. People expect us to be able to come into this House, look at this proposal and hear from honourable members opposite that that is a proposition with which they can agree. They would not expect to come in and hear a speech in which the honourable member for Port

Adelaide said: 'Unless you will agree to fundamental changes in relation to our Constitution on other matters you cannot expect us to co-operate on this matter'. 1 hasten to suggest that those would be quite necessarily unrelated matters. That is what he is saying. It amounts to political blackmail.
Mr Bourchier-Typical!
Mr RUDDOCK-The honourable member for Bendigo says: 'Typical'. I am personally disappointed that in this Parliament members cannot raise themselves to debate the topic and look at the unanswerable arguments. As 1 prepared for this debate I asked for the Hansard of the New South Wales Parliament to see the manner in which this matter was debated there. That is the most recent forum in which this matter has been debated and in which members have had the opportunity to consider this important question. It is interesting to note that a referendum proposal in New South Wales was put to the people, with the Opposition and the Government-that is the Liberal and National Country parties and the Australian Labor Party-in agreement to extend the term of the Parliament to four years. It is also the State which has in place an upper House which has a term of 12 years.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! As it is now two hours after the time fixed for the meeting of the House, the debate on the motion is interrupted.
Motion (by Mr Newman) agreed to:
That the time For the discussion of Notice No. I, General Business, be extended until 12.15 p.m.
Mr RUDDOCK-I was making the point that New South Wales has in place a Legislative Council with a term of 12 years. The honourable member for Port Adelaide in his speech suggested that we ought to be somewhat concerned at the prospect of a Senate with a term of eight years. The fact of the matter is that in New South Wales no effort was made to change the term of the Legislative Council. Although criticism was made-by Malcolm Mackerras, I believe-of the prospect of the Legislative Council having its 12-year term unaffected by the referendum proposal and the term of the Legislative Assembly being extended in that State, when this matter was put to a referendum and these issues were canvassed quite fully by the people, we had this result: To the 'Do you approve of the Bill entitled- "A Bill for an Act to extend the Maximum Period between general elections for the Legislative Assembly from 3 years to 4 years"?' 1,950,317 people voted yes and 874,833 people voted no.

1144 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

I have never seen a referendufu proposal carried so overwhelmingly by the people. There is strong support around Australia for the terms of parliaments to be extended to four years. In New South Wales, when the people had an opportunity to consider whether the term of the Parliament ought to be extended to four years, with the Westminster system still in place-that is, with a system under which if a government loses the confidence of the members of parliament that government can be sent to the people early still in place-the people and the Government of New South Wales resolved that the Westminster system should remain; in other words, that there should be some discretion in relation to the matter, that the term ought to be extended to a maximum of four years but not toa fixed term. That was the proposition that was put in New South Wales and that was the proposition that was carried.
When this matter was debated in the New South Wales Legislative Council Mr Landa, for the Government, made some very interesting comments. I will quote from Mr Landa's speech. Subsequently I will read part of the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, Mr Willis, because quite frankly he was in agreement with Mr Landa in relation to the proposition. Mr Landa stated:
Australia has often been described as a country with election hysteria. Voters are called upon to vote for both Houses of the federal Parliament, both Houses of the State Parliament, and at local government elections. The point has been made in another place that in the past thirty years voters have been compelled to go to the polls on thirty separate occasions to vote in respect of federal or State elections or referenda. These statistics do not include local government elections and federal or State by-elections. The point about these statistics is not that the voters have been inconvenienced on this number of occasions, but that by their very nature, governments tend to concentrate far too much on issues related specifically .to election campaigns, rather than to the better government of the people.
Mr Willis, in a speech following the speech from which I have just quoted, stated:
The Opposition supports this proposal. Indeed, when the Premier and Treasurer first announced the fundamental terms of the bill, particularly when I read his speech introducing it in another place, I was most concerned because, for the first time since the Premier has been in this Parliament, I found myself on completely the same grounds. Suddenly I was wondering what was wrong with what I had been proposing for some years, but now I have, in .the generosity of my heart, come to the conclusion that the Premier has at last brought himself to one statesmanlike act in his term of office.
He went on to give the reasons for that. Such a magnanimous approach could have been adopted in this chamber. The honourable member for Port Adelaide could have said: 'Yes, we agree on this issue of extending the term of the Parliament'. We did not expect the mea,ly-mouthed approach that

he took in relation to the arguments of honourable members on this side of the House. We did not expect the political blackmail. We did not expect the personal invective on this matter. Those of us who have a view that the Parliament ought to be a forum in which these matters can be discussed and argued reasonably expected an indication of unanimity on this issue. Clearly unanimity exists. The arguments of honourable members on this side of the House were not rebutted. The argJ,lments of Opposition honourable members related only to events which preceded consideration of this matter in this Parliament and events which took place within the nation.
I was asked by the honourable member for Port Adelaide to comment on those matters. I should like to offer some views. Australia is a unique country. It is a federation. We do not have in place a Westminster system that operates on the same basis as the Westminster system operates in the United Kingdom. Good reasons exist for that. It is because a number of people-for example, the people from Tasmania and the people from Western Australia-had to put aside their special interests and agree to come together in a federation. Special arrangements had to be made to accommodate that unique situation. We have a House of Representatives, whose members are elected on a popularity basis by the people, and we have a Senate which is designed to protect the special interests of the States. We do not have a House of Lords, which is an appointed chamber, which one could quite properly say does not have an electorate to represent and which quite properly has never had power to consider matters relating to Supply and the like. Nor do we have a presiden~ial system such as exists in the United States of America. We have a unique Australian system, under which we have two Houses. The members of both Houses are elected by the people of Australia and both Houses have a proper basis upon which to offer a view.
I, with other members, was asked to recant what happened in 1975. I must say that I have taken the view that if one is prepared to act in that way one must be prepared to accept that at another time others may act in the same way. I am not. so Ilaive as to believe that if circumstances were different the Opposition would react any differently. In fact, the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) has indicated very clearly that my view is correct. That is his view. Quite frankly-it is very interesting to note this-if we go through some of the speeches made before 1975 in the Senate by honourable senators from the other side of politics we find that they were quite prepared to take action in relation to Supply

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1145

Bills when they thought they might be able to do so: One has only to look at the speeches of the then Senator Murphy, then Leader of the Australian Labor Party in the Senate. He was quite prepared to put that view for the Labor Party and to seek the former Democratic Labor Party's support.

I am not suggesting that politicians are lily

white in these matters, but I think the Opposition

ought to put those matters behind them. We

might well be able to discuss them and endeavour

to come to a form of compromise. I would cer-

tainly encourage that. I am certairily prepared to

be involved in such discussions. But let us not' for-

get. the uniqueness of our Constitution, the

umqueness of our system quite properly that that

of government. I uniqueness has

tthoinbk~

maintained. We are a federation. Let us look quite

separately and quite dispassionately at this other

measure. New South Wales was able to achieve it.

It held a referendum, which was carried over-

whelmingly, to extend the term of the Parliament.

There was agreement between the Opposition and

the Government. They did not seek a fixed term

for the Legislative Assembly in New South Wales.

The position is that the parliament can still be dis-

solved earlier. That was a proper basis for con-

sideration of this matter, a proper way in which

the proposals could be implemented. I believe

that the Opposition could quite simply agree to

accept, to support, this proposition. It does have

overwhelming support that would indicate that

politicians in this Parliament are able to get

together on a topic and agree-I am sure there.is

agreement-and not resort to what I have de-

scribed quite properly as the political blackmail

approach: 'Unless you give in and agree to some

constitutional reforms we want, you won't get an

extension of the term of the House of

Representatives'.

Let me make one other point very clear. The honourable member for Port Adelaide suggested there was some advantage for the Government in this proposal. It is my view that any proposal in
relation to having the term for this Parliainent extended would be totally unacceptable. It is my view that it would be quite inappropriate for the term of the next Parliament to be extended from three to four years if the referendum were put contemporaneously with the election. It would be the Parliament after that, as occurred in New South Wales, that would have its term extended. We would not seek this proposal to extend the term of the Government in office at this time, nor of the Government which would be elected on the next occasion, but simply on the occasion after

that when the people next go to an election. That is the proposition, and it is worthy of support.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (12.l1)-We have heard what is an apology for a proposition that seeks to do one of a number of things that are necessary to be done in Australia in order to bring about a situation in which stable government can and will take place irrespective of which party is elected to govern this country. The proposition from the Government is that when it is in office it should have a longer term of office. But the Prime Minister.(Mr Malcolm Fraser)has made it clear, and the Government through its Cabinet has already decided, that the Government will reject a proposition which will be put in the Senate .today which would enable the Parliament of Australia to function properly on fixed terms. The length of the term is not necessarily relevant.
I have here a table of elections since 1949. It shows that no Liberal government has been forced to the polls other than at a time of its own choosing, that two Labor governments have been elected and in both cases they were forced to the polls after a period of 18 months. I also point out that on the second occasion the Senate was constituted' not as it was elected but as it was contrived by the manipulation of the Constitution by State governments in order to replace Labor senators, one of whom died and one of whom resigned, in breach of conventions which had existed for some considerable time so that the numbers in the Senate reflected not the elected numbers but the contrived nurribers of Liberal and Country Party governments in the States. That was the situation in the Senate and that has been corrected. But the proposition put by the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) that this chamber, for reasons of history, has different powers and the Senate has different powers is a false one. At the time of Federation we had the same powers as the Parliament of Westminster. The Parliament of Westminster, after a confrontation between the Houses, changed its powers in 1909, 1910 and 191 I. The powers of the Parliament of Westminster were reformed to conform with modern political practice and the necessities of government. We did not have that reform because of an accident of time.
The facts of life are that if you are to have government you cannot have it in two different chambers. The 1974 election results revealed that a conservative senator for New South Wales was elected because of deficiencies in the Electoral Act as a result of which some thousands of votes which were properly cast for candidates were declared informal on a technicality and the people who had voted primarily for Labor candidates

1146 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Proposed New Terms ofParliament

were deprived of their yote because in numbering the 73 candidates a mistake was made in the late count. Their preferences were clearly indicated and their ballot papers were capable of being counted, but those people were deprived of their say as to who should represent them in the Senate because of a contrived Electoral Act. If we were not debating this 1110tion we would be debating the establishment of a committee to look at that matter.
It is unfortunate that this type of debate takes place in the chamber under such limited circumstances. It is important that at some stage this Parliament tackles the problems of the relationships between its two Houses. The Senate has a role to playas long as it exists a5 a House of Parliament. That role is not to provide the day to day government. That is the responsibility of this House. But while the rules are as they are all parties have to play within those rules. They do not have the right to opt out of the rules as they are. But the conservative parties of course believe they should have the right not to play by the rules, and as recently as this week the Prime Minister reiterated that he ~ould take any opportunity to get rid of a Labor government.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The time allotted for precedence to General Business has expired. The honourable member for Corio will have leave to continue his speech when the debate is resumed. The resumption of the debate will be made an order of the day under General Business for the next sitting.
Mr Scholes-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I am not sure whether I asked for leave to incorporate a table in Hansard. I indicated that I wanted leave but I am not sure whether I asked for it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member sought leave to incorporate the table when order was called at the conclusion of the honourable member's remarks?
Mr Scholes-Yes.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member had not made his requcst before the time allotted for precedence to General Business had expired.
Mr Schoies-I think I did during the speech, Mr Deputy Speaker, but it was not picked up by you.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If the honourable member had made a specific request for incorporation, the Chair would have given it the attention that would have been its due. In actual fact the Chair cannot accommodate the honourable

member's request in the first instance, but if the House has a mind to accommodate that request the Chair will respond to it.

Leave granted.

The table read as follows-

TERMS OF AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT SINCE

1949

.

1949 1951 1954 1955
1958 1961 1963
1966 1969 1972 1974 1975 1977
1980

Liberal Liberal Liberal
Liberal Liberal Liberal
Liberal Liberal Liberal Labor Labor Liberal
Liberal

2 years Double Dissolution
2 years
It years Request by Prime Minister
3 years 3 years
2 years Request by Prime Minister
3 years
3 years
3 years
It years Forced by Senate
I t years Forced by Senate
2 years Request by Prime Minister
3 years

PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, I present the final report relating to the following proposed work:
Upgrading of facilities for the introduction of domestic wide body aircraft.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh)-by leave-I want to make a brief comment on reports which suggest that some hurry up has been applied by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on the work of the Public Works Committee. I base my comment on a report circulated fairly widely in Adelaide that the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) was contacted by the Prime Minister who had said that the delays in the presentation of the report were unacceptable. I have not yet had the privilege of seeing the report. I am certainly very interested in it. On a previous occasion when I spoke on this question the Chairman of the Committee acknowledged the great interest in Adelaide on this very question. It concerns me very much to see this report of some pressure being applied by the Prime Minister on the Committee and it may well be that there was some political overtone in this to try to assist the Liberal Premier of South Australia. I think the work of the Committee is far too important in dealing with very important issues to be hurried up by the Prime Minister for political expediency. Certainly when that report is made available I will have something else to say about it. I thank the House for the opportunity to make this point.

Vietnam Veterans

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1147

Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-by leave-I want to comment on the report to the extent that I want to refute the allegations by the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott). In no way has the Public Works Committee been hastened or directed in any way by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) or any other Minister. In fact, according to the timetable for this reference, the initial wide-bodied works reference involving works at a number of major airports throughout Australia was referred to the Committee on 27 August 1981. Owing to the early rising of Parliament, an initial report was presented early in November, immediately before rising. Because of the number of representations and submissions received from people in Adelaide, the Committee felt that those submissions had to be investigated and listened to. Every attempt was made to do that. In effect, we are now tabling the report today in relation to a reference, so far as Adelaide and Hobart airports are concerned, which was referred to the Committee on 27 August. That is a long time ago and the Committee has obviously looked at it. There has been no direction by any Minister, or the Prime Minister, in regard to this. If there had been such pressure, there would be no way that the Public Works Committee would in any way submit to it.
VIETNAM VETERANS
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The rejection by the Government of a judicial inquiry sought by Vietnam veterans, as influenced by the Prime Minister's previous decision as Minister for Defence.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number of members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (12.22)- For over 2t years Vietnam veterans have been making very specific allegations about the chemical defoliants used in Vietnam to which they were exposed and the toxic effects of those chemicals on both them and their families. They have sought an independent judicial inquiry with wide terms of reference to establish the scientific, medical, legal and other facts in the hope that such an inquiry would provide answers and guidelines to solve the range of problems facing them and their families. Between November 1969 and March 1971 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser)

was Minister for Defence. When questioned about his knowledge of the use of toxic chemicals by the Australian armed services in Vietnam and their danger to human beings, the Prime Minister sought to justify the use of defoliants. On 31 March 1980, in answer to a question from the honourable member for Capricornia (Dr Everingham) the Prime Minister said:
. . . the decision to use defoliants was a responsible and sensible one.
However, he also sought to convey to the Parliament and to the people of Australia that he, as Minister for Defence at the relevant time, while being prepared to justify the use of defoliants, was not aware of their potential toxic effects. This was the same Minister who told the same honourable member for Capricornia on 5 May 1970, in answer to a question on the long term effects of these chemicals on humans, that the Mid-west Research Institute report of 1967, which listed the toxic effects of various chemicals, was freely available. I t is that same 370-page report which just a couple of weeks ago the Prime Minister's office could not find and which a Defence Department spokesman described as-just a minor report. In answer to a question from me in this House on 5 March 1980, the Prime Minister said:
I was Minister for the Army a good number of years ago and I cannot recollect any information being given to me which would have led to the kind of concern that has become evident in more recent times. I think that it ought to be said that I am quite certain that members of the Army, of the Department of Defence, indeed anyone in AustralIa, would have been concerned if they had been told at the time that there were possibilities of serious effects as a result of the use of a particular material.
That was the Prime Minister, in a statement to the Parliament, speaking of his knowledge at the time when he was Minister for the Army. Let us look at those terms again:
. . . if they had been told at the time that there were possibilities of serious effects as a result of the use of a particular material.
The Prime Minister, in his memorable statement to the Parliament on his resignation as Minister for Defence, asserted clearly his concept of ministerial responsibility. On page 682 of the Hansard of 9 March 1971, dealing specifically with the conduct of military operations and the direction of Australian military operations in Vietnam, he stated that the Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee advised the Minister for Defence but, again to quote the Prime Minister's own words:
But the ultimate decision and responsibility belongs to the Minister for Defence and his immediate advisers.
Therefore, on the Prime Minister's own standards, the House is entitled to presume that, as Minister for Defence, he knew or he ought to have

1148 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Vietnam Veterans

known both the extent and nature of the defoliation programs which were being carried on in Vietnam, the exposure of Australian troops to those defoliants and the dangers that were implicit in that situation. When the Prime Minister asked the House to accept his assurance that at the time when these defoliants were used their potential serious effects were not either known or understood, I, like other members, because I was a fairly new member of this House, was inclined to accept the Prime Minister's assurance. However, subsequent documents that have been made public from the Defence Department's records and
files, place the Prime Minister's assurances solemnly given to this House on that occasion in the same category as some of his other election promises. They are thoroughly unacceptable.
Let us look at the record. In October 1969 the
United States forces in Vietnam discontinued the use in populated areas of agent orange and other defoliants due to the scientific evidence which was available to the American military authorities that physical and biological damage could be done to human beings exposed to those chemicals. For that very reason, the Americans had abandoned the use of all other chemicals in Vietnam by the end of 1970. On 18 September 1980 the present Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) confirmed to the Parliament that Mr Malcolm Fraser when Minister for Defence was aware of the United States decision and the reasons it was made. However,the Australian Army went on using dangerous defoliants until at least 1971. This is admitted in the Government's report 'Pesticides Used in Vietnam Hostilities and Their Use in Australian Agriculture: A Comparative Study'. It is clear from the Prime Minister's own concept of his ministerial duties and from the admissions made by the present Minister for Defence that, first of all,
the Australian Army was fully informed of the reasons that the Americans abandoned the use of these dangerous herbicides. On the basis of the Prime Minister's own concept of his ministerial responsibility and of the admissions made by the Minister for Defence, it is clear that Malcolm Fraser as Minister for Defence knew the reasons why the Americans abandoned their defoliation program. Yet for a period of almost 18 months
after that the Australian Army continued to use these defoliants and Australian troops were exposed to the dangers of these toxic chemicals. It is clear from the Government's own reports now made public that a wide range of chemicals known to be dangerous were used and that the paucity of Army records makes it difficult in many cases to pinpoint the nature and extent of their use. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard

the Hoffman document of 19 March 1969 and the affidavit of former Lieutenant Craig Steel. I have
made copies available to the Minister.

Leave granted.

The documents read as follows-

AUSTRALIAN MILITARY FORCES

Distribution Below:

HQIATF NUl OAT 19 Mar 69

DEFOLIATION PROGRAMME I ATF NUl OAT APR-NOV 69
Introduction
I. During the wet season a defoliation programme will be carried out at Nui Oat to defoliate the perimeter wire, ammunition dump surrounds, radio aerial complexes and any other sites which may present a fire hazard during the following dry season.

Types of Defoliants
2. During this programme two types of defoliants will be used. The characteristics of these defoliants are as follows:

a. Knock down type-This chemical affects that part of
the vegetation which is above the ground causing it to dry off in approx 48 hours. It does not affect the root system of the plant consequently normal growth resumes in 7 days.

b. Sterilant type-This chemical actually sterilises the soil surrounding the root system of the plant and denies growth to any type of vegetation for a period of up to two years. It requires something in the order of three inches of rain to soak this chemical into the soil and its effects are not seen for approx 5 weeks.

Unit Responsibilities
3. To ensure that the spraying programme is effective units must be prepared to carry out the following tasks:

a. During the current dry season, burn vegetation along the perimeter wire and keep this growth down to a minimum until such time as the perimeter can be sprayed.

b. During spraying operations in the unit, provide personnel to lift any mines and flares along the perimeter wire and to open up the wire to give access to all portions of the perimeter.

Personnel
4. The field regiment and each infantry battalion is to detach one soldier to HQ Coy I ATF for the period I Apr-3D Nov 69. Because of the toxicity of the chemicals used and the rigid safety precautions which must be observed, the soldiers provided must be intelligent types.

5. It is preferable that the personnel provided remain unchanged throughout the entire period of the programme. If this is not possible they must not be changed more frequently than once every three months.

Control
6. During the period of their detachment, the four soldiers provided will be under the direct control of I ATF Hyg Offr.

Nominations
7. Details of the personnel being provided are to be advised to A Branch I ATF by 28 Mar 69.
W. G. HOFFMAN Maj
DAAG

Vietnam Veterans

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1149

AFFIDAVIT
I CRAIG MAXWELL STEEL of \0 Dorisvale Crescent, Tiwi in the Northern Territory of Australia MAKE OATH AND SA Y as follows:
I. As 2794623 Lieutenant Craig Maxwell Steel (Royal Australian Army Medical Corps) I served in South Vietnam from March, 1971 to March, 1972 as Task Force Hygiene Officer, Ist Australian Task Force.
2. During that period I was the officer responsible for conducting the defoliant spraying program in and around the Australian Task Force Base at Nui Dat.
3. I had in my possession at that time written guidelines on the methods of application for the chemical defoliants Agent Orange, Agent Blue and Hyvar. These guidelines referred specifically to those application methods suitable for use by Australian troops, using Australian equipment, in and around the Nui Dat Base.
4. These guidelines carried the explicit warning in bold print that the misuse of these chemicals may result in sterility and/or congenital abnormalities in humans.
This is the First Page of the Affidavit of CRAIG MAXWELL STEEL sworn the 1st day of May, 1980.
Witness A Commissioner for taking Affidavits in the Northern Territory
of Australia
5. Troops whose duty it was to spray defoliants were made very much aware of this warning.
6. Troops engaged in defoliant spraying were required to submit themselves for a medical examination on completion of the spraying program.
7. These examinations were carried out by Medical Officers serving with 8 Field Ambulance and/or 1st Australian Field Hospital.
8. My purpose in having these examinations was to have endorsed on a member's Army Medical Documents the fact that he had been in close contact with chemical defoliants.
9. Only the chemical defoliants Agent Blue and Hyvar were used during my term in Vietnam.
10. I returned the spraying guidelines and other technical papers to Australia sometime between October, 1971 and February, 1972.
II. The above information was made available to:(a) Sir William Keys-National President of the RSL., verbally during December, 1979 and confirmed in writing 9th January, 1980. Ann.exed hereto and marked with the letter "A" is a copy of Sir William Keys' acknowledgement of receipt of this information.
(b) Mt John Dux-Journalist with "The Australian" newspaper, verbally in early March, 1980 and confirmed in writing 13th March,1980.
(c) Mr Frank Alcorta-Secretary V.V.A.A. (N.T.) verbally 22nd April, 1980.
(d) Mr Matt Peacock-Journalist with the A.B.C. (N.T.) verbally 29th April, 1980 and confirmed in a television interview recorded 30th April, 1980.

This is the Second Page of the Affidavit of CRAIG MAXWELL STEEL sworn the 1st day of May, 1980.

C. M.STEEL Deponent

Witness

A Commissioner for taking Affidavits in the Northern Territory
of Australia

12. I know the facts deposed 'to herein of my own knowledge.

DATED this Ist day of May, 1980.

SWORN by the abovenamed deponent CRAIG MAXWELL STEEL at Darwin on the.lst day of May, 1980.

Before me:

C.M.STEEL

A Commissioner for taking Affidavits in the Northern Territory
of Australia

NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS

THE RETURNED SERVICES LEAGUE OF AUSTRALIA

Patron Her Majesty the Queen

National President Sir William Keys, OBE., M.C.

National Treasurer Major-General C. H. Finlay, C.B., CBE.

National Secretary K.G.Schultz

Address all Mail:
P.O. Box 303, Canberra City, A.C.T. 2601

Telegrams and Cables: "Helles", Canberra
Phone: 48-7199, 48-7512 AGWK:hk

In Reply Please Quote

"The Price of Liberty is Eternal Vigilance"

22 January 1980

Dear Mr Steel,

My thanks for your letter and photograph dated 9 January

1980. I will study these in some depth and then include details

from them in our further submission to the Government on

this matter.

.

I am most grateful for your initiative in contacting us and for your helpful information.

With kindest regards,
Mr Craig Steel, 10 Dorisvale Crescent, TIWI, N.T. 5792

Yours sincerely,
A.G. W.KEYS National President

This is the annexure marked with the letter "A" referred to in the Affidavit of CRAIG MAXWELL STEEL sworn the 1st
day of May, 1980.

Before me:

A Commissioner for taking Affidavits in the Northern Territory of Australia

Mr HOLDING-I simply say that these two documents prove, as a result of the directions that were given to Australian officers who were in charge of these chemicals, that the officers in the

1150 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Vietnam Veterans

field clearly knew the dangers that were involved in the use of those defoliants. The significance of the Hoffman document is that it confirms the knowledge thatexi~ted within the Australian armed Services and it also confirms the affidavit of Lieutenant Craig Steel who, in his affidavit, points out an official and explicit warning of the toxic nature of various defoliants. References to sterility and congenital abnormalities were contained in those warnings that were given. On the evidence, it is clear that the Army knew both the nature of the chemicals it was using and the dangers to the humans exposed to them. If the Army knew, qow did the then Minister for the Army not know? This was the Minister who, on the occasion of his resignation from the ministry, spelt out his views of his responsibility.
The extent of his guilt may be measured by the fact that when this issue first arose, when Vietnam veterans and their families voiced their concern in terms of the physical ailments of veterans and the deformities amongst their children, the Prime Minister caused an exhaustive search to be made of his owh personal files, as held in the Archives. It is equally a matter of concern to me that the Prime Minister, who could spell out so eloguently and explicitly to the House that 'The House may rest assured that these matters will be dealt with sensitively and with full and complete justice', should have let lie on the Notice Paper for almost 11' months now a question which I directed to him asking specifically for details of the briefings he received as Minister for Defence in respect of the use, of defoliants in Vietnam. The fact is that the -Priine Minister's assurances on this matter are worth about as much as his election promises. "N,either has credibility.
Mr Hawke-He has been careless with the truth again, has he?
Mr HOLDING-I think that is true. It is perhaps one of the ironies of history that the enthusiasm shown by the Prime Minister as one of the hawks of the Vietnam war, in his concern to conscript young Australians and send them to Vietnam or to gaol, seems to have been abandoned now that he has been brought face to face with the sad reality of the claims of many Vietnam veterans for justice for themselves and their families.
For more than two years Vietnam veterans have been asking questions and seeking a judicial inquiry into the use of toxic herbicides by the Australian Army between 1969 and 1971 in the hope that such an inquiry may arrest their concern that the use of such defoliants is causing a higher than normal incidence of physical and mental illness among Vietnam veterans and of birth defects

among their children. The Government, while strenuously avoiding a judicial inquiry, responded with a medical investigation and strongly denied the veterans any other form of inquiry. After two years and an expenditure of $1.2m, the Government has been forced to agree with the veterans that their concern about the potential toxic effects of the chemicals is well founded. The scaled down research that is now being promised falls far short of the veterans' request for a full judicial inquiry. Throughout this whole period, Government spokesmen have sought to play down both the extent of the Australian defoliation program and, above all, the toxicity of the chemicals involved.
I could never understand why this Government would not give Vietnam veterans a judicial inquiry. It always seems to me to be an eminently reasonable and just demand. Confronted with a range of physical and mental disabilities and the agony accompanying the knowledge of children being born with deformities, they sought not automatic compensation, but rather the use of judicial processes in order to have every aspect of their problem examined. That process is available to almost every citizen of Australia who breaks the law. It is followed every day in our courts when judges make decisions on the range of issues before them.
In 1982 Vietnam veterans have the dubious distinction of being the only section of our society which has sought a judicial inquiry but has been unable to get one. There seem to be plenty of judicial inquiries in which others are fairly reluctant to participate. Why are these men denied access to that process? One can only be forced to the conclusion that such an inquiry, with its access to records and documents, would not only answer questions raised by veterans but also expose for all to see the gross and cavalier manner in which decisions to continue defoliation spraying, after the Americans had abandoned it, were carried out by the Australian Army with what must have been the knowledge and approval of the then Minister for Defence, Malcolm Fraser. The Prime Minister is the prisoner of his own feelings of fear and guilt. He knows that in any properly based judicial inquiry his own record of administration, his own knowledge, would be under scrutiny. That is why I believe that Vietnam veterans will never get the inquiry that they seek from this Governmentdespite the fact that many back benchers, and two Ministers, have indicated their support for such an inquiry and for a just resolution of the problems of Vietnam veterans.
The test for this Parliament and for every member of it, particularly those on the Government side, is embraced by the question: Are you

Vietnam Veterans

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1151

really prepared to consign the claims of Vietnam veterans to the back door manipulation of bureaucrats in the Department of Veterans' Affairs? Or are members of the once great Liberal Party prepared to turn their backs on the claims of some 40,000 veterans to an independent, impartial, judicial examination? If that is the attitude that the Government adopts it. is taking a gutless political position for one purpose only, that of protecting an ailing and failing Prime Minister whose political credibility is already beyond redemption. Let right be done for these Vietnam veterans. Let their cause be examined and let the guilt and justice fall where it will. If the Prime Minister is guilty, so be it.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (12.36)-We have just heard a tissue of malicious innuendo from the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), who has made some quite outrageous statements. He has criticised very fine members of the Department of Veterans' Affairs in speaking of back door manipulation by bureaucrats. That is absolute nonsense and I refute it immediately, as do the Government and the Returned Services League. If I may refer first to the question of a judicial inquiry, I say that, as the honourable member has made clear, the Government has been asked by the Vietnam Veterans Action Association to set up such a judicial inquiry into the effects of herbicides on the health of Vietnam veterans. That request was rejected for a very good reason-not for the reasons stated by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports. The Government's attitude has been that a judicial inquiry would not provide a scientifically valid answer to the question whether problems that some veterans and their families were experiencing could be related to possible exposure to herbicides or to any other aspect of Vietnam service. That is very clear.
Mr Holding-You indicated that the Vietnam veterans supported a judicial inquiry.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! I ask the honourable member for Melbourne Ports to remain silent. He was heard in relative silence. He has raised very important issues and the Minister is entitled to respond without interruption.
Mr THOMSON-Thank you for your courtesy, Mr Deputy Speaker. I listened to the honourable member for Melbourne Ports in silence although it was very difficult to do so in view of some of the statements that he made. I forbore any interruption and would be grateful if he would extend me the same courtesy.

Honourable members will be aware tha~ the Government has initiated a program of epidemiological studies in an effort to deterrriine whether there has been an ipcreased incidence of disabilities in Vietnam veterans or of birth defects in their offspring. The honourable member for Melbourne Ports did not mention that the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment decided to hold an inquiry into the use of pesticides and to take as its first priority the question of the possible effects on Vietnam veterans of exposure to herbicides. That inquiry commenced on 8 December 1981. The Committee is engaged in a very thorough investigation of Vietnam questions and Government departments are cooperating fully with it. I believe t'hat the Committee is equally effective as any judicial inquiry. It can make any inquiries it wishes, and its membership includes representatives of the Opposition. It can investigate the allegations that have been made by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports, but I suspect that it will ,find many of them not sufficiently important even to consider. The only veterans' organisation or group that has called for a judicial inquiry-I do not include honourable members opposite,. who are doing that for political reasons-is the Vietnam Veterans Association.
Mr Hawke-We should ignore them, should
we?
Mr THOMSON-We certainly should not, but it is a small group and I would question how representative it is of Vietnam veterans generally. Its membership is small. Of the 45,000 servicemen who served in Vietnam some 8,000 are memqers of the RSL. The RSL is not calling for a judicial inquiry, and later I will quote a statement by it .on that subject. Another related organisation-of which I am a member, as well as of the RSL-is the South East Asia Forces Association of Australia, the Chairman of which is Sir William Keys, the National President of the RSL, who certainly has not called for a judical inquiry. There has certainly been no cover-up, nor was there any in the early 1970s when the matter was discussed.
Honourable members will be aware that the United States Government decided in April 1970 to stop using agent orange in Vietnam pending an evaluation of 2,4,5-T and possible links with foetal deformities. Members of the Australian Parliament were made aware of this in answer to a question which appeared on page 2449 of the Senate Hansard of 16 June 1970. The then Minister for External Affairs commented on the basis of advice from the Department of Defence, on the possible connection between the use of defoliants and deformed babies. He said:

1152 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Vietnam Veterans

On the evidence available to me, I am unable to say whether the number of defprmed babies being born in areas of Vietnam where defoliants have been used is different from the Vietnamese national average. Despite an overseas report that relatively large doses of 2,4,5-T can cause foetal deformity in mice,there is, as far as I am aware, no conclusive evidence of a causal link between 2,4,5-T (or, for that matter, any other chemical defoliant) and foetal deformity in humans. I understand that, as a precautionary measure, the use of 2,4,5-T by US Forces has been discontinued.
The chemical 2,4,5-T is not used by Australian Forces in Vietnam. Several other commercially-available weed-killers have been used on occasions to clear undergrowth in front of positions and near perimeter wire.
No record can be found of any consequential action being directed by Defence or Services Ministers or of any such action being suggested to them. In December 1970 the President of the United State,s ordered the phasing-out of all use of anti-plant and anti-crop chemicals in Vietnam. The last American herbicide spraying operation by fixed wing aircraft was flown on 7 December 1971 and the last helicopter operation under US control was flown on 31 October 1971.
The honourable member for Melbourne Ports had incorporated in Hansard a document which, in great excitement, he produced on 25 February, implying that it was a leaked document. It was a normal routine administrative order issued in Vietnam by the headquarters of the First Australian Task Force.
Mr Holding-Read it out.
Mr THOMSON-It has been incorporated in Hansard. It is a routine order. He said that, 18 months after the Americans ceased using agent orange, Australians continued to use it. That is neit true. The only herbicides used by Australia were commercially available herbicides commonly available in Australia.
Mr Holding-Many of them were highly harmful and the volumes used made them more dangerous.
Mr THOMSON-Of course the Army knew that the herbicides used in Nui Dat were harmful to health, as shown in the document incorporated by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports. The herbicides chosen in 1968 for perimeter clearance operations were Reglone, Gramoxone, Tordon 50D and Hyvar. These were, and still are, weedkillers commercially available and used within Australia. Just as such weedkillers have instructions for safe handling on their labels, so did the Army issue safe handling instructions. The honourable member has kindly incorporated these in Hansard. No official records have been found confirming that Australian forces ever used agent orange or 2,4,5-T in operations in Vietnam. Some agent blue was sought in 1967 in support of

an operation with US forces but there is no evidence of Australian involvement in aerial spraying operations after the US forces ceased carrying out such operations.
Recent publicity has ignored the conclusions in the reports referred to in 1970. One report, an article in Science magazine in 1969, concluded:
There is no evidence to suggest that the herbicides used in Vietnam will cause toxicity problems for man or animals.
That was in 1970. The other report, by the Midwest Research Institute, concluded in relation to aerial spraying of herbicides that:
The direct toxidty hazard to people and animals on the ground is nearly non-existent.
The reports themselves were not submitted to the Minister for Defence at the time, nor was the nature of their contents brought to the notice of the then Minister for Defence, now the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). In an answer in 1980, the Prime Minister said he was not referring to the toxic properties of herbicides which were and are a matter of common knowledge, but to emerging concern about possible longer term effects. The Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) has already tabled a considerable amount of information on this subject and departments have been co-operating fully with the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment, which is inquiring into the use of pesticides. The Government certainly shares the concern of veteran members of this Parliament, of whom I am one, and the public that these problems be unravelled. The events of the past should be looked at carefully and the Government is doing all it can to do this.
I refer to some of the Government actions taken on behalf of and for Vietnam veterans. There is a range of programs for Vietnam veterans. A Vietnam Veterans Counselling Service has been established. The Adelaide and Sydney centres are already established and shortly centres will be established in every capital city. I am told that only 63 veterans have visited those two centres since they were established two or three months ago. The counselling service is supervised by a national advisory committee which includes the President of the Vietnam Veterans Association and the secretary of theRSL. Four of the committee's five members are Vietnam veterans. Last month the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) announced further initiatives to provide treatment for Vietnam veterans and their families. If Vietnam veterans require urgent treatment, they can obtain it free of charge to them at repatriation general hospitals or at hospitals outside the metropolitan areas. ,If members of their families-members of their families, mind

Vietnam Veterans

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1153

you-require emergency treatment they may obtain it free of charge at-repatriation general hospitals.
The studies being undei'taken by the Commonwealth Institute of Health will provide information of key interest to Vietnam veterans and their families on possible birth defects, on the causes of deaths of Vietnam veterans in the past and on the level of illnesses suffered by Vietnam veterans. The final point in this list of Government actions is that Australia has a particularly generous repatriation system. Vietnam veterans ha.ve direct access to that system. More than 7,000 Vietnam veterans are already in receipt of disability pensions and claims by other Vietnam veterans are being given full consideration in the various levels of the repatriation determination system: In short, the repatriation system caters for the needs of Vietnam veterans and the Government has initiated a program of counselling, treatment and studies specifically directed to the particular needs of Vietnam veterans and their families.
Yesterday, the National President of the RSL and a number of State presidents discussed in the budgetary context in the Cabinet room with members of the Government their thoughts on what should be done for veterans. This morning the National Secretary of the RSL sent me a telex confirming what was said. He has said that these statements are for unlimited use. I will quote from a part of the document and will then ask permission to incorporate it. In part, the telex states:
During its pre-Budget submissions, before the Prime Minister and Cabinet. yesterday, the national president of the RSL, Sir William Keys commended the Prime Minister and Government on the advances that have been made over the past year in the ~are and concern of Vietnam veterans.
Finally, Sir William said that the total programme means that there is more being done by the Department for the Vietnam veterans than has been made available for any other veterans who served in any other area of conflict involving Australian troops.
From my experience I can confirm what he said. The rest of the telex is a statement by the national secretary of the RSL, Mr Peter Young, who is himself a Vietnam veteran. In fact, I first met Major Peter Young in Vietnam. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard what he said.
Leave granted.
The document read asfol1ows-
MINSCI AA62689 ANZAC AA61431 18.3.82
For Mr David Thomson, M.P., From Mr Peter Young.

2 statements follow for unlimited use.
I. During its pre-budget submissions, before the Prime Minister and Cabinet yesterday, the National President of the RSL. Sir William Keys commended the Prime Minister and Government on the advances that have been made over the past year in the care and concern of Vietnam veterans.
Despite a slow start, and early difficulties in recog~izing the dimension of the problem, he stated that with the newly estatilished advisory committee and counselling centres, the improved access to medical facilities for both the Vietnam veteran and their families and recent decisions of the High Court liberalizing the granting of pensions for disabilities and the programmes examining physical, psychological and genetic problems, a situation had now been reached where the complex difficulties which had faced Vietnam veterans and their families in recent years could now be substantially resolved.
Sir William also commended the Minister Senator Messner and reminded the Prime Minister of the initiatives made by the RSL. in this area through its membership of the National Advisory Committee on Vietnam Veterans which has oversighted the setting up of counselling services in capital cities throughout Australia.
Finally, Sir William said that the total programme means that there is more being done by the Department for the Vietnam veteran than has been made available for any other veterans who served in any other area of conflict involving Australian troops. .
2. Mr Peter Young, National Secretary of the RSL. himself a Vietnam veteran, and the RSL. representative on the National Advisory Committee for Vietnam Veterans, stated yesterday that the Department and Minister was to be commended on the speed and efficiency with which counselling services had been set up and the generosity of the benefits and provision for treatment which had been implemented.
In less than 4 months, the committee, which is formed by a majority of Vietnam veterans, including the President of the Vietn(jm Veterans' Association, has oversighted the setting up of counselling centres in each of the capital cities. Centres were now fully operational in Adelaide and Sydney, with centres currently in progress in Melbourne, Brisbane, Darwin, Perth and Tasmania.
The veteran, he said, now has almost immediate access to the repatriation system with unprecedented provisions for urgent medical and psychiatric treatment for wives and dependents suffering from conditions that can be attributed to the problems of the veteran.
Despite early delays in recognizing the full scope of the problem, everything that can be done is now being done.
Whilst obvious benefits lie in the programmes set up to pursue the cause and results of possible exposure to chemical sprays, the main thing as far as the League is concerned is that irrespective of the cause, the veteran and his family' can now turn to a full range of treatment, support and counselling from the repatriation system.
Peter Young, National Secretary, RSL. Tel: 488915 Telex: 61431
Dated: 18 March, 1982.
MINSCI AA62689 ANZACAA61431
Mr THOMSON-I would like to quote one final part of what Major Peter Young had to say. Hesaiq:
Whilst obvious benefits lie in the programmes set up to pursue the cause and results of possible exposure to chemical

1154 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Petitions

sprays, the main thing as far as the League is concerned is that irrespective of the cause, the veteran and his family can now turn to a full range of treatment, support and counselling from the repatriation system.
The RSL is, and always has been, the main spokesman for veterans. I am proud to be a member of the League and I am delighted with what it said.
Mr Deputy SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (12.50-The Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) raised certain aspects about this matter which must be answered. In particular, I refer to his suggestion that the veterans are being catered for. There is one big hole in the Minister's argument. The Repatriation Act requires that the onus of proof rest on the Department unless reasonable d<;lUbt can be proven. As the herbicides used in Vietnam have been withdrawn there is reasonable doubt and compensation should be paid.
Motion (by Mr Bourchier) agreed to:
That the business of the day be called on.
~
PETITIONS
The Clerk~Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. there is a lack of public information about the content and intention of the proposed legislation on Plant Variety Rights;
2. there is concern that the ethical and moral issues of granting private proprietorial rights over genetic resources have not been properly and publicly considered;
3. there is evidence to suggest that such legislation may lead to a reduction in the plant diversity;
4. there is reason to fear that farmers may be restricted in their activities due to the controls placed on the use and propagation of seed stocks;
5. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights legislation will lead to higher costs for the farmer, the consumer, the plant-breeder and the tax payer and
6. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights legislation will lead to a further increase in foreign control of Australian resources;
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament ensure:
(i) that information be made freely available to allow full and informed public discussion of the issues involved.
(ii) that the Government undertaketo carry out an analysis of the costs and benefits involved to the various sectors of Agriculture and the Nation as a whole.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr John Brown, MrLes Johnson and Mr Kerin.
Petitions received.

Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.' The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to impose a tax on books, magazines and newspapers particularly educational publications and books of a religious nature, is abhorrent to the notion of the right to information, a c1ear-infringement of our democratic freedom, and that no such tax is levied on any other country with which Australia is usually compared.
Your petitioners therefore humbly, pray that the Government will withdraw its announced intention to impose a sales tax on books, magazines and newspapers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling..
Petition received.

Sales Tax Legislation

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That librarians and library' users throughout the nation call for the exemption of books, periodic,als and newspapers from the imposition of sales taxes.

The tax exempt status of iibraries and schools will not protect them from general cost increases which sales tax and its
collection will cause, Indeed, exemption claims on millions of items per year will themselves' add to the cost burden of both
libraries and suppliers.

This tax is socially injurious and unworkable, and a burden

on education, science and culture.

'

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will exempt books, periodicals including newspapers from the proposed sales tax.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by MrMoore.

Petition received.

Broadcasting Licences

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That Family Radio Ltd represents the largest single interest group in the community-i.e., christians-who do not h~ve a voice ,in public broadcasting commensurate with their
representation:

That prime time access to existing broadcasts by christian

groups is virtually non-existent, and access at other times is

fast disappearing:

.

That, by comparison with other capitals, Brisbane is entitled to at least one more category 'S' FM broadcasting
licence.

That there appears to be no prospect of the release of further category 'S' FM licences in the near future for
Brisbane:

That satisfactory fulfilment of the aims of family radio and its expansion can only be achieved by broadcasting in its own
right under licence:

Petitions

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1155

That family radio has a responsibility to the large support groups which have contributed substantially to its development, to achieve the aims in broadcasting and community work for which it was established:

That there is an urgent need for the kind of service and support that family radio can provide to other community groups through the particular type of integrated programming proposed by the company under a full-time licence:
And that pruned Government resources are obviously insufficient to advance the development of public broadcasting as originally intended.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Govern-

ment will support family radio's application for a broadcast-

ing licence and will enable more category'S' FM licences to be

made available in Brisbane.

"

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Darling.

Petition received.

Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government and Telecom management have presided over the deliberate scaling down of Australia's telegram services, to the disadvantage of those poorer people in the community who cannot afford telex or telephone facilities and rely on the telegram service in time of emergency;
That the Government and Telecom management have undermined the telegram service by increasing the unit cost of telegrams by over 130 per cent in four years with the result that the use of telegrams as a form of communication has fallen by approximately 60 per cent in that time.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government and Telecom management retain the telegram service at a standard and cost that will not djsadvantage the ordinary citizen.
And your petitioners as"in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Telephone Charges
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
'We wish to voice our objection to the latest rises in telephone charges of Telecom Australia, deeming such charges to be unnecessary and outrageous.'
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government will: 'Cause Telecom to make telephone services available to every Australian home by bringing their installation and rental charges in line with North America and abolishing fees for local calls.'
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent

education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt.or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a "poor risk" (particularly affecting wome"n and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This atack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students;
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students;
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced;
(iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance;
(v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are rationalized be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pensioner Non-interest Bearing Accounts
To the Honourable The Speaker and" Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That any proposal by the Government to threaten pensioners' entitlements to fringe benefits by establishing a ceiling on the allowable amount of savings in non-interest bearing accounts is completely unfair and does not take account of the natural need of all pensioners to maintain some savings for occasional expenses such as house maintenance.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government will not proceed with any such proposal, and should instead direct its attention to those pensioners who enjoy extremely high levels of extra income yet manage to remain within pension eligibility guidelines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Hearing Aids: Import Duty
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. The Petition of the undersigned individuals concerned with the welfare of the hearing impaired citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

1156 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Petitions

That there are approximately one million people in Australia who suffer severe problems with their hearing.
That the greatest percentage of adults with hearing impairment are not eligible for N.A.L. aids. (1978 Australian Bureau of Statistics. 38.79 per. cent of hearing impaired are aged between 45-64 years).
That the accepted useful life of a hearing aid is only 3-5 years.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that your'Honourable House reject all recommendations that may subject hearing aids to \Iny import duty (lAC propose 15 per cent) and thus ensure hearing handicapped persons be not further disadvantaged.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Falconer.
Petition received.
Registration Fee for Periodicals
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned, respectfully ask:
That the Australian Government request Australia Post to review the recently introduced annual registration fee for periodicals.
With many periodicals produced for distribution to me.mbers in small numbers only, this new impost, together with the recent increases in postage rates, considerably adds to the, administrative costs of small clubs and organisers, whose activities are non profit, and are directly involved in communityactivities.
Accordingly, we earnestly request this review, with a view to smaller clubs and organisations, at least, being exempted from the requirements of annual registration.
We thank you in anticipation of your support.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Good luck.
Petition received.
Marine Mammal By-products
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that:
,. Since the Australian Whale Protection Act 1980 provides for the banning of importation into Australia of all whale by-products, and
2. the Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the international banning of whaling,
3. then consistent with (1) and (2), this Government should immediatley legislate to ban the importation of all marine mammal by-products, including the harp seal of Canada, and
4. through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly, the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an international ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that consistent with legislation on whaling, this Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products and support an international ban on slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Sex Discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
(a) that the Australian Government signed the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women in Copenhagen in 1980;
(b) that the Convention came into force on 3 September 1981;
(c) that Australian women suffer serious disadvantage in employment, education, accommodation, membership of licensed clubs, provision of goods and services including services relating to banking, insurance and the provision of grants, loans, credit or finance;
(d) that this disadvantage could be overcome by (i) making unlawful certain discrimination on the grounds of sex and marital status, (ii) eliminating discrimination on the ground of sex and marital statiIs and (iii) promoting affirmative action for women in employment;
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament pass the Sex and Martial Status Discrimination Bill 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That-
(a) the export of live animals for slaughter overseas and (b) the shipment of live horses to Japan sentences such
animals to cruel and inhumane treatment in the export process and at the hands of foreign importers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ban the export of live animals for food and allow only carcass trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. ,;.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Sun Screen Lotions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the price of sun screen lotions, despite being exempt from sales tax, are excessive, since Australia has the highest rate of skin cancers in the world.
2. That sun screens approved for sales tax exemption should also be eligible for deductions under health insurance schemes.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to make these products deductible under health insurance schemes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Petitions

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1157

Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose: and
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories. .
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament assembled take action as it deems appropriate to ensure that the present Federal Government children's services programme is maintained and improved, and the Child Care Act is retained as a legislative base for this important programme.
In considering the recommendations of the Spender report, no recommendations put forward should be implemented without full consultation with community groups.
The present subsidy system to Child Care Centres should be retained. The proposal that monies be made available to subsidize child care in commercial centres is viewed with grave concern. The proposal to alter the present guidelines for subsidy in different programmes and introduce a common means test is also viewed with grave concern, as the present arrangements are effective.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action on the above mentioned issues.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by the proposed imposition of sales tax on items concerned with home building, clothing, footwear, books, newspapers and food wrappings, as these sales taxes impose a further burden on home builders, families and children; inhibit the free flow

of information through books and newspapers; and reduce employment opportunities in the industries concerned.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should exempt these items from the proposed Sales Tax legislation, as requested by the Senate.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morrison.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. the automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well-being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. if imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.
Pensions ofItalian Immigrants
To the Speaker and Honourable Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned residents of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Australian Government take urgent steps to formulate and approve a Social Security Agreement with the Italian Government based on the rights and the needs of Italian immigrant workers in Australia.
Moreover, with the present petition we request that the following important questions related to the pensions of Italian

1158 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Afghanistan

immigrants be urgently resolved within such an agreement; in

particular we request:

.

I. That Italian immigrants who have gained tlie right to Australian pensions and are no longer resident in Australia be given the opportunity to apply for and obtain the pension without having to return to Australia.
2. That periods of residence in Australia of less than ten years presently required by the Australian legislation be considered for some entitlement to the Australian pension.
3. That the issue concerning the unfair reduction applied to the pension of Australian residents who are receiving an Italian pension be resolved.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Les Johnson.

Petition received.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr MILTON (La Trobe)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The honourable member may make an explanation.
Mr MILTON-The honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer) stated yesterday in a speech on the Sinai peacekeeping force that official Australian Labor Party policy is influenced by the adamantly anti-Israel attitude which was reflected in my speech on the Sinai peacekeeping force on 29 October last year. That statement was not true as in my speech I drew a clear distinction between the desperate need for the Israeli people to live in peace and harmony with their Arab neighbours and the aggressive attitude of the Begin-led Israeli Government. I also referred to the Saudi Arabian peace plan which recognised the rights of states in the region to live in peace. My speech was an attempt to reconcile the aspirations of both the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples to live within their own independent state borders and could in no way be considered to represent an anti-Israel attitude any more than does official ALP policy.

AFGHANISTAN
Motion (by Mr Street) proposed:
That this House-
(I) recalls that on 19 February 1980 it condemned the invasion of Afghanistan on 27 December 1979 by the Soviet Union as a gross violation of the United Nations Charter and of Afghanistan's non-aligned status;
(2) notes that the international community, in particular the United Nations General Assembly, has repeatedly called for the immediate withdrawal of the foreign troops from Afghanistan and reaffirmed the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government free from outside intervention;
(3) deplores the continued fighting within Afghanistan, the tragic loss of life and destruction of property, and the suffering of the Afghan civilians who have been

subjected to sustained and increasing military harassment, bombing and disruption;
(4) views with deep concern the plight of approximately 2.5 million Afghan refugees in Pakistan;
(5) notes that 21 March has been traditionally celebrated by the Afghan people as the beginning of their New Year;
(6) welcomes the decision of the European Parliament to designate 21 March 1982 as Afghanistan Day and make it the occasion on which international attention again should be focussed on the Soviet military occupation of Afghanistan, and
(7) declares also its intention to designate 21 March 1982 as a day for Australians to convey to the world their desire for the USSR to withdraw unconditionally from Afghanistan and allow a free, independent and truly non-aligned Afghanistan to be re-established.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (12.56)-The Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) gave us notice of the motion. I want to tell the House that we support the motion because it draws the world's attention to the problems of Afghanistan and reaffirms Australia's opposition to the Soviet presence in that country. It is a matter on which all Australians are unanimous. Might I just add, though, that perhaps both the American Government and the Australian Government should have a look at whether more stringent action could not be taken to guarantee that the Soviet presence in Afghanistan is terminated because the war has resulted in 3-1million refugees. We understand that there has been a large amount of loss of life irr Afghanistan because of the 90,000 Soviet troops in that country.
Debate (on motion by Mr Bourchier) adjourned.
EXCISE TARIFF (COAL) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Viner, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (12.58)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill forms part of a package of measures designed to raise additional revenue for the funding of the long service leave entitlement of employees in the black coal mining industry. The Bill proposes to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921 to increase from 15c to 25c the excise duty on black coal. In a few moments I will seek to introduce the complementary Coal Industry Legislation Amendment Bill. That Bill proposes to alter the proportions in which the revenue raised by the levy is allocated between the Coal Mining Industry Long Service Leave Fund and the Coal Research Account. The present excise of 15c per

ExCise Tariff (Coal) Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1159

tonne is divided between the two funds, 10c per tonne being allocated to the Long Service Leave Fund and 5c per tonne to the Coal Research Account.
The Coal Research Account was established by the Coal Research Assistance Act 1977 and is used to fund coal research. The Long Service Leave Fund was set up in 1949 to finarice long service leave in the black coal industry on a national basis. Under this scheme excise duty paid to the Commonwealth by the producers of black coal is appropriated to the Fund and claims are then made on the Fund by the producers for reimbursement of the cost of long service leave granted to their employees.
The Government has accepted the recommendation of the Review of Commonwealth Functions that the Commonwealth withdraw its involvement in the long service leave funding arrangements. The Premiers of the States concerned-New South Wales, Queensland, Tasmania and Western Australia-have been approached and negotiations are being arranged to achieve the Commonwealth's withdrawal from this field. Pending termination of the Commonwealth's involvement, funding needs beyond 1 April 1982 have been assessed. It has' been estimated that the long service leave component of the excise revenue collected needs to be increased to 20c per tonne to ensure adequate funding for the remainder of this financial year and for the 1982-83 financial year.
I should stress that, exce'pt for certain administrative costs, all moneys collected by way of the excise duty are returned to the industry for either coal research or long service leave payments for its employees. The amount of excise per tonne which is allocated to the Coal Research Account is not being varied by this package. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hawke) adjourned.
COAL INDUSTRY LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Viner, and read a first time.
Second Reading
, Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (1.1 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time,
This Bill is complementary to the Excise Tariff (Coal) Amendment Bill 1982.1 mentioned in my second reading speech on the Excise Tariff (Coal) Amendment Bill 1982, that the amounts raised by way of excise duty oIi the production of certain

coal are allocated to the Coal Industry Long Service Leave Fund and the Coal Research Account. The purpose of this Coal Industry Amendment Bill is to amend two Acts-the States Grants (Coal Mining Industry Long Service Leave) Act 1949 and the Coal Research Assistance Act 1977-to increase the amount of the excise revenue allocated to the Long Service Leave Fund to 20c per tonne in lieu of the present lOco There has been no change to the amount allocated to the Coal Research Account and it will continue t6 receive 5c per tonne. 1 commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hawke) a~journed.
Sitting suspended from 1.3 to 2 p.m.
ROADS GRANTS AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (2.0)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time,
The purpose of this Bill, is to amend the Ro'acls Grants Act 1981. Honourable members will be aware that the Government made a commitment in June 1980 to provide grants totalling $3,650rh under a five-year roads program covering the period 1980-81 to 1984-85. An allocation of $628m has already been provided iIi 1980-81 under the Roads Grants Act 1980. A further $685m is currently being provided in 1981~8'2 under the Roads Grants Act 1981. The Bill before the House will enable grants of $734m in 1982-83, $778m in 1983-84 and $825m in 1984-85 to be made available over the remaining years of the five-year program. The Bill subsumes the amounts appropriated by the Roads Grants Act 1981. The amounts to be provided in the next three years involve annual increases of 7 per cent in 1982-83,6 per cent in 1983-84 and 6 per cent in 1984.85. All States and the Northern Territory have been allocated corresponding annual increases iIi funding. As a result the 1981-82 funding relativities will be maintained through to 1984-85.
When determining the levels of funds to be providedunder the five-year roads program, the Government intended that the allocations would be firm and final amounts. The Government was not willing to encourage inflationary pressures by building into its expenditure programs openended commitments to meet unlimited future cost increases. However, there is increasing evidence becoming available that the GovernmenCs expectations iIi relation to future cost increases in the

1160 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Repatriation Amendment Bill

roads area are being exceeded. The Bureau of Transport Economics has recently completed a report on the development of a national road construction price index. The report, which I tabled yesterday, indicates that in recent years increases in Commonwealth road grants have not kept up with movements in road building costs. Therefore, the Government will be examining in the Budget context the scope for the provision of additional road funds. However, it is clearly not possible right now to say what might emerge from this. It needs to be recognised that the Government's deliberations on road funding have to be undertaken in the light of the need for continued overall restraint on the Budget and, within that, the competing funding demands of other Commonwealth programs.
The Bill apportions between road categories on the same basis as in 1981-82 the funds to be provided in each of the next three years. However, the Commonwealth is not commited to maintaining the existing funding relativities indefinitely. For instance, a recently released Commonwealth State officials study shows that there are major deficiencies in our national highways system in all States. Furthermore, the most pressing problems are in Queensland and New South Wales. I recently had the opportunity to examine at first hand the state of the Bruce highway between Rockhampton and Townsville. I have agreed to a Commonwealth and Queensland officials examination of the feasibility of a jointly funded project to bring the Burce highway to an acce~table standard within 10 years.
The explanatory memorandum that has been circulated sets out in detail the features of the Bill. The conditions under which Commonwealth assistance is to be provided are identical to those in the Roads Grants Act 1981. Therefore, I do not propose to deal further with individual sections of the Bill. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
REPATRIATION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 11 March, on motion by MrThomson:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (2.5)-The Repatriation Amendment Bill 1982 is a minor Bill to correct four small anomalies in the repatriation legislation. The first anomaly relates to the Government's effort to provide equality of treatment for veterans suffering serious service-related mental illness as compared with veterans suffering

other forms of war-related illness. The second point of the Bill is to extend repatriation benefits to Australian members of the Sinai peacekeeping force. Thirdly, the intention of the Bill is to facilitate recovery by the Commonwealth of mpqeys expended on health care for repatriation patients eligible for workers compensation or third party payments. The final object of the Bill is to protect from legal .actions employees in repatriation hospitals who may have to carry out tasks specified by State laws.
This Bill corrects four relatively minor anomalies in repatriation legislation. I say 'relatively minor' in that in to to the anomalies affect only a few hundred persons. Of course, it is important for those persons that these anomalies be corrected. We certainly support the correction in this respect. But in to to, in terms of numbers and costs, the Bill is relatively minor. The Australian Labor Party supports the correction of those four anomalies and does not oppose the Bill.
However, as our amendment will indicate, we believe that the opportunity should now be taken to correct three further anomalies which are directly relevant to the anomalies corrected by the Government in this Bill. If the Government is setting out to correct a number of minor anomalies in the Repatriation Act, we think it only sensible that the Government should be directing its attention to closely related anomalies in the Repatriation Act, anomalies which we have brought before the House on previous occasions.
I will list the three anomalies which we would like to see corrected as part of the work being done on the Repatriation Act. The first is the extension of repatriation benefits for those Australians who served in peacekeeping services prior to the Sinai force. This Bill provides repatriation cover for those who will serve in the Sinai force. Therefore, we think it only appropriate that the Government should seriously consider providing repatriation benefits for those Australians who served in peacekeeping forces prior to the Sinai force. Secondly, as we have argued before, we believe that the Government should, logically, extend eligibility for service pensions to allied exmerchant mariners, as they have extended service pensions to cover allied ex-servicemen. At present the Government provides service pensions for Australian merchant mariners who were in war zones during the war. It provides now repatriation cover for all allied ex-servicemen. There is a kind of logical flaw in the Government's position in leaving out allied merchant seamen.

Repatriation Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1161

The third anomaly that we believe should-be corrected is ih the provision of equality of repatriation entitlements as between veterans of World War I, World War II and the campaigns in Malaya and Vietnam. As I shall argue later, in respect of entitlements, at present World War I veterans and Malaya and Vietnam veterans are discriminated against as compared with World War II veterans. These three anomalies which we suggest should be corrected are also relatively small anomalies affecting relatively few people, but again, as I have said in relation to the Government's corrections, these anomalies are very important for the particular people concerned, and I should have thought that they surely could be encompassed in legislation such as this, designed to correct these minor anomalies within repatriation legislation.
Before turning to the anomalies that the Labor Party believes attention should be paid to, let us deal with the corrections that the Government has sought to make in this repatriation legislation, corrections which the Opposition fully supports. The Labor Party welcomes the proposal to end the discrimination against veterans suffering serious service-related mental illness. I welcome this legislation in general terms for it shows a government concern for the problems of the mentally ill, which is an area of great neglect by the Commonwealth Government. This neglect is the part explanation for the fact that too often our mental institutions have become the slums of our health system. I do not believe that national health policies can continue to neglect this issue. Certainly the Labor Party, in the months ahead, will turn its attention to that aspect of the health system in this country. But I welcome the attention given in this Bill to certain problems relating to veterans suffering severe mental illness.
At present the Repatriation Commission can withhold pensions from veterans suffering severe mental illness. In addition the practice has been that half of a disability pension has been,paid to Consolidated Revenue to cover the maintenance of a veteran while he is in a mental institution, or wherever he is being treated. No other veteran is treated in this way. For example, a veteran suffering from a physical disability in a hospital or elsewhere has no such deduction made for maintenance, so it is quite clearly a discriminatory provision towards which the Government has rightly turned its attention. Moreover, if the veteran recovers from the mental illness the accumulated moneys are paid to him; but, if he dies, without recovery, his estate is disposed of at the discretion of the Repatriation Commission. There is a serious discrimination there in relation

to the way the estates of other veterans are treated. The Labor Party welcomes the abolition of these unsatisfactory and discriminatory provisions.
This Bill, when passed, will ensure that the mentally ill veteran's pension and any accumulated money will become his property as it is for any other veteran. For instance, under the provisions of this Bill, if the veteran dies without recovery from his mental illness, the pension will be distributed according to his will and, if no will exists, according to the laws of intestacy. That means that it will not be left simply to the discretion of the Repatriation Commission. Again, once this Bill is passed, no deductions will be made for maintenance of the mentally ill veteran, as no deductions are made at the moment for physically ill veterans.
Finally, the trusteeship provisions have been improved. In this respect let me note that the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) reports that one of the States is laggard. I presume, knowing the behaviour of the States in this country, that that one laggard State is Queensland.
Mr Hodges-It's not.
Dr BLEWETT-I am glad to be corrected in this instance. Whichever the laggard State is, I hope it will very quickly come to the party because I think this agreement over trustee conditions is very necessary in relation to the trustee provisions provided in this Bill.
The second anomaly corrected is that relating to direct collection by the Commonwealth from insurance companies of reimbursements for veterans who are eligible for workers compensation or third party benefits. If a veteran is treated and the cost is met by the Commonwealth and if that veteran is eligible for workers compensation or third party benefits, the Commonwealth has the right to reclaim that cost. At present it can only reclaim it directly from the injured individual and not from any third party. We again agree with the proposal of the Bill that the Commonwealth should be able to recover directly those moneys from a third party which is, in most cases, the insurance company. This is clearly a much more humane way of treating this issue than having to put pressure on the injured person to pay the money and leave him or her with the responsibility of collecting it from the insurance company. I also think it will turn out to be a much more efficient way if the money can be collected by the Commonwealth from the third party, namely the insurance company. The Labor Party supports these proposals.

1162 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Repatriation Amendment Bill

Thirdly, whatever our critical views on. this country's involvement in the Sinai pecekeeping force-those views have been expressed quite clearly in the Parliament-we nevertheless support the decision to provide repatriation cover for members of that force, just as whatever views the Labor Party had of its involvement in Vietnam, we nevertheless believed that all Australians who participated in that war were deserving of full repatriation cover. We fought for and supported those changes. Equally so with the Sinai force. Those Australians who serve there are equally entitled to repatriation cover. This Bill, of course, extends repatriation cover to those who will be serving in the Sinai force.
It is perhaps a somewhat ironic comment on the competence of this Government that it introduced a.Repatriation Bill at the end of last year, which was designed to cover this peacekeeping force and which included a clause which stated:
.Pea~e keeping force means a Force raised or organized by the United Nations or another international body.
That was designed to provide cover for the men and women in the Sinai peacekeeping forces. That Bill was introduced only about five months ago. It is' also interesting to note in this Bill that that definition is amended by clause 4. Clause 4 takes out the phrase: .
. . . by the United Nations or another international body.
That is perhaps some comment on the nature of the Sinai peacekeeping fprce as well as I think being some comment on the administrative competence of this Government, which introduced a definition four or five months ago and has to abandon it hastily five months later. Nevertl;leless, despite the muddle of the Government we support the provisions that extend repatriation cover to members of peacekeeping forces, however difficult the Government finds the problelll of definition.
The remaining correction made by the Bill protects repatriation employees in carrying out duties required by State law-for instance, such matters as the administration of blood-alcohol tests. Obviously this is a correction that is required. I think it is important for that correction to be made and the Opposition supports it.
I now turn to what we see as further anomalies in repatriation legislation of much the same order as the anomalies that have been dealt with in this Bill. We believe it would have been very appropriate to have included these corrections in this Bill. We hope to encourage the Government to include these corrections in the next Repatriation Bill that it.unde'rtakesto bring down.

First of all, we want to draw attention again to the inequality of treatment in relation to allied merchant mariners. Since the last Budget, the Government has provided service pensions in relation to Australian merchant mariners. Since the Budget before last, the Government has provided service pensions for all allied servicemen. The present situation is that all servicemen who fought alongside the allies in wars are covered by the service pension. In addition, Australian merchant mariners who were on ships in war-designated areas are also covered by the service pension. The group left out is that of allied merchant mariners, that is, those who served alongside Australians in themerchant marine, often in similar convoys and sometimes I think even on the same ships. These people have been excluded. It seems illogical to have covered all allied servicemen, and then Austn~lian merchant mariners and to have excluded this relatively small group of allied merchant mariners. It seems to me, on any logical grounds, very difficult indeed to justifythat exclusion.
I do not believe the Minister at the table or any member of the Government benches canproduce a logical argument for that exclusion. I presume the argument is, as it frequently is with this Government, the supposed cost of the proposaL But in this case I would have thought that the cost argument was not particularly powerful. The numbers we are dealing with are relatively small. It is difficult to get the numbers and the Minister has admitted this in answer to a question that he was asked. But, certainly in relation to. the amounts involved, in an answer the Minister gave on 29 October 1981, he put the full year additional cost of extending cover to allied merchant mariners at only $1.5m. That amount is to overcome the logical flaw and to give to these men who served in conditions which were often as tough as the conditions on the war front. It seems to me therefore that neither the logical argument nor the financial or human argument is particularly powerful in this case.
Most honourable members on the Government benches are not here for this debate but they nevertheless have expressed, at least to the relevant organisations, their enthusiastic support for this extension. Let me just list them. They are: The honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack), the honourable member for North Syd" ney (Mr Spertder), the honourable member fot Denison (Mr Hodgman), the honourable member for Perth (Mr McLean), the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite), the honourable member for Indi (Mr Ewan Cameron), the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter), the honourable member for Canning (Mr

Repatriation Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1163

Bungey) and the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly). I am talking now about all the enthusiasts who write off to these organisations to say how much they support theextension of this cover to include allied merchant mariners. I suggest to them that certainly any time they like to turn their words into action they will find complete backing from this side of the chamber. Given the numbers involved, we might even have a majority in the House to support their action.
I think it is important also to tell those honourable members that words are not enough because the people about whom we are concerned are rapidly dying off. If action is not taken fairly soon in relation to the great bulk of these merchant mariners who, of course, were involved in the Second World War, it will be too late to honour the various pledges that have been made. I encourage those members who were very active with words to provide us with some action-I do not mind how it is done; it can be done either in their party room or on the floor of the House-to make sure that allied merchant mariners receive this service pension cover.
The second of the anomalies to which we will draw attention in our proposed amendment relates to the eligibility of those involved in peacekeeping forces prior to this year to receive service pensions. The peacekeeping provision relates only to the Sinai force, and no doubt to those that will follow; it does not go back to service provided by earlier peacekeeping forces to which Australia has contributed. My colleague, the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes), when this issue was last debated, provided a number of instances of Australian involvement in peacekeeping-type operations. They did not always attract these fine words that we have become used to today but they were operations which were very similar to the kinds of operations now contemplated. There was, for instance, the Australian involvement in Indonesia between 1948 and 1951; there was the peacekeeping in Korea after the Korean armistice, that is for the period from 1953 to 1957; there were the observer groups sent to India and Pakistan, to the border conflict over Kashmir; and there were observer groups in the Middle East on a number of occasions-we have had observer groups in that very troubled area at various times in the past.
We might also want to contemplate the possibility of cover for civilian police force members, such as the Australian policemen who have been involved in Cyprus since 1964. I believe it was the Minister for Science and Technology who pointed out in the last debate on this matter the problem

that arose with Australians who served with the occupation forces in Japan but who did not serve in war zones during the Second World War. It is certainly true that when this issue was last debated the Minister gave a fairly sympathetic response and said: 'I will take it to the Government and suggest that it look at the matter to see what could be done about past peacekeeping forces'. I hope that later in the debate he will be able to comment on what the Government may be able to do in that sphere as a result of his representations.
It is true that he noted there were problems with retrospective legislation. I accept the point that there are difficulties in the request we are making regarding retrospective legislation. However, although I think the difficulties can be grossly exaggerated in a case like this because, again, the numbers involved are miniscule; they do not lead to major problems in relation to retrospective legislation. I would have thought that we should not be inhibited by the problems of retrospective legislation when we are trying to provide cover for Australians who were prepared to risk life and limb in the cause of reaching pacific solutions in troubled parts of the world. I hope that the Minister will be able to comment on what advances have been made in the possibilities of covering Australians who have served in earlier peacekeeping operations.
I turn now to the third part of our proposed amendment. This is aimed at providing equality of repatriation entitlements for veterans of World War I, Malaya, and Vietnam, so that those groups have an entitlement equivalent to that already available for World War II veterans. The point here is that at present in regard to World War II veterans there are two clauses relating to entitlement and, in a sense, two bases for entitlement. I refer to clauses 101 (1) (a) and 101 (1) (b) of the main Act. These two provisions on which entitlement is based can be summarised as, first of all, what we call the occurrence provision; that is, the entitlement is based on a specific occurrence during the war. The second provision, in clause 101 (1) (b), which we call the arisen-out-of provision, is a broader provision for entitlement on the basis of illness or incapacity having arisen out of the war service. That is a much broader category. One need only look at the decisions made on appeals to the Repatriation Commission in relation to this matter to see that the arisen-out-of clause is a much broader clause providing a wider entitlement than the specific occurrence clause.
Yet the point to note, and the purpose of this proposed amendment, is that for World War II veterans both cases of entitlement are there-the

1164 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Repatriation Amendment Bill

occurrence basis and the arisen-out-of basis. But the provision relating to World War I veterans, Malayan veterans and Vietnam veterans is simply the occurrence provision; the arisen-out-of provision is not there. Therefore, the entitlement of these groups of veterans, the really old veterans from the First World War and the younger veterans from Vietnam and Malaya is more limited because only the occurrence provision applies. Therefore, if the Government is setting about correcting inequities and anomalies, surely this is an important anomaly to attend to in order to provide a basis of entitlement for all Australian veterans on the same grounds, rather than providing it, as the Act does at the moment, on a much narrower ground for World War I veterans and Malayan and Vietnam veterans than applies for .World War II veterans. A few very tragic cases have been carried through on appeal, particularly in relation to World War I veterans. Again, it does seem not a very difficult task, certainly not a very expensive task, for the Government to correct these clauses to provide equality of entitlement. Some of my colleagues will develop this argument in particular at greater length.
In conclusion, we support this Bill for the anomalies it will correct. We only wish that the Government would take up closely related and similar anomalies that exist in the legislation. We will do our best to encourage it to do so. I will finish a little earlier than my allocated time because a number of our people wish to speak in this debate. I move:
That all words after That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not denying this Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that the Bill should provide for:
(I) repatriation benefits for those who served in peacekeeping forces before I November 1981;
(2) eligibility for service pensions for all Allied exmerchant mariners as is provided for Allied ex-servicemen, and
(3) amendment to the Repatriation Act 1920, and related Acts, to provide equality of repatriation entitlements as between veterans of World War I, World War II and the conflicts in Malaya and Vietnam, as is presently provided for World War II veterans under section 101 (I) (b) of that Act',
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-ls the amendment seconded?
Mr Holding-I second the amendment.
Mr HODGES (Petrie) (2.29)-Before addressing comments to the provisions of the repatriation Amendment Bill, I advise the House, and in particular the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), of what benefits are available under the very comprehensive repatriation scheme that operates in this country. I think

it is widely accepted that the repatriation benefits available in Australia are equal to the best in any country and, indeed, better than most. We have available to veterans a wide range of Service pensions, disability pensions and medical services including various aids, right through a complete range of services that I believe~ as I said earlier, are second to none. I do not think anybody in this chamber or indeed in the nation should not realise that we do, we have done, and we will continue to, look after the veterans of this nation who have fought for their country in so many theatres of war. In addition, of course, certain benefits and services are made available to the wives of veterans. I did have the opportunity some three years ago while in the United States to study some of the aspects of the services that country provides for its veterans. I want to repeat that the services that are available in this country are really of a very high standard and in fact are second to none. There are a few blemishes in our system but I emphasise, in my view, only a few.
The honourable member for Bonython talked about other anomalies in the system and said that he would like to see further amendments to this legislation, in particular the extension of benefits to veteran allied merchant seamen. I wish that he had provided the House with some costings for the issue that he raised because it is very important when one looks at proposals that are put from either the Government or tbe Opposition side to consider the costs which will be involved, I would have hoped that had he done the costings they would be a little more accurate than those that he put forward a few weeks ago when he introduced the Hayden health plan. I emphasise that it was the Hayden health plan because it was brought out not in the name of the Opposition spokesman on health but in the name of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). I hope that, in future, costings which come forward from the Opposition leader or the Opposition spokesman on health matters are done accurately and not as they were in the Labor health plan, as I said, of a few weeks ago.
In referring to the cost of various assistance to veterans and their dependants I think it is very pertinent in this debate to mention that Budget Paper No.1, under the heading of 'Social Security', states that something of the order of $1.324 billion is being spent on disability pensions and allowances and service pensions, but of course one has to add to that amount a very substantial cost for. the range of health services which are provided at a cost of almost $400m. There is also the very extensive Defence Services Homes Scheme which costs taxpayers a considerable amount of

Repatriation Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1165

money in addition to the costs for those other services. All of those figures probably add up to a figure in the order of $2 billion or $2,000m.
Let me turn to the provisions in the Bill. There are just one or two things that I want to say about the Bill without repeating some of the very good arguments which were made in the second reading speech by the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) and which were referred to by the Opposition spokesman, the honourable member for Bonython. Obviously there has been an anomaly in respect of the very small number of mentally ill single veterans who are institutionalised and who have in the past been paying a portion of their pension towards their maintenance. Thisanomaly is being removed, and I believe it is a very humane approach, a very compassionate approach and indeed a fair and proper approach, for the Government to take. Some fears have been expressed in respect of allowing State public trustees to control the affairs of these veterans, bearing in mind that the veterans are incapable of looking after their own affairs. I do not share those fears. I believe that we have throughout the States people who are capable of carrying out these functions. Of course, there is a provision that if one of the States is not carrying out that funr;tion adequately the Repatriation Commission can intervene. So I do not believe that the introduction of this measure will be detrimental to the veterans.
The other aspect I want to talk about just briefly is the payment of repatriation benefits to members of the Sinai peacekeeping force. This legislation rectifys an anomaly discoyered in existing legislation when it was realised that a peacekeeping force was being sent to the Sinai. One or two newspaper articles made this point and fortunately it was picked up very quickly by the Government. I do not think anybody in this nation would want to see people involved in the forces, in this instance in a peacekeeping force, not to be eligible for the benefits that have been and are available to veterans of the various theatres of war over the past half a century or m.ore.
I want to move on to what I believe to be an anomaly in the Repatriation Act. It. is onethat was not mentioned, I believe, by the honourable member for Bonython. The Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill 1978 was introduced on 28 September 1978, by the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Adermann) who was then the Minister for Veterans' Affairs. I just want to quote a couple of sections from the Minister's second reading speech because although I personally agreed with the amendment that was made at the

time. I believe, on further examination and following submissions I have received from and discussions I have had with, representatives of the Federated T. B. Sailors, Soldiers and Airmen's Association that the freezing of the 100 per cent rate pension for tuberculosis veterans from 2 November 1978 at the May 1978 cash level was a decision that should not have been taken. I just want to read to the House a couple of extracts from the Minister's second reading speech:
. . . the Government is firmly of the view that there is no longer any reason for these people to be in a privileged position, particularly when the disease is no longer active.
Veterans in receipt of benefits for pulmonary tuberculosis at the 100 per cent general rate will not lose their pensions, but will have these pensions frozen from 2 November 1978 at the May 1978 cash level of that rate.
As the recipient of a pension equivalent to 100 per cent of the general rate or greater, a veteran who has or has had TB is entitled to free medical, hospital and ancillary treatment for injuries, ailments or medical conditions irrespective of cause.
On the occasion of the debate on that Bill the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) raised, I believe, some very important points. He did quote from an article written by Padre Singleton. I believe the arguments put forward by the honourable member for Prospect, which were in line with the arguments in that article by Padre Singleton, are very valid. In support of my stance on this issue I now want to refer the House to Part 10 of the Toose report of June 1975. Under the heading 'Assessment of Incapacity and War Pensions' and under the sub-heading of 'Pulmonary tuberculosis', Mr Justice Toose said:
My own observations, gained from personal inspection of case records and expert medical advice to the Enquiry have satisfied me that the position is substantially as represented by the submissions. This causes me to doubt whether there is now a strong case-or even a case at all-for the existence of the minimum pension level that now obtains.
I consider that, as a general rule, the assessment of disablement from pulmonary tuberculosis should be based on the guidelines provided by the A.M.A. Guide. I would, however, wish to qualify this in three respects.
First, the simple fact of being labelled a sufferer from pulmonary tuberculosis brings practical and social problems not generally found with other diseases. For example, there can be restrictions on entering some employment fields, and there is evidence to indicate that in some circumstances loadings have been applied to insurance policies of members with inactive pulmonary tuberculosis. Second, there still remains a substantial body within the community inhibited in their social relationships with peOple they know to be labelled 'T.B. sufferers'. Whether these 'penalties' ought to operate in this day and age is immaterial. The fact remains that they do.
Finally, where some members have been away from work for a substantial period as a result. of pulmonary tuberculosis they may find it difficult, if not impossible to return to the workforce.
In his conclusions he states:

1166 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Repatriation Amendment Bill

I am of the view that pensions presently payable under Section 37 (1) of the Act for pulmonary tuberculosis should be continued, with the minimum rate at present applicable.
That argument from the Toose report, plus submissions that have been made to individual members, I think, of both sides of the House and to the Minister, by the Federated T.B. Sailors, Soldiers & Airmen's Association of Australia support the view as do I, that there ought to be a return for those veterans-I understand there are only about 4,000 of them-to the full indexed rate of 100 per cent disability pension. I will quote one or two passages from a report by a chest specialist from Newcastle, a Dr Mills, who I understand was a prisoner of war and who came out of the war as a tuberculosis sufferer. In his paper he states:
Along with the program of public education, in many instances there was instilled in the minds of members of the public an even greater fear of the contagiousness of the disease. The patient who was affected was taught not only how to regulate his life for his own benefit but it was also impressed upon him that he had a public duty to do so in the interests of his family, his friends with whom he associated, the general public with whom he travelled, and those with whom he worked.
It must also be borne in mind that the patient who had suffered pulmonary tuberculosis was advised not to work overtime, was advised not to seek that type of employment which caused not only physical stress but mental stress. He was urged not to, as it were, try to set his foot too vigorously on the ladder of promotion.
The point here is that, although medically those veterans in receipt of the TB pensions are cured, there is no doubt in my mind that they have suffered a great deal throughout the earlier parts of their lives. When in the earlier days tuberculosis was considered to be a disease that was difficult to control and indeed to cure, there was a certain stigma if a patient had suffered from the disease although the disease may have been long ago cured. I believe that there was an expectation on the part of those veterans that they would receive that pension for the rest of their lives. It is quite clearly indicated in so many documents that the position for them would be that, regardless of their other income, their personal financial position, they would receive for the rest of their lives the full rate TB pension, indexed as it had been until 2 November 1978. I am fairly reliably informed that the cost of restoration of that TB pension for those veterans, numbering as I said earlier about 4,000, would be a little over $300,000 anually. 'I am also informed by the Association that there would be no suggestion of a claim for retrospectivity in terms of the money of which they have been deprived since the change was made in 1978.

With all of those arguments, I believe that the Government ought to give serious consideration to the restoration of that pension. There is no doubt that these people have forgone activities, forgone promotion and suffered the stigma of that disease albeit, as I have said, they may now be completely cured. I do not believe that the arguments that were put forward on my acceptance of that amendment back in 1978 are really as strong and valid as I considered them to be at that stage. Therefore, I ask that the Government and the Minister consider the restoration of that benefit in its full form to those recipients of a TB pension.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (2.45)-1 wish to join in this debate this afternoon to support the amendment moved by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett). Whilst the
Opposition agrees with many of the provisions of this Repatriation Amendment Bill, we believe that it does not go far enough. In the last few years there have been a number of Repatriation Amendment Bills brought into the Parliament. It has always amazed me that the Government has not taken one whole look at the repatriation benefits in this country and made the necessary changes all at once rather than bringing in a number of different Bills to make band-aid changes to the circumstances of many people involved. In the previous Bill that was debated in this Parliament, the Opposition moved an amendment somewhat along the lines of the present one, suggesting that justice should be given to people who were even now still excluded, even though at the time of war they did their best for their
country.
One gtoup in particular, which up until recently was excluded from benefits, was Australian ex-merchant mariners. The Government, while partially solving the problem of ex-merchant sea-
men, has not gone as far as it should. There are people who served as allied merchant sailors who are still precluded from receiving this benefit. Recently the Government amended the Act to allow repatriation benefits to allied ex-servicemen. It has always amazed me that this Government has continued to make a distinction between people who were in the merchant marines during times of conflict and people who were in the regular
forces. One should recall that during the Second World War, for instance, people who were merchant mariners prior to the War were precluded in many instances from joining the Australian Imperial Force or joining the regular forces to go to war. At the recruiting offices when they gave their occupation as merchant mariner they were sent back to their ships. It has been argued by some people that those persons received a higher rate of

Repatriation Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1167

pay than Navy, Army or Air Force personnel and, therefore, should be excluded from the benefits. Many of the benefits that the Navy personnel had in armed ships were benefits that people in the merchant marine; most particularly, did not have. People in the merchant marine on re-supply missing in the islands, for instance, had a greater casualty rate than members of the Australian Navy. Last year the Government went some way to providing justice to those people, admitedly too late for most of them. But the Government still has not been willing to provide justice for those who were allied merchant marine personnel in the same fashion that justice was provided for people who were allied ex-servicemen. That is a shameful state of affairs and I know that the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) has taken a very sympathetic approach to this. It. is unfortunate that his voice has not been heard in Cabinet. I know he felt that it was taking the Government far too long to give justice to Australian merchant seamen. Once again, we are compounding that injustice in relation to those who were in allied merchant navies.
We have a distinct anomally in this Bill that the Government could have rectified with regard to peacekeeping forces that have been in operation since the Second World War. Australia has had servicemen involved in peacekeeping forces in Palestine and in Cyprus. This Bill will give no justice whatsoever to those people. It is all right for us to say now that we will provide coverage for those who now go overseas with peacekeeping forces, in particular the Sinai multinational force. Those who have served Australia in Palestine and Cyprus have received no justice from this Government.. Last )ear I Was in Cyprus and visited the Australian Federal Police contingent there. The members of that force are under constant threat. In the last 12 months a number of members of. the United Nations peacekeeping force there have been killed. If injury occurred to members of the Australian Police contingent no repatriation beriefits would be payable. They would be entitled to only ordinary compensation benefits that would a<;crue to them as members of the Australian Federal Police.
I wish to mention also the Government's rather parsimonious attitude to the members of this very small contingent of policemen who' represent Australia's interests in that part of the world has meant that they have not been very well looked after at all. I was at the Australian police headquarters in Cyprus last year on the day after the rugby league grand final took place in Sydney. They had to wait three days before they got the

results of what, to some members of the contingent from Sydney, was a very important Australian cultural event. That really shows our view of people we send to the other side of the world to represent our country in what is a very dangerous place. We provide them with very little comfort at all. In fact, it was put to me that the people in that Australian police post had been asking the Department of Foreign Affairs for many years to provide them with a video cassette recorder and replay equipment so that they .can play video tapes of their families. It would cost about $900 to supply that recorder, but because of financial con" straints the Department of Foreign Affairs said that under no circumstances was it able to provide it. The meanness that is instanced in this Bill with respect to the health of those representatives of Australia is also shown by the Department. of Foreign Affairs and others in regard to their physical comfort.
During World War II merchant mariners were put at great risk. In fact, I have seen figures which suggest that 57 allied merchant ships were sunk off the Australian and Papua New Guinea coasts during that war. Some were Australian ships; many were not. Some of the survivors now reside in Australia but they will not be covered by this legislation. It is a paltry change that we ask the Government to make in respect of allied exmerchant mariners. I can see no reason why it has not been made, particularly when it was raised by both the honourable member for Bonythan (Dr Blewett) and me in this House last year when we debated a repatriation measure. We have raised it again this year. How long must these people wait to receive justice from this Government? It is very important when one considers that the main benefit that accrues to people who have repatriation benefits is that they will be able to retire 'at 60, rather than at 65, and receive a service pension. I do not know whether the Government is waiting until most of those veterans are 65 before they change the legislation. Many ofthose Aus_ tralian ex-merchant mariners who would have been entitled to receive a service pension had already passed 65 years when the Government introduced this legislation. Thefe are not many people left in Australia who are under 65 and who served in World War II. One would have to have been pretty young to have enlisted and still not be 65. If the approach of the Government is to wait until all these people are too old and then say that it will give them that benefit, that is an extremely cynical approach. As I said earlier, merchant seamen experienced much the same conditions as those who served in the Navy. The great problem they had was that they were in very poorly armed

1168 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Repatriation Amendment Bill

or unarmed ships and suffered great losses and hardship. Many languished in prison camps and were dealt with very harshly therein. They suffered equally during the war and they should receive equal remuneration from the Government.
I wind up my remarks by reminding the Government that it must address itself to these two areas of injustice in the repatriation field. Those who served in peacekeeping forces prior to the date set in this Bill, 1 November 1981, should be eligible for benefits. Also, I ask the Minister to take on board my remarks about the members of the Australian police contingent in Cyprus. They are very far away from home and perhaps the Government could find $900 to provide them with a video recorder and replay unit. Also, and most particularly, I ask the Government to note my remarks about those who have suffered as a result of ,being members of peacekeeping forces but have received no assistance whatsoever because the Government has not made its legislation applicable to the period prior to'l November 1981. These are very small requests. Responding to them would not cost much money. Surely,.in justice and equity, the Government must do something about them.
Mr WHITE (McPherson) (2.56)-1 too support the Repatriation Amendment Bill. I believe that it brings forward some sensible provisions and I am very pleased to see that the Australian Labor Party supports it as well. It is part of an ongoing program to look after our war veterans. As other speakers have said, the program which has been adoped by Australia over many years is second to none in the world, but there is always room for improvement as conditions change and past anomalies are corrected. I wish to speak briefly a little later on one anomaly-the extensive delays taking place in the system. I believe that the Government should address itself to that problem and unlock a system which is causing hardship to many.
Firstly, as far as the Bill is concerned, the transfer of pensions to State Public Trustees is a measure which can only bring good. I understand that there has been some criticism by service related organisations that this would disadvantage veterans. I do not think anything could be further from the truth. It will affect some 230 veterans. That is a small number but it is of vital interest to those who are concerned. One hundred and sixty of those veterans already have some of their affairs in the hands of the State public trustees and it seems to make sense to give such trustees responsibility for all of their affairs.

Secondly, it is certainly time that we stopped making deductions for people who are mentally ill and being treated in State institutions. I am very pleased to see that the old provisions under which half of their pension was deducted to help pay for this treatment is to be abolished, with effect from 30 April last. They will now be treated in the same way as any other veteran receiving treatment.

In regard to the payment of repatriation

benefits to those who have served in certain

peacekeeping forces, other speakers have made

the point that the practice seems to be unfair. We

are to look after those who will shortly be serving

in the Sinai, whereas others will suffer the disad-

vantage of not having been covered by this legis-

lation. It is true to say that some have indeed been

disadvantaged already. Although many were

covered by Commonwealth compensation pro-

visions, taking advantage of such provisions is

sometimes hard to achieve and can occupy some

time. Moreover, they are not as all-embracing as

are repatriation provisions.

'

The third provision of this Bill is to allow the Commonwealth to recover the costs of medical treatment direct from a third party. This is an important provision because it means that a veteran who has been 'subjected for some reason or
another to hospital treatment does not have to worry about paying for that treatment if a third party is involved. In other words, the Commonwealth looks after him fully under the repatriation system and if claims against a third party are involved the Commonwealth now will be empowered to go to that third party and recover the money. I commend some of our civilian medical benefits institutions to look at the same provisions. There is no doubt that serious hardship is caused to various people when they cannot .get full treatment and full recompense from their medical benefits association which, withholds money and treatment until a claim is settled. In many cases such a claim drags on for a very long
time.

I turn briefly to a matter which is of great concern to me-the delays in hearings within the repatriation system. The first step in this claim system is when a veteran lodges a claim or an application for an increase to an existing benefit
with a repatriation board. Some 15,000 claims were awaiting hearing inJune 1981. As at January 1982, despite efforts to decrease this number and to hasten the processes of the system, we now have a total of something like 17,000 claims. It could be 12 months before some of those claims are heard. There are various reasons for this and I will come to them. I make the point that it is unfair that veterans who are no longer young are

Repatriation Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1169

forced to wait for up to 12 months to have their claims heard. If they appeal to the Repatriation Commission-some 3,500 claims await hearing by the Commission-it could take another 5 or 6 months or even more. If they appeal to the Repatriation Review Tribunal, which has 9,000 claims before it, it could take a further 12 months. So altogether, between a claim to the Board and an appeal heard by the Repatriation Review Tribunal, it could take something over 2 years.
There are various reasons for this, not the least of which has been the recent requirement for boards and tribunals to justify their decisions in writing. This requirement did not exist before. There is no doubt that this is a time consuming procedure. Certainly members of boards are much more careful if their decisions are to be subject to appeal. It is probably a more just system in that greater time is given to the consideration of claims, but it is a significant delay factor. We had also the Law case recently which involved a claim for a smoking disability. That has encouraged people to claim and has led to part of the increase in the number of claims before the boards. Some members of the boards are now inexperienced. Many of the older experienced members have retired. They included' people who saw service themselves, particularly in World War II. This is no reflection on current members of the boards but the fact is that, if one has not been through that experience, it is more time consuming to understand what veterans are talking about.
One of the other reasons for these long delays is that as time goes on and war fades into the distance it becomes more and more difficult to establish cause and liability. There is no doubt that the comprehensive system of appeals which has been built into this system, which we all applaud, is another factor. It is a safe, sure method that successive governments have adopted but there is no doubt that it is time consuming when the appeals can go on and on through the various strata. Unfortunately, some veterans, for reasons best known to themselves-many of them are gei1Uine-ask for constant deferral of their claims. Once they are deferred, they go back to the end of the list.
Having said all that, for all those reasons which are understandable and genuine, I believe that the Government must address itself to this problem of long delays in hearings. Elderly people make claims and expect reasonably swift justice and decisions on those claims. It is not fair or just that people have to wait for long periods before their claims are decided on. In the case of some veterans severe hardship is caused because, as the years pass, the disabilities for which they are

claiming and which they suffer become more severe. I know the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) is concerned about this and I must compliment him on the action that he has taken so far. However, I do expect the Government to put more effort into this area.
Mention has been made during this debate of merchant mariners. Merchant mariners are now eligible for a service pension but they do not get full repatriation entitlements. I sympathise with their case. It has taken over 30 years to get them on the books, so to speak, but I do not think it does their cause any good when some of them are very critical of the Government which, as I said, for the first time in over 30 years has recognised their plight. I would hope that we will pursue their case and perhaps in due course be able to convince the Government that they are entitled to full benefits. Australian Labor Party speakers have been quite critical of the fact that the merchant mariners are not entitled to full repatriation benefits. I do not like harking back to what the Labor Party should or should not have done when it was in government, but it did have a chance some years ago to redress that anomaly. However, it did not. To the credit of this Government, it has at least put them on the books. Tuberculosis pensioners have my full support. I believe that the Government was unwise and unjust in freezing their pensions in 1978. The honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) had been through that in some detail and I fully support the remarks that he made.
I conclude with a few remarks about Vietnam veterans. There are some 53,000 Vietnam veterans in this country. They are mainly concerned not with repatriation problems as such, in regard to which they are fairly treated, but with the problems caused as they see it by pesticides sprayed in Vietnam. I believe that the Government has taken a long time to come to grips with this problem. I do not suggest, as other members do, that the Government is trying to avoid the issuefar from it-but it is a complicated issue and there is no clear evidence one way or the other. One of the great problems indicated by a pilot study just finished in Sydney, apart from all the other problems, is where we locate these people. The pilot study in Sydney, which was to lead to a full comprehensive study, has now been abandoned as such but three separate studies will go on. One, on birth defects, is being undertaken now and mortality and morbidity studies will start shortly.
In addition, counselling centres have been set up in Adelaide and Sydney and a new centre will

11 70 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Repatriation Amendment Bill

be established in Brisbane by the end of May. Assistance for veterans is available through the Department of Veterans' Affairs even though the counselling centres as such have not been set up throughout Australia. It is interesting to note that in Adelaide and Sydney only 63 new Vietnam veteran cases have been put to the counselIing centres, as distinct from those cases which are already receiving assistance under the normal repatriation system. When we consider that some 53,000 people served in Vietnam, that is a very low figure. The number of Vietnam veterans who have required urgent hospital treatment which is available to them through the Department again has been fairly low. The information 1 have indicates 'that only some 53 have used this facility. That is not to say that there is not a problem with respect to pesticides. 1 would doubt whether anyone in this House would be brave enough to say that there was not. The problem is to-try to relate such a condition to their war service. The provisions in the Bill before us are simple, effective and certainly a step in the right direction in looking after our veterans. 1 totally support them.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (3.11)-1 just want quickly to join issue with some of the views that have been expressed in this debate with respect to Vietnam veterans and to reiterate a view which 1 put earlier. When the Vietnam veterans asked for a judicial inquiry they were asking for a process Which would be open to them if they Were involved in an anti-social act. If a Vietnam veteran were to hold up a bank and was apprehended and charged and he wanted to argue that he committed the offence as a result of a depression which was a symptom that arose out of his .service in Vietnam and as a result of exposure to defoliants, he could calI evidence in this respect and the judge could then make a judicial assessment on the basis of the availability of that evi- <;ience. We have an extraordinary situation in which people as a group are suffering a range of problems which has not been encountered before. Many of those problems are related to family problems. Many wives of veterans believe that children have been born with deformities as a result of chemicals to which their husbands were exposed.
It seems to me that we have within the framework of our judicial system judges who are experienced in dealing with a whole range of cases in terms of evidence as complex as some issues which would undoubtedly arise in any judicial assessment that wbuld be made in respect of Vietnam veterans. Judgments are being made in areas such as workers compensation and accident claims and there is the skill and capacity within our judicial

system to deal with matters raised by Vietnam veterans. These veterans have been asking for this right for over 2-!- years. As I said earlier today, I believe their claim is being refused only because of a cover-up of some of the activities of the then Minister for Defence. I believe it is regrettable that when these issues are canvassed directly in this Parliament the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), who is the Minister directly involved in respect of alIegations which are peculiarly within his own knowledge, chooses again to absent himself from the Parliament and not make any attempt to deal with these very serious and important issues.
1 wi11leave that aspect of the claims of veterans and deal with some issues which were raised by my colleague the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett). 1 think the honourable member clearly explained to the House the effect of the differences that arise out of the 'occurrence' provision in section 101 (1) (a) and the 'arisen out of' provision in section 101 (1) (b). It seems to me that it is not good enough to adopt, as the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) did, the course of saying: 'Look, we do have a very fine Repatriation Act; it does give a whole range of benefits, but we admit there are some blemishes'. It would be regarded, 1 think, as thoroughly unconscionable and thoroughly unprincipled if someone were to produce a model workers compensation Act and say: 'This is realIy one of the best Acts in the world but we have excluded one class-we have excluded carpenters. They cannot get into the provisions of this Act'. It is not good enough for the Government to say: 'WelI, we recognise what we call'-to use the term of the;: honourable member for Petrie-'a blemish'. The fact is that this Parliament ought to be prepared to endorse the principle that alI ex-servicemen, alI people who are entitled to repatriation benefits, ought to be able to claim those benefits within the framework of a process where essen~ialIy the same standards and procedures of evidence apply to alI. 1 seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a document from the Repatriation Commission whicn sets out reasons for decision for one claim to show how different standards of assessment applied within the provisions of the Act disadvantaged the widow of a First World War veteran who was seeking to make a claim.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
(Dec'd)
This is a matter in which the widow has applied for benefits under the Repatriation Act 1920 ("the Act") in respect of the death of her husband from aortic incompetence due to ischaemic heart disease in 1967.

Repatriation Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1171

The matter was considered by various determining authorities culminating in a Tribunal decision of 1968 rejecting the member's death under Sections 24 and 37(3) of the Act as it then stood.
Following the publication of the decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in the matter of Foulger the widow has requested reconsideration of her claim for a pension and indicated that the member's death was caused by stress due to war service.
In her request dated 1980 the widow has provided a statement in relation to the late member's health after service. It is noted that the member's health declined following his service. However there is no indication that the member's heart disease which was part of his declining health was in any sense directly related to conditions suffered by themember on service. Similarly the evidence from a departmental medical officer is categorical that there is no relationship between pulmonary tuberculosis and the member's death. .
The Commission finds that the member died from aortic incompetence due to ischaemic heart disease. While the Commission finds that the member's health declined after service it finds no direct relationship with service although it is conceivable that stress associated with the member's service could be one of several factors in the development of ischaemic heart disease. Also it finds that the cause of death did not exist prior to war service and that pulmonary tuberculosis was not a factor in the member's death.
The Commission has had regard to the decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal already referred to and notes that the Tribunal in the context of the particular provision of the legislation therein considered concluded that Mr Foulger's incapacity arose out of or was attributable to his war service.
In this case, the Commonwealth liability does not arise under section 101 but under Section 24 of the Act. The Commission notes that paragraph 24( I)(a) is, in essence of the same effect as paragraph 101 (I)(a) referred to by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in its reasons when the Tribunal pointed out that in Foulger's case there was no evidence of any relevant occurrence which would have brought paragraph 101 (I)(a) into operation. The issue therefore in the present case is to ascertain whether there was a relevant occurrence during service and whether the claimed incapacity results from that occurrence. In that regard, the Commission notes that the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia in the Repatriation Commission v. Law 31ALR40 stated at page 150;
"In S.101 (I )(b) the words 'arising out of' require a consequential relationship of the incapacity or death with the service out of which it is said to arise. It is not useful to attempt to put a gloss upon the words of the Act by saying that the casual relationship must be 'immediate', 'direct' or 'proximate' or by saying it connotes a 'real', 'sole' or 'dominant' cause.
The Act does not say death which is 'caused by' or 'results from' his war service phrases which might connote a proximate casual relationship. The expression 'arisen out of' is satisfied if some less proximate casual relationship is established. Of course, a suggested relationship which is fanciful is not sufficient; and a suggested relationship may be so tenuous as to preclude its consideration as answering the description 'arising out or.
It is reasonable to conclude from this that the phrase 'results or has resulted from' requires a more direct casual relationship than that required by the phrases 'arising out or or 'attributable to'.
In this case the Commission considers in terms of the provisions of Section 24 of the Act that there is no incident connected with the member's service or deemed to be connected with the member's service (i.e. pulmonary tuberculosis) from

which his death could have resulted in the sense discussed above. Similarly there is no indication that the origin of the cause of the member's death existed prior to his enlistment and that his service or the conditions of his service contributed to it in any material degree. The Commission does not find any reasonable doubt arising on the material to suggest other than these conclusions.
The Commission is therefore satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt, that there are insufficient grounds for allowing the claim under Section 24 of the Act.
1982.
Mr HOLDING-I thank the House. World War I veterans are. now particularly disadvantaged because of their age and their very small numbers in the community. I do not accept the argument of the honourable member for Petrie when he says that perhaps my colleague the honourable member for Bonython should produce some figures in the House in terms of cost if the standards were to be made uniform so that World War I veterans and their next of kin would be able to make their claims on the same basis as everyone else. For almost the last week the honourable member for Bonython has been involved in a very considerable exchange when he went to the trouble of producing figures based on the Government's own Budget Papers in respect of health claims. I can see no reason why in anar~ gument of this kind he should have to go to all that trouble again because it would seem that whatever figures are produced from this sid~ of the House in terms of claims-as happened in the case of health costs which I have already mentioned-the figures will automatically be rejected by the Government.
The reasons for decision which I have had incorporated in Hansard show that in the 1982 decision in the case of an unnamed deceased World War I veteran the Repatriation Commission has dealt at some length with the limitations of section 24 of the principal Act. In that case, the veteran's widow brought the latest action some considerable time after his death. The Commission found that there was no doubt of the cause of death and that 'stress associated with the member's service could be one of several factors in the development of' the condition causing his death. Despite the High Court decision in the case of the Repatriation Commission v. Nancy Law, which found that the onus of proof was on the Commission and not on the claimant, if the widow in this particular case takes an appeal to the Repatriation Review Tribunal she will undoubtedly find that under the present legislation her appeal will fail because of a lack of 'arisen out of' provision in section 24 of the principal Act. This is despite the Repatriation Commission's full recognition, in effect, that the widow's Case has been proven.

1172 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Repatriation Amendment Bill

It is clear that in this case, where one widow is to argue that that is not a just and equitable pro-

disadvantaged by virtue of differing standards of vision and one that ought to commend itself to the

proof which are applicable, it is not a blemish, and Government? It does seem to me that this is not

it cannot be dismissed as being such. It is a conan issue upon which the House should have to div-

siderable case of injustice. There is no reason why ide. I hope that on this sort of issue the Minister

the widow of a World War I veteran should have for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson), can

to face a more difficult set of standards in bringing give an undertaking to the House that the amend-

a claim than a World War II veteran. That is in ment will be very seriously considered. I would

heart the essence of the argument. It is a question hope that he would be prepared to take the in-

which has not been answered.

itiative and adopt the amendment. These sorts of

issues ought not to be the subject of the kind of

In my view, in this Parliament, amendments normal political confrontation which we see in the

that come from the Opposition are not treated House. I commend the amendment that has been

with the seriousness they often merit. There is a moved by the honourable member for Bonython.

view that any proposal that comes from this side I do not believe that any honourable members op-

of the House is automatically to be rejected. I subposite would be prepared to seriously argue

mit that if there is one area which has the goodwill against it. I believe it would be a major step for-

of members of both sides of the House and with ward in this Parliament if the Minister adopted

which all members are concerned, it is the need to the amendment and had it incorporated in the

ensure that the Repatriation Act does benefit all Bill.

those people who have served this country. This is an area in which there could be a genuine bipartisan approach. When we recognise common and

Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (3.23)-1 support my colleagues, and take pleasure in doing so. I support the main thrust of the Repatriation Amend-

uniform problems, when an amendment is proposed which I think raises very serious questions which ought to be considered by all honourable members, I do not believe this Parliament, the nation and more importantly our veterans

ment Bill to the extent that repatriation benefits are being extended to cover those serving in peacekeeping forces such as Sinai. With my col" league the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) I too feel that the amend-

who have fought for this nation on a wide variety of fronts are being served when the Government says: 'Yes we admit there are blemishes but as
tqese proposals come from the Opposition we are not really going to look at them'. If one examines

ment containing three parts which has been put forward by the Opposition is a logical extension of the intent of the Bill which is before us and that justice would be done to an even greater extent if this amendment were given serious consideration,

the amendment which has been moved by the honourable member for Bonython-I had the' privilege to second it-one will see that in prin-

accepted and included as part of this Bill. It is logical that repatriation benefits should be provided for those who served in peacekeeping forces be-

ciple it states that repatriation benefits for those who served in peacekeeping forces before 1 November 1981 ought to be provided. Would any

fore 1 November 1981. Eligibility for service pensions for all allied ex-merchant mariners is another logical amendment. I wish to address my-

member of this House join issue with that and argue seriously that that is not a thoroughly just

self to the third part of the amendment which

states:

.

and equitable proposition? The second part of the amendme.nt deals with the eligibility for service

. . : amendment to the Repatriation Act 1920, and related Acts, to provide equality of repatriation entitlements as

pensions for all allied ex-merchant mariners as is between veterans of World War I, World War II and the

provided for allied ex-servicemen. I do not belic;:ve conflicts in Malaya and Vietnam, as is presently provided for there is any member of this Parliament who has World War II veterans under section 101 (I) (b) of that Act.

been seriously approached on the matter who, if I believe that this third amendment, if accepted,

asked the question, 'Do you bdieve that it is a would serve as the basis for opening up repatri-

reasonable proposition?', would be heard to argue ation benefits to sufferers of genetic diseases and

in the negative.

of new areas of disease and illness which are now

surfacing as a result of the spraying of herbicides

The third proposition amends the Repatriation in Vietnam. This House should seriously consider

Act 1920 and related Acts to provide equality of the responsibility that it has and that the Govern-

repatriation entitlements as between veterans of ment has towards Vietnam veterans. I wish to

World War I, World War II, and the conflicts in take issue .with the honourable member for

Malaya and Vietnam, as is presently provided for McPherson (Mr White) who said that Vietnam

World War II veterans under section 101 (1) (b) veterans are not concerned about repatriation

of,that Act. Is any member of the House prepared benefits as they are now well looked after in that

Repatriation Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1173

area. I point out to him that the spouses and families of Vietnam veterans are not catered for and are suffering because of it. There is no provision for them in the existing legislation. Th~ Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has already made a statement accepting responsibility in principle for Vietnam veterans and families who suffer from genetic diseases. In answer to Question No. 316 at page 2231 of Hansard dated 14 May 1970 the honourable member for Wannon as the then Minister for Defence, said:
The Government is well aware that susceptibility to chemical and biological warFare agents varies from person to person and that the weak, the young and the infirm are more vulnerable than the healthy.
However, the now Prime Minister's expressed concern of 1970 about the weak, the young and the infirm has not been evident from his Government's treatment of Vietnam veterans and, I emphasise, their spouses and families. Those women are bearing the brunt of the exposure of their husbands to these herbicides and defoliants: Despite extensive evidence which has been available for some years about the very real human problem of these veterans and their families, it took until last month for the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) to announce that there would be free emergency treatment for wives and children at repatriation hospitals. The problem is that the facilities are earmarked for emergency treatment only. I am concerned about the number of veterans and families who are chronically affected by the different diseases and who do not have access to this facility.
I want to make it clear to honourable members on the other side of the House what sorts of problems veterans who were exposed to agent orange have been suffering from. We are not talking of trifling medical disorders. The conditions include: Carcinomas of several kinds; nausea and diarrhoea; weight loss; lethargy; depression and anxiety; fits of rage; insomnia; headaches and skin rashes. But more pertinently, when one is considering the Act under discussion, their families are really suffering. They do not receive compensation. It is now well known that their children may have a number of physical deformities. When we add to this already extensive list of physical problems the emotional pressures placed on a family of trying to decide whether to keep having children after one or more miscarriages, or the birth of a deformed child, we are getting to the root of why families break up or why people commit suicide or turn to crime.
Last week in the Senate reference was made to the desperate plight of an American Vietnam veteran who had bound himself to a cross in

Washington in an attempt to draw the attention

of the United States of America Government to

the plight of Vietnam veterans. Part of that man's

protest sign said: 'How many more Vietnam vet-

erans must moan and die in agony

.?' The

anguish of an Australian woman whose husband

took his own life as a result of his torment follow-

ing disabilities he received from agent orange has

already been put on record in this chamber by the

honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child). This

is not emotive rhetoric. This is the tragic, unvar-

nished reality of Vietnam veterans in the United

States of America and Australia. They are our re-

sponsibility; these people went to serve in Viet-

nam at the call of the Government. They are now

entitled to full compensation not only for them-

selves but also for the spouses and children who

are having to face up to the reality of deformities

and genetic diseases which are visited on them be-

cause the husband and father served in Vietnam. I

find it utterly incomprehensible that a govern-

ment can put aside this dire responsibility and

how anyone-the Minister or honourable

members on that side of the House-can reason-

ably say that they do not have any responsibility

for these very tragic circumstances of exposure to

defoliants.

Senator Messner has congratulated himself on the difference in the way in which the United States and the Australian governments are hand-. ling the veterans' problems. Already it has taken Australia's Vietnam veterans over two years to beg, cajole and finally force very limited con~ cessions from the Fraser Government.- Now, because of setbacks to the Veterans' Affairs Department's approach to veterans see)<ing compensation for exposure to agent orange in the wake of the Law and Simpson decisions, there is evidence that this Government will seek either legislative or administrative changes fuither to protect its precious purse strings. What about
people?

As reported in the Canberra Times, the permanent head of the Department of Veterans' Affairs, Mr Derek Volker, has attacked recent administrative changes which require the various tribunals within the Department to give reasons for their decisions. Mr Volker suggested that not
having to do this would alleviate certain delays. But if a repatriation claimant is unhappy with a decision and no reason or only minimal reasons are given, it will obviously be extraordinarily difficult for the veteran to appeal. Add to this the fact that the spouses and families of Vietnam veterans are already without any rights under existing repatriation legislation and it is little wonder that Vietnam veterans gave up hope of

1174 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Repatriation Amendment Bill

any sign of compassion from this Government and sought the protection of a judicial inquiry.
1 do not say these things just to attack. 1 believe that there is a really strong case for Government members moving off their own bat and supporting these logical and compassionate amendments to an Act which admittedly holds greater hope for veterans from different areas. It is a good Bill as far as it goes but it would be better with these amendments. It gives Government members the opportunity to honour their responsibilities to veterans, particularly those of Vietnam and particularly,1 repeat, in view of the fact that wives and children are not covered and do not receive repatriation benefits but receive the brunt of injuries suffered by the husband and father.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (3.33)-1 am pleased that the Bill has been accepted by the Opposition-in fact, by both sides of the House-as a Bill showing concern. 1 am delighted that it has been supported. 1 turn briefly to the amendment suggested by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett). We discussed the matters referred to in this amendment on another occasion last year and 1 undertook to ask that they be considered by the Government. Taking them briefly in turn, the first involves the extension of benefits to those who served in peacekeeping forces before 1 November 1981. Honourable members will be aware that last year this provision was extended from 1 November 1981. This matter, as 1 undertook last year, is being considered very seriously by the Government. It is a budgetary matter, so 1 will be forgiven if I do not comment any further on it.

I am not one who believes that any Opposition amendment, particularly an amendment on veterans' affairs, should be disregarded just because it comes from the Opposition. As I said before, 1will undertake to ensure that these amendments, which are amendments to the question and not to the Bill itself, are considered by the Government. The Government would not accept their inclusion in this Bill. 1 think that that would be inappropriate. I am sure that the honourable member for Bonython would agree with that. 1 should like briefly to take up some other points made by honourable members. I noted the plea by the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) on behalf of tuberculosis pensioners. 1 shall discuss that with my colleague the Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner). 1 noted the plea by the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) on behalf of the peace contingent in Cyprus that we should find some way of providing them with a video recorder. Again, 1 shall pass that on to my colleague the Minister for Veterans' Affairs. It is a very worthy point.
I noted the comments of the honourable member for McPherson (Mr White) on delays in the system. This matter was discussed yesterday with the national President and other senior officials of the Returned Services League. The delays, as the honourable member pointed out, have been caused by amendments to the procedures. Yesterday the National President of the RSL made the point that there are many good features of these amendments because a far higher proportion of the applications is now accepted. I think that it has risen from about 30 per cent of the applications to about 60 per cent. So these amendments have been very good for ex-servicemen, although they have added to delays.

The second matter is the extension of service pensions to allied ex-servicemen. The Government extended this provision last year to Australian merchant mariners. This, again, is being
considered by the Government, and again it is a budgetary matter. The third matter is the much more difficult and complex one of equality of entitlement. The honourable member for Bonython, the honourable member for Mel-
bourne Ports (Mr Holding) and other speakers are right to point out that there are inequalities in the treatment of World War I and World War II veterans and veterans of subsequent wars. A good deal of work has been done by the Department of Veterans' Affairs on uniform eligibility, but the general view is that such an extension of eligibility, which is a major matter, should form part of a total review of the disability pension area.

1 shall not comment on the points made by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports and the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) on Vietnam veterans, except for one point. This matter was discussed in the debate earlier today. I totally reject the allegations made by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports that there is a cover-up in this matter. There is no cover-up: I made that quite clear earlier today. I have listened carefully to the points made in the debate. Some very good points have been made. I commend the Bill to the House.
Question put:
That the words proposed to be omitted (Dr Blewett's amendment) stand part of the question.
The House divided.

Repatriation Amendment Bill

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr p, H, Drummond)

Ayes

62

Noes

46

Majority

16

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M, E, Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. O. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Cariton, J. J. Chapman, H. O. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean, A.O. Dobie,J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Fal~oner, P. D. Fife, W. e. Fisher, P. S. Oiles, O. O'H. Ooodluok, B. J. Oroom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Hyde,J. M. Jull,D.F. Kaller, R.e. Killen,D.J. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller) ,McLean, R. M.
McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, l. M. Moore, J. e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porler, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C . . Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. Mce. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, O. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, l. B, e.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewell,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cainpbell, O. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Cohen, B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J, L.. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J. Jacobi, R.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating,P.J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J. e. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon; Les Mild;en, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. O. ScholeS, o. o. D. Scott, J. L. Uren, T. Wallis,L.O. West,S.J. Willis,R.
Young, M.J.

Brown, N. A. Anthony, J. D. Jarman. A. W.

PAIRS

Child,J. Free, R. V. Theophanous, A. e.

Question so resolved in the affirmative, Amendment negatived, Bill read a second time,

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1175
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced,
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith,
Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time,
TARIFF PROPOSALS Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (3.46)-1 move:
Customs TarilfProposals No, 9 (1982).
The Customs Tariff Proposals I have just tabled and circulated to honourable members relate to proposed alterations to the Customs Tariff Act 1966, Proposals No, 9 (1982) which operate from tomorrow contain tariff changes resulting from the Government's decisions on recommendations by the Industries Assistance Commission in its report on hand and machine scales, drawing and mathematical calculating instruments, et cetera, The Government has accepted the Commission's recommendations contained in this report. The effect of this decision is that there will be an immediate increase in the duty rate from 2 per cent to 25 per cent on the following goods: Hand scales, machine scales, protractors, disc calculators and the like, set squares, parallel rules of artificial plastic material, stencils and drawing curves, This rate will be reduced to 20 percent after two years, Other goods under reference will remain dutiable at minimum rates,
The Government agrees with the Industries Assistance Commission that assistance should be given to this relatively low cost. industry at the higher rate of 25 per cent for two years to avoid a possible loss of resources from the industry in the short term, A comprehensive summary setting out the nature of the changes has been prepared and is being circulated to honourable members, I commend the proposals to the House,
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned,
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Industries Assistance Commission Report on Hand and Machine Scales, Drawing and Mathematical Calculating Instruments, et cetera,

1176 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

ACT Electricity Supply Amendment Bill

AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ELECTRICITY SUPPLY AMENDMENT
BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 10 March, on motion by MrHodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (3.49)-The Opposition does not oppose the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Amendment Bill. The major purpose of it is to provide machinery whereby should it become necessary the Minister acting on behalf of the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority can impose restrictions or limitations on the use of electricity. This is a limited power but one which is obviously necessary and one which should be available to whoever is responsible. In the case of the Australian Capital Territory, the electricity supply is totally dependent upon sources outside the Australian Capital Territory. It would appear that that is likely to be the case for some considerable time. Not to have the power to restrict or place limitations on usage would seem to be almost ludicrous.
The Bill also changes some of the arrangements relating to disclosure of interest and otherwise which the Opposition does not object to. I note that in his second reading speech the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) took the opportunity to deal with general power supplies and the availability of power. He made a point about the likely reductions in the supplies of power available in this area because of the problems of the power system in New South Wales. I think it is fair to add that this situation could be exacerbated because of the ongoing plight of the Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Scheme, where there is a drop in output. This is not only a temporary drop but also a permanent one. It is likely to accelerate because of the problems with hydroelectric schemes and water supplies. In the next few .years during peak periods, especially in winter, heavier drawings from both New South Wales and Victoria are likely also. Whilst the situation in New South Wales is currently in the news, the situation ih Victoria is at least as bad, if not worse. I think in both cases the management of the authorities responsible for electricity supply are at least open to question and probably should be thoroughly examined.
The facts of life are that in Victoria over the last two years several hundreds of thousands of dollars have been spent on telling Victorians how good their power supply is. We had an unfortunate Premier, overseas with the chairman of the

electricity authority, telling people that his State could provide unlimited amounts of electricity for high usage industries. I think this situation is parallelled in New South Wales. While they were undertaking this task, Victoria ran out of power. We went into a blackout situation as a result of bad planning and, to a large extent, bad administration of the electricity supplies in that State. I think it is likely that supplies of electricity whatever the source, will be unreliable for a number of years to come. The reductions in infrastucture loans and the 'proposed restrictions on leasing arrangements whereby funds were put into power stations in New South Wales must ultimately affect the supply of power.
Canberra has one other problem which at some stage will have to be faced; that is, whether Canberra could obtain the necessary power should a high power usage industry be attracted to this area. It is doubtful whether either State would give up its drawing rights on the Snowy Mountains or whether Canberra's purchase agreements relating to New South Wales would enable a quick increase in power available in Canberra for an industry for which Canberra may be competing with New South Wales or another State. There are problems. It is probably not the time for Canberra to move towards an independent power supply but certainly in the not too distant future, if Canberra grows at the rate at which it has grown over the last 20 years, an independent supply of power may become necessary.
The Opposition does not oppose the Bill. I do not want to take any more time because my colleagues, the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) and the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry), who are representatives of the Australian Capital Territory in this Parliament, both wish to contribute to the debate on the matter and I wish to give them the maximum time possible.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (3.52)-The Federal Government has been forced to introduce this emergency electricity supply legislation for the Australian Capital Territory because of-the incompetent mismanagement and neglect of the New South Wales Government in failing to plan for and provide adequate power for New South Wales. As we all know, the Australian Capital Territory draws most of its power from New South Wales. Because of plant difficulties and major industrial problems in that State, New South Wales is today in a state of crisis. 'Teetering on the brink' was one of the headlines within the last 24 hours. The people of New South Wales

ACT Electricity Supply Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1177

have been suffering blackouts, brownouts and interruptions to the electricity supply in that State for some time now.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SHIPTON-Honourable members opposite should ask the people of New South Wales about this matter. The Sydney office workers will tell them of working conditions throughout the hot summer in large city buildings without windows and without air conditioning because of a lack of electricity to run air conditioning. New South Wales has had to extend daylight saving to save electricity. Honourable members opposite should just take note of that. In New South Wales today there is talk of zoning and rationing. Zoning and rationing is about to be introduced in New South Wales because of the New South Wales Government's incompetence in managing the electricity supply. A four-day working week for all New South Wales industry is proposed under these zoning arrangements. This means that there will be an enormous loss of output from industry in that State and an approximately $70 a week pay cut for all workers on the average wage in the State. That is the situation in New South Wales. Because of mismanagement New South Wales is facing a four-day working week in industry and blackouts and brownouts.
Dr Jenkins-Who wrote this?
Mr SHIPTON-I suggest that the honourable member listen to what the Director of the New South Wales Chamber of Manufactures, Mr Noel Mason, said. He warned that zoning will cost New South Wales workers $16m a day in wages alone. That is what the workers will lose a day because of the management of electricity supplies by the New South Wales Government. Mr Mason and the Director of the Chamber of Commerce are both reported in New South Wales papers as having criticised the New South Wales Government for its lack of planning. The New South Wales Government is clearly responsible and totally to blame for this appalling situation of lack of electricity in the Australian Capital Territory, which has caused the Government to introduce this legislation. Let us contrast that situation with the situation in Victoria under the Victorian Government.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SHIPTON-My opponents opposite should just listen to this: Currently Victoria is supplying New South Wales with excess power to help it out of its difficulties. The amounts of power vary from time to time because of available supply and Victoria's need to plan its maintenance. As we all know, supplies of power from the

Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority to New South Wales have had to be cut because of dwindling water supplies.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) -Order!
Mr SHIPTON-Mr Deputy Speaker, will the Opposition members listen? Victoria is currently offering spare capacity to New South Wales under an electricity interchange agreement. Let uscontrast the New South Wales Government's mismanagement 'with the situation concerning electricity in Victoria. I have stated that currently Victoria is, as far as it can, helping out New South Wales. The Victorian Government has secured supplies for Victoria. Investment will be attracted to Victoria. Capital will not go to New South Wales. Who would invest in New South Wales When it is in this state of crisis? It does not have electricity to supply to and support manufacturing industry. As a result, capital will flood to Victoria, which has the electricty capacity, and the capacity generally to support an expanded industry. Manufacturing industry will expand in Victoria as there is no incentive to invest in New South Wales under the Wran Government. That will be the net result of the current situation.
Opposition members have criticised the Victorian Government. Let us look at what the Victorian Government has done. I will prove to them that much has been done. Let us look at Loy Yang. It is progressing. It will be finished to supply electricity to Victorians. Let us look at Newport-ah, dull silence has fallen over the Opposition side of the House. Newport was built in spite of union black bans. It is a great tribute to the Premier of Victoria, Lindsay Thompson, who took on the unions and won. Yallourn W, in the prosperous Latrobe Valley in Victoria, is being built in stages. Two units have been in operation in Victoria since the early 1970s. Yallourn W3 contributed to Victoria's supplies of electricity last winter and Yallourn W4 will be in operation within the next few weeks. Both Yallourn W3 and W4 will be available to supply electricity to Victorians this winter. The Victorian Government has had its problems with the unions but it has got on top of them by good management and strong government.
Dr Jenkins-It has its troubles with the electorate.
Mr SHIPTON-Just listen to me; I will tell the honourable member about Mr Wran. The glitter has gone off Mr Wran. He has turned off the lights in New South Wales. I say to Victorians, let us keep them on in Victoria under the Thompson

1178 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

ACTElectricity Supply Amendment Bill

Government. This morning Mr Cain, the Opposition Leader in Victoria, was reported as warning the union movement. What a joke. What a myth. What a laugh. The ALP cannot control the unions because the unions control the ALP. We all know, and it is accepted, that the Labor Party is the parliamentary wing of the union movement..
Mrs Kelly-Oh, come on!
Mr SHIPTON-Does the honourable member deny that the Labor Party is the parliamentary wing of the union movement? No, she does not, because it is trUe. Mr Cain will not be able to controlleft wing union officials. Cain will not be able to control the Gallaghers and the Halfpennys of this world because he and the ALP are their prisoners. They control him and his party.
Mr Beazley-Ha, hal
Mr SHIPTON-Well, in Victoria at the last ALP State conference 61 per cent of the delegates were there as representatives of the trade union movement and only 39 per cent were from the branches. It is interesting that at that conference--
Dr Jenkins-They were all branch members.
Mr SHIPTON-I have got no doubt that the honourable member. was there so he could tell us that at that conference the socialist left controlled the majority of the union delegates and, as has been said, the socialist left controls a substantial number of the branches.
Mr West-I raise a point of order. I know that we are supposed to be discussing the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Amendment Bill. I would like to know what the State of Victoria and the so-called socialist left has to do with the electricity in Canberra. I draw your attention, Mr Deputy Speaker, to the Standing Orders which require a speaker to be relevant to the Bill.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER' (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-I ask the honourable member to. remain relevant to the Bill before the House.
Mr SHIPTON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I believe I am being relevant to. the Bill before the HQuse. It is very important that supplies of electricity from Victoria to New South Wales at present under an interchange agreement are helping out New South Wales and I bel,ieve it is relevant to talk about the Government in Victoria because that Government, by its gQod management, has enabled the supply of eleCtricity to New South Wales to take place. That obviously must be relevant. I believe the Opposition is deliberately taking up my time because its members do not want to hear the truth. It is ironic that last night while the lights were out in New

South Wales Mr Wran fled to the well lit State of Victoria. He was not all that welcome by MrCain who realises that the glitter has gone off Mr Wran. But the ALP in Victoria had to have him under VictQrian footlights with the Victorian power supplied by the ThQmpson Government.
Mr Keating-I raise a point of order. If the brain damaged member on the other side of the House cannot understand what Y9U have told him, Mr Deputy Speaker, then he should oblige by standing by your ruling.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will not cast aspersions on another member. There is no point of order.
Mr SHIPTON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I am delighted to. see that the honourable member for Blaxland is afraid to listen to what I have to say. He is taking spurious PQints of order to take up my time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will not refer to interjections. He will keep to the Bill, and there will be no interjections from my left.
Mr SHIPTON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I am pleased to speak abQut the Australian Capital Territory electricity situation because the shortage has been caused by the incompetence and bad management of the Wran Government in New South Wales.
Mr West-We are waiting to hear what you know about Australian Capital Territory electricity supplies.
Mr SHIPTON-That is the truth and the honourable member knows it. As I was saying, in view of the electricity chaos in New South Wales with the brownouts and blackouts, Mr Cain is no longer modelling himself on Mr Wran. In fact, he is distancing himself further day by day.
Mr Charles-I raise a point of order. With all due respect, Mr Deputy Speaker, if the Government wishes to have a debate on the Victorian State election we on this side of the House will undoubtedly take it on. Butthe honourable member is really talking about that State eleCtion, not about the Bill that is beforethe House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr SHIPTON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. This is the third or fou:th Opposition member who has taken a spurious point of order and I want that noted because members of the Opposition are afraid of the truth, they are afraid to hear what I am saying about the situation in

ACT Electricity Supply Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1179

New South Wales today, about the lack of electricity in that State caused by the lack of planning by the New South Wales Government.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. The House will cometo order. The speaker will remain relevant to the Bill and members on my left will cease interjecting. That is also out of order. I call the honourable member for Higgins.
Mr SHIPTON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker, for your support.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-the honourable member will not put words into the Chair's mouth. The Chair merely called the member to continue with his speech.
Mr SHIPTON-I was thanking you, Mr Deputy Speaker, for calling me and nothing further was implied, I can assure you. As I said at the introduction of my remarks, the Federal Government has been forced to introduce this supply legislation because of the mismanagement and neglect of the New South Wales Government in failing to plan for and provide adequate power for New South Wales. I regret the need for the legislation but it has been caused by the New South Wales Government's mismanagement of its electricity supply. I support the Bill.
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (4.06)-The purpose of the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Amendment Bill is to give the Government power to ration electricity in the Australian Capital Territory with a prospect of some power rationing in New South Wales. I think this legislation needs to be seen in the context of the present state of the New South Wales grid. It is wrong, as was said earlier by an honourable member, to cast reflections upon the efficiency of the New South Wales Government. What we will see in New South Wales in a very short space of time is an excess of power generation capacity with the development of Eraring and Bayswater. What we are experiencing at the moment is the mechanical breakdown of three units at the largest power station in New South Wales, which is at Liddell, and the loss of those three 500 megawatt units which has meant a loss of 30 per cent of the power through the New South Wales grid by way of mechanical breakdown. Because of the bans and limitations that have been placed upon certain maintenance on other units in the system in New South Wales by employees of the New South Wales Electricity Commission, it has not been possible for the Government to guarantee that there will not be

any shedding of load during periods of high electricity demand. That is not a matter which bears upon the capacities or efficiencies of the New South Wales Government because in aggregate terms of power planning to meet power needs the State of New South Wales will not be found wanting as indeed it has not been found wanting in any of the years when there were major blackouts in the early 1950s.
Despite all the brouhaha about power problems in New South Wales the actual cost to the public in terms of load shedding was one day last winter-one day, that is all we have had. We have lost about three days in Victoria and of course we have losses all the time in the State of Queensland. At the moment no power is being shared by Victoria to New South Wales. Both the States of Victoria and New South Wales are now drawing power from the Snowy River scheme. If I may comment upon Victoria's power development policy, it has its peak load gas turbines operating for base load power now and has been for quite some years. So what this Bill is in fact doing is providing for the Federal Government to make adjustments in the power supply situation in the Australian Capital Territory in line with what happens in New South Wales. But it was a great shame, I thought, that the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) should try to make a cheap political point for the purposes of the Victorian State election, to try to bolster the flagging fortunes of the Victorian Government led by Mr Lindsay Thompson. Of couse, to the listening audience this member, in terms of esteem of other members, would not blowout a candle. He has got no chance of getting ministerial office. He is one of the drones on the Government back bench and he is never really going to rise above that station.
Mr Ruddock-That is a bit unkind.
Mr KEATING-No, it is not unkind. It is a reflection of fact. If he wants to come in here and make those sorts of speeches he cannot expect any respect from the Opposition. Let us get the record straight. There has been the prospect of power problems in New South Wales because of mechanical breakdowns at Liddell and because of bans and limitations, but once the first Eraring unit is installed and the other Liddell units are brought back onto line power will be running out of their ears, particularly if less smelting capacity is built because even though less smelting capacity may be built there will not be less power generating capacity built. There will be quite an excess of power generation in New South Wales. While there is the prospect of some difficulties for this

1180 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

ACT Electricity Supply Amendment Bill

winter-let us hope that they are minimisedbeyond 1982 there will be a flood of watts coming from the power generation system of New South Wales to the consumers of that State and, unless I am a very poor judge of things, if there is to be any subsidisation it will be subsidisation of power from New South Wales to Victoria rather than the reverse. Of course, as any informed observer knows, and the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) is nodding his head--

Mr Hodgman-What do you mean nodding my head? I am reading what the Electricity Commission of New South Wales says. It is different from you.

Mr KEATING-Well, he is shaking his head as though it is about to fall off. Apart from his expertise in a very small area of the apple industry in Tasmania, let us put it on the record that this Minister--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M.

Dobie)-I remind the honourable member, as I

did with the previous speaker, to keep to the sub-

ject of the Bill.

.

Mr KEATING-That is fine, Mr Deputy
Speaker. Let us talk about the administration by this Government of the Australian Capital Territory, be it in electricity or otherwise. The Minister is held in contempt by the business people of this community, as he is by the electors of the Australian Capital Territory. We will have no as-
persions cast by him of bungling or incompetence in relation to the capacities of the New South Wales Government. An unfortunate situation has developed in the New South Wales power grid.

Mr Porter-It is all the fault of the Wran Government, isn't it?

Mr KEATING-Here is another drone from the Government's back bench coming into the House-another permanent piece of back bench fodder. He should not come in here talking about the New South Wales Government. The last New South Wales Government received the largest number of seats in Australian Federal history.

Mr Hurford-What happened in Lowe?

Mr KEATING-In Lowe we turned up a 9.3 per cent swing. I remind the House of the words of
the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that the Lowe by-election would be fought on State issues, particularly power. There has been a nice answer by the voters of Lowe to the Prime Minister concerning the affairs of the New South Wales Government. It ill becomes the Government to score off the people of the Australian Capital Territory, to make a mockery of a situation in which they might find themselves in the event of load

shedding. The New South Wales Government is doing everything in its power to avoid load shedding and it is to be hoped that the people of New South Wales and of Victoria are not inconvenienced by a mechanical breakdown in the power system.
Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (4.13)-1t is unfortunate that this House has to have before it the piece of legislation we are now discussing. It is unfortunate but it is due to the action, or in some instances the inaction, of others outside the Australian Capital Territory. The purpose of this Bill, the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Amendment Bill, is to amend the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Act, to enable the uses--
Mrs Kelly-You would never guess that was the purpose of the Bill.
Mr HARRIS-lam glad the honourable member is learning. The Bill's purpose is to enable the use of electricity in the Capital Territory to be rationed following upon a declaration of a state of emergency by the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman). The Territory currently derives about 60 per cent of its supply from New South Wales, the balance coming from the Snowy Mountains Hydro-electric Authority. Owing to the amount of supply of electricity that is purchased by New South Wales, the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority is particularly vulnerable to emergency situations occurring in New South Wales. Already shortages of electric power and energy in New South Wales have resulted in emergency situations and requests to the Capital Territory Authority to reduce its load. In order that the Authority may respond effectively to emergency situations, and to provide equitable distribution of what supply is available, it is absolutely essential that the Authority have power to impose restrictions.
New South Wales for more than 50 years has been the prime supplier of electricity to the Australian Capital Territory. However, since June last year, the supply of electricity from New South Wales has become distinctly uncertain. We cannot be confident that the situation will improve. Indeed, on all the evidence before us, it is very likely to get worse. The power supply problems in June last year were due to a combination of factors, the principal one being the shut-down caused by plant difficulties in two of the large generating units, combined with major industrial problems. This is, in fact, what the Electricity Commission of New South Wales has itself admitted. The failure of two more large units at Liddell power station in November 1981, exacerbated

ACT Electricity Supply Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1181

again by industrial problems, caused yet again the imposition of restrictions. Some relief was expected with the commissioning of the Eraring power station, or the first generator in that station, but this too has been delayed, again for industrial reasons. The Gover,nment believes that that history of events is such that it must be fully prepared to deal with the situation and protect as far as is possible the users in the Australian Capital Territory.
It is indeed regrettable that this situation has come about. That the National capital is facing a winter in which there could be periods without electricity is beyond doubt the fault of the New South Wales Government. It is due to the weakness of that Government in its industrial relations, and to its general inefficlency, that electricity generation in New South Wales is in such a mess. It is necessary only to look at today's reports to understand the nature and degree of that mess. In this morning's Australian Financial Review it states:
Power supplies in NSW cannot be guaranteed, even if today's mass meeting of power workers agrees to lift all bans and limitations.
The article refers to the State Minister for Energy, Mr Landa, and states:
. . . if the power workers decided to follow the recommendation of their delegates and lift all bans and limitations, zoning could be avoided only if they worked all available shifts and if the reliability of the machinery was maintained.
Otherwise, he said: 'there can be no guarantees on zoning or on the supply side'.
It would appear that even on the best assumptions as to the industrial relations situation, there will still be considerable trouble in maintaining supplies from New South Wales to the Australian Capital Territory. It is clear too that essential maintenance has been ignored or overlooked in New South Wales power stations. The situation is a monument to incompetence. New South Wales still has six major generators out of action because of mechanical breakdowns and the State system can generate at about only 40 per cent of its installed capacity. New South Wales has been drawing down so much power from the Snowy Mountains hydro-electric scheme that the short term water storages in the Snowy Mountains will run out on Friday morning.
As I have said, the only additional sources of power for the Australian Capital Territory, apart from New South Wales, are from the Snowy Mountains, and, indirectly, from Victoria. The Snowy Mountains Authority, as I have said, has already supplied so much power that its short term water storages are about to run out. This sorry situation is also the result of the mess in New

South Wales, from the heavy demands on the Snowy Mountains scheme that have been made by New South Wales to meet its sho~tages' throughout the summer months. This situation, is a disaster which has had, and will continue to have, unfortunate economic effects immediately in New South Wales but spread into both Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory. There is one other source which has been assisting and that is Victoria. It is fortunate that that State has been able to help New South Wales and hence, indirectly, the Capital Territory by supplying electricity which is surplus to that State's needs. The contrast between Victoria and New South Wales is instructive. In Victoria that State Government has resisted militant union action to ensure that adequate supplies of power are available. Probably the best example is in the Vital State Projects Act which was used by the Victorian Government to hasten the completion of the Newport power station. That is a piece of legislation, incidentally, which the Victorian Opposition says it will repeal
if it ever gets the chance. It is clear from the N,ew South Wales Premier's recent statements that he has realised, perhaps too late, the need to take firm action to defend vital State utilities.

While the lights go out in New South Wales and
possibly, as a consequence, in the Australian Capital Territory it is to be hoped that power generation will continue in Victoria:- The
differences will no doubt be noted by the voters-of that State. The actions contemplated in this legislation are unwelcome, but also necessary. It ista be hoped that New South Wales can get its EI~c tricity Commission into better order so that such
measures will not be necessary in future years. I support the Bill.

Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (4.20)-Unlike sev-

eral of the speakers who have preceded me, I

actually intend to confine my comments to' the

Australian Capital Territory and to look at the

effects that this legislation will have on it.

,',

Mr Porter-Boring!

Mrs KELLY-One of the interjections that I just received from the Government benches was 'boring'. It is not boring to me that my constituents will have to ration their electricity this year.
It may be boring to the honourable members on the Government side, as we have seen in the debate today. Most of the Government suppOl:ters who spoke did not discuss the Australian Capital Territory; they discussed Victoria and New South Wales. Why was that? The answer is that this
Government cares very little at all about the consumers in the Territory. That is a very good reason why we need some form of self-government.

1182 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

ACT Electricity Supply Amendment Bill

Then, instead of having people from Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia talking about the needs of the Australian Capital Territory, we would have people elected by the people of the Territory determining these needs.
The issue of fault seems to have been brought up quite regularly by honourable members on the Government benches. I would like Government supporters to look back to see who happened to be running New South Wales when this maintenance should have been done. It was a Liberal Country Party Government that caused the rundown in the grid-a government of their own persuasion. They must accept that responsibility. The Wran Government is trying to do something about the situation. It is trying to be constructive. In speaking of being constructive, I request the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) and Government supporters to try to be a bit constructive when they are looking at co-operation with the New South Wales Government so that we will get a decent deal for the people of the Australian Capital Territory. It is unfortunate that we, the people of Canberra, have to rely on this Federal Government to negotiate with the New South Wales Government, but we do. Therefore, I ask Government supporters to be cooperative and constructive in their criticisms instead of continually damning the New South Wales Government and talking about the value of the Victorian Liberal Government. Everyone will find out what the Victorians think about that Government on 3 April.
While we are looking at the concept of cooperation, I advise the Minister for the Capital Territory to give some thought to the report of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory on this subject, which was tabled in this Parliament in July last. It looked at the whole question of energy use, distribution and conservation in the Territory. It brought down a number ofrecommendations, 11 to be precise, but to date no constructive opinion has been given by the Government in relation to them. One dealt with the whole issue of electricity supply. A recommendation which should have been followed last year was that which provided:
The Committee retommends that the ACTEA conduct a survey of the generating equipment within the ACT with a view to establishing whether or not there are adequate emergency facilities within the ACT.
If that work had been conducted last year it would have proved very useful. Instead, the Government is just thinking now about what to do in an emergency. I hope that the Minister will give serious consideration now to doing something constructive in his own right about planning for

conservation in the use of electricity and other forms of fuel in the Territory by taking on board the recommendations on energy use, distribution and conservation of that Committee.
The Opposition does not oppose this legislation. We feel that it is necessary and is a sensible approach in the context of the energy shortages which have occurred in Victoria and New South Wales. The Territory's electricity supply is linked to that of Victoria and New South Wales through the provisions embodied in the Snowy Mountains arrangements for the distribution of electricity. Honourable members cannot argue about that. The Australian Capital Territory is only an island within New South Wales. Therefore, if New South Wales is to have problems obviously there will be a flow on to the Territory. It is best to stop making political capital of that and get on with accepting the reality and being constructive about it.
The Territory receives 40 per cent of its electricity from the Snowy Mountains scheme and 60 per cent from New South Wales. However, as the Territory entitlement from the Snowy scheme is set at a fixed amount of 607 gigawatt hours and as this includes no growth factor, it is obviously necessary that in future we look at emergency measures and ways to conserve power. That would have been inevitable and in this context the Bill before us provides the necessary machinery. It contains emergency provisions to regulate the supply and use of electricity during times of shortage. Under proposed section 35D-I at least have obviously read the Bill, which is more than I can say for most of the other speakers whom we have heard today-the Minister is empowered to make guidelines which are to be applied by the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority in such circumstances.
I hope that the Minister will be making those guidelines public as early as possible in order to allow community and business interests in Canberra to comment upon them. The safeguards built into the proposed legislation appear adequate. Provision is made for the tabling of emergency orders before each House of Parliament within 15 sitting days of their making. They will be subject to disallowance within 15 sitting days of their being tabled.
Provision is also made for the tabling of guidelines to be applied by the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority, in making emergency orders, within five sitting days of their making. They will be subject to disallowance within five sitting days of being tabled. Further provision is made to allow the Minister to vary these

ACT Electricity Supply Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIYES n83

guidelines. Again, this would be subject to disallowance within five sitting days. Overall, these safeguards should ensure adequate debate and public scrutiny of the provisions. The remaining c1auses-8 and 9-which deal with the imposition of the increased fines are straightforward.
On the whole the Bill provides a sensible means of implementing electricity restrictions in the Territory should they ever be necessary. Unfortunately, in an energy hungry world there is every likelihood that such restrictions will be required. Before I conclude, I do ask the Minister and the Government to think constructively about this issue and to work with the New South Wales Government to provide the very best deal possible for the people of Canberra.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (4.35)-in reply-I take no offence at any of the remarks made by the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) although no doubt I could argue on certain of the points she has made. I only rise to speak in defence of two honourable members on the Government side who made a valuable contribution to the debate and also to make brief remarks about the contribution-if I can call it such-of the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating). I believe that the comments that were made by the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) and the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris) were completely in order and completely accurate. Without repeating what they have said--
Mr Hurford-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Minister, in his remarks, is questioning your ruling. You had constantly to call to order the honourable member for Higgins, who made nothing but a farce of this debate, with his lack of credibility and usual joking manner.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-There is no point of order.
Mr HODGMAN-I take the greatest exception to the comment of the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) but why should I pay any attention to him when nobody else does? In short, the remarks of the honourable member for Higgins were absolutely correct, as were those of the honourable member for Chisholm. Unfortunately, the honourable member who brought me to my feet has ferreted out of the chamber very quickly. I refer to the honourable member for Blaxland. I cannot permit his comments to go unanswered because they were, whether he intended it or not, a gross misrepresentation of the truth. The honourable member for Blaxland, aided and abetted by the honourable member for

Cunningham (Mr West), who has also deserted the battle, put it to the House by inference that in a very short time New South Wales would have power running out of its ears. I do not need to have to refer to Press headlines about New South Wales moving in certain circumstances to a four day week. I do not have to refer to the headlines in relation to blackouts, brownouts and industrial disruption. But I object very strongly to a shadow Minister of the Opposition coming into this House and trying to convey to the public of New South Wales, and to the people of Australia including people in the Australian Capital Territory, that the power position in New South Wales willimprove and that, as he put it, power would be running out of its ears. If that is so, why is it that less than one month ago the Electricity Commission of New South Wales, in an official document which I have in my possession, talked ab'out reduction-not short term but long term reduction-in the rate of growth of electricity consumption. One paragraph states:
If the rate of growth of electricity consumption can be reduced by, say, I percentage point From 6% to 5% p.a. the level of capital investment in the electricity industryin New South Wales in 1982 dollars would be cut by approximately $100 million per annum.
Who is telling the truth, the Electricity Commission of New South Wales or the honourable member for Blaxland, who stumbled into thi~ debate today? The honourable member for Canberra has queried who has read the Bill. I have read it and I know she has read it, and I know tht; honourable members for Higgins and Chisholm have read it. I do not think the honourable member for Blaxland has ever seen it in his life and I do not think he would recognise it if he fell over it.
The other matter to which I have to refer and which we cannot get away from is the fact that the Electricity Commission itself knows exactly where the responsibility for what has happened in New South Wales and what is happeningin Canberra lies. I simply read again from this document a couple of paragraphs which again make this point. The document says:
The power supply problems in June 1981 were due to a combination of Factors, the principal one being the shut down due to plant difficulties at two large units, one at Wallerawang and one at Liddell, combined with industrial problems associated with wage claims. The period of restrictions in December 1981 was made necessary by the failure of two Further units at Liddell Power Station within three days of one another in November, 1981, exacerbated by industrial problems which delayed the return to service of other generating capacity which was capable of operation.
That frank and factual statement demonstrates the point: There was generating capacity capable

1184 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

ACTElectricity Supply Amendment Bill

of operation. It was not operating because of industrial disruption, and the industrial disruption went on because the New South Wales Wran Labor Government refused to take a firm stand against industrial disruption. I ask the honourable member for Canberra, who has considerable influence-and rightly so-in the Australian Labor Party, when we will hear comments from members of the Australian Labor Party to their colleagues across the border in New South Wales that Canberra has had enough of this. We got through 1981 by the skin of our teeth because most people in Canberra were prepared to do the right thing. I admire them for doing the right thing but unfortunately some did not. That is why we have had to bring in this legislation. I do not mind what the honourable member for Blaxland says about me. I have never minded in the past and I do not intend to mind in the future. I am glad the honourable member for Canberra did not support the honourable member for Blaxland's statement that I am held in contempt. Should I take the trouble of reading to the House-
Mr Dawkins-It was a joke, mate.
Mr HODGMAN-The honourable member for Fremantle is not only a oncer; he came in and went out, and after having returned he is about to go out again. The sooner the better. I do not know whether I have to read into Hansard words such as-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon.J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! The Minister will keep his remarks to the Bill.
Mr HODGMAN-These remarks are very much to the Bill. The letter I have says: 'You have worked tirelessly', 'your successful efforts' and 'your stocks in our neck of the woods have never been higher'.
Mr Dawkins-Did you write that?
Mr HODGMAN-The honourable member might like to invite me to incorporate that document. I would be tickled pink to see it in Hansard. The short point is that the debate becomes demeaned when a senior Opposition front bencher comes into this House, having not looked at the Bill but knowing the effectiveness of the attack by the honourable member for Higgins and knowing the truth of what has been said about why this Bill is necessary, and the best he can do on the way through is to demean me and then, as I said to ferret himself out of the chamber. When the going got tough, away he went. I make 'two further comments in conclusion.
Mr Hurford-You are an embarrassment.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Adelaide will cease interjecting. He has repeatedly attempted to interject and the Chair asks him to remain silent.

Mr HODGMAN-The Labor Party will n6t put him on the speakers' list. The only way he can be heard in this place is by interjection. The fact is that it is not just those who are desirous of the use of electric power for residences, those in small business and those who wish to see industrial development of an appropriate nature in Canberra who are being threatened; it is a matter of what it will do across a wide range of activites. Only yesterday a senior representative of the tourist industry told me that already he is receiving indications that bookings for Canberra during this winter period are at risk because people are concerned about the fact that they will find themselves in Canberra and blacked out--

Mrs Kelly-Rubbish. It is because of the air

fares.

"

Mr HODGMAN-They will be blackedout as a result of the incompetence, absolute neglect and 'shameful dereliction of duty of the Wran Labor Government. The honourable member for Canberra again raises the question of air fares. It is one thing to fly somewhere for a holiday; it is a totally different picture if we know that the place we are going to may well be placed in a situation where we will suffer from a blackout or from a brownout.

Mr Shipton-That is what is happening in New South Wales.

Mr HODGMAN-Indeed. I know the Labor Party is embarrassed about this but I have to ask the Labor Party one thing in conclusion: Will it get the Wran Government to come clean on the question of the power situation in New South Wales? We heard not a word before the Lowe by-election; yet, within 24 hours of that election being over, there were great Press reports of how the Premier and the new member for Lowe had got together and been able to prevent industrial disruption. Within two days of the Lowe by-election, we were told that New South Wales was going from top gear back into second gear and that it was receiving its power from Victoria. It is a long way from Victoria to Canberra but that is where the power is coming from. The power is going on to the New South Wales grid and some of it is coming through into the Australian Capital Territory.

I appeal to the Labor Party to do one thing constructively. I say to its members collectively-I will not, like the honourable member for Blaxland or the honourable member for Adelaide would do,

Overseas Students Charge Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1185

single out each honourable member individually-'Will you ask the Wran Government to give the people of New South Wales and the people of the Australian Capital Territory a factual report on exactly what the situation is?' I am sick and tired of members of the Australian Labor Party alleging that the consumers of the Australian Capital Territory are being subsidised heavily by the industrial users in New South Wales. It is an utter and contemptible lie and a shocking reflection on the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority and its 750 employees. The people of the national capital are entitled to be told exactly what the truth is. If the honourable member for Blaxland comes in here and says there will be power running out of our ears and the El~ctricity Commission of New South Wales talks about a reduction of power and a saving of $100m through a 1 per cent reduction, we have to ask: Who is telling the truth?
Mr Wran, Mr Landa and the New South Wales Government have a solemn obligation to ensure that the quarter of a million people in the Australian Capital Territory know what the truth is. I will take every step within my power to break this Labor conspiracy of silence, which is a conspiracy designed to hold up the New South Wales Labor Government. I place on record my appreciation of the fact that at this time, through help from Victoria and the Snowy Mountains, the power is getting through. It is no thanks, however, to the New South Wales Government and, until it comes clean and tells the people of the Australian Capital Territory the truth, the Australian Labor Party representatives of the Territory would be far better advised to tell the people in New South Wales that a quarter of a million Australians want to know the truth and will no longer be fobbed off with misrepresentations, cover-ups and conspiracies of silence. I commend the Bill to the House.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
OVERSEAS STUDENTS CHARGE AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 25 February, on motion by Mr Macphee:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the Overseas Students Charge Collection Amendment Bill 1982 as they are related measures? Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (4.42)-This debate is about a measure which the Government has introduced relating to charges levied on overseas students who are studying primarily in Australian universities and colleges of advanced education. It is proposed to amend a scheme which was first introduced in 1980 to impose charges. The charges are collected by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs as the students enter Australia. As a result of the changes we are discussing today the charge essentially will be exempted in respect of those students coming from the South Pacific. including Papua New Guinea. It is proposed that a charge will be collected in respect of courses other than courses at universities and colleges of advanced education that are also funded by the Commonwealth. I understand that this involves mainly courses in the tertiarty and further education sector. I might also mention that at the same time as these changes were foreshadowed the Government announced that the charges were to be increased in respect of most undergraduate courses from $1,500 to $1,700 and in respect of medicine, veterinary science and dentistry from $2,000 to $2,200. In the case of post-graduate courses such as masters degrees and PhDs the charge will remain unchanged at $2,500.
What these new measures reveal is the further folly of the Government in relation to the treatment of overseas students. When these measures were first introduced the Opposition said that very much more was needed to be known about the operation of the Overseas Student Program before we would be interested in supporting the proposal to introduce charges. That view substantially remains the same because the Government has not on this occasion taKen the opportunity to explain to us, to the Parliament and to the people of Australia what the effect of the introduction of these charges has really been and, indeed, what changes have been made to the Overseas Student Program. In fact, substantial changes have taken

1186 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Overseas Students Charge Amendment Bill

place in the last couple of years. I think the Parliament is entitled to some sort of explanation before we are expected to agree to these proposals which the Government has introduced.
I might say that in respect of the changes themselves, of course we are happy to see the Government exempt students from the South Pacific and Papua New Guinea from the obligation to pay these charges. We welcome that decision. However, our main query as far as the Government is concerned is why, if it was good enough to exempt students from the South Pacific and Papua New Guinea, it is also not possible to exempt students, particularly needy students, from other developing countries. For that reason I move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substiluting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second" reading, the House is of the opinion that charges should not be levied against needy students from any developing country'.
We cannot see the rationale for exempting students from certain developing countries and not others because, after all, the Overseas Student Program is designed to provide higher education opportunities in Australia for students from developing countries. Students fall mainly into two categories-private students or sponsored students. There are nearly 9,000 students from developing countries in universities and colleges around .Australia at the moment. The private students, of course, pay their own way and have to pay this charge as well. Not only do they have to meet the cost of getting here and supporting themselves while they are here but also they have to meet the cost of this charge as well. Most students sponsored under programs operated by the Australian Development Assistance Bureau are exempt from paying these charges as are other sponsored students who are sponsored by other government departments or some tertiary education institutions.
The point we are keen to make in the course of this debate is that the Government really seems to have a very confused approach to supporting overseas students. It has a very confused approach to providing higher education opportunities for students from developing countries. What is happening in fact is that these opportunies are really available only to students who can afford a fairly substantial cost in order to get here. I have already mentioned that a number of students are sponsored under ;-\DAB programs. However, selection under ADAB programs is made on academic bases rather than on the basis of the financial needs of those students. So in a sense somebody from a developing country who does not qualify for a sponsorship under an ADAB

program, whether he is well off or whether he is impoverished, will have to pay this charge as well as all the other expenses involved in coming to Australia for the purposes of undertaking tertiary education. Indeed, it has been put to us by organisations representing overseas students that in fact the very well offJrom developing countries-that is, the members of the ruling elite-go to other countries such as Britain and America and so on rather than come to Australia and it is the relatively less well off who choose to come to Australia. So I suppose the fundamental point we want to make is that if the Overseas Student Program is designed, as we imagine it is, to support students from developing countries particularly, and those students for whom insufficient tertiary education opportunities exist in their own countries, the imposition of these charges in this way is inimical to the pursuit of the objective of providing opportunities to the people in those countries.
The other point that requires much more explanation from the Government concerns a statement by the then Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affiars, the present Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar). He said at the time that the main reason for introducing the charges was that 75 per cent of the students who came here ended up staying here. Therefore, he took the view that as they were not returning to their own country after completing their courses there was a greater requirement for them to make a contribution to the cost of their education which was provided here. Regardless of the merits of that argument the situation now is that it is very difficult for overseas students to stay in Australia once they have completed their tertiary studies. In fact, I am advised that the overwhelming majority of them return to their own countries within a very short time. If that were the major objective for introducing the charges maybe the Government ought to have another look at the situation and consider removing those charges. As I am advised, the overwhelming majority of students who come here return to their own countries very soon after the completion of their courses.
The other reason that the Government gave at the time it introduced these charges was that the selection procedure of students was inadequate and that many who came to Australia were doing courses which were really inappropriate for the needs of the countries from which they came. Again, the selection procedure, both in relation to the Australian Development Assistance Bureau program and student entry requirement, is a matter that is within the control of the Government. It did not require the imposition of a fee to sort

Overseas Students Charge Amendment Bill

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1187

out that problem. As a result of the experience of the last couple of years with the imposition of these fees, the Government should provide the Parliament with a much greater explanation of the developments that have occurred during that period. It has become increasingly clear that what the Government is really interested in is simply getting the money. It is estimated that this year the Government will collect something like $12m as a result of the imposition of these charges. We question whether it is appropriate to collect $12m in respect of a program which is designed to provide, as I said before, educational opportunities for people from developing countries.
There is very little time remaining in this debate and I do not want to preclude my colleague the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) from speaking. There is just one matter I wish to raise. It is appropriate that the Minister for Health is at the table because one continuing problem for overseas students is their access to proper health care in this country. This matter has been raised with the Minister, I know, by the Opposition shadow Minister, and others. The matter still appears to be confused. Certain classes of overseas students are eligible for the disadvantaged card but others are not. It seems that a lot more has to be done by the Government in order to sort out the anomalies which exist as far as overseas students are concerned. If we are to provide for overseas students to come here-seeing we are doing it in a spirit of providing aid to developing countries-we ought to be providing appropriate health care should they require it while they are here. At the moment the health costs of sponsored students are supposed to be met by whoever sponsors them. The others-the private studentshave to go through a fairly cumbersome mechanism in order to obtain the disadvantaged health card. I am advised that the Minister's Department is aware of certain continuing anomalies in this regard. It seems to me that it is time the Minister sorted out these problems because these students should not be confronted with a confusing minefield in relation to the provision of their health care while they are here.
I hope that the Minister will undertake at an early stage to sort out those problems and ease the difficulties which many of these students face. Obviously they are concerned that they be adequately catered for. I have read what the organisations which represent these students have had to say about this matter. It is one of continuing concern for them. Therefore, I hope that the Minister will take this question on board. As I indicated before, the Opposition does not intend to oppose this proposal. We urge that the Government take

a much closer look at the implications of these charges for the overall program of assistance to overseas students, particularly in relation to our aid program, bearing in mind the very important objective which lies at the basis of all this of providing educational opportunities particularly for those needy students from developing countries.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (4.S7)-Yes, I second the amendment moved by the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). The legislation amends enactments of the last Parliament. At the same time as it makes exemption from charges more available to students from the South Pacific and Papua New Guinea areas, it increases charges on the remainder. As a result first degree students will pay $1,700 per annum from next year-that has gone up from $l,SOO-and medical, veterinary and dentistry students will pay $2,200, an increase from $2,000. The Opposition's amendment proposes that in imposing these charges a criterion of the extent to which a prospective private student is needy ought to be taken into account. If a lack of means is established we believe the student should receive a concession and the charges be removed. That we should be discussing this at all is something, we believe, above a minor tragedy.
One of the most generous features-if a somewhat unsung one-of our aid program prior to 1979, when the original legislation was introduced, was that we made available to students from overseas, who made their way to Australia, a tertiary education at the price directly charged to the Australian student. After the election of the Whitlam Government that price involved no charge at all as the Australian Labor Party Government, under Gough Whitlam, removed fees for all students. We assumed-it was a bipartisan assumption-that the expense involved of travel and establishing themselves in Australia was substantial and that alone would prevent any abuse of our generosity on the part of the students involved. We built up among those students attending our universities and colleges of advanced education an immense good will towards Australia which they took home with them. We treated those students better than did any country in Europe or northern America which was the recipient of privately funded overseas students.
The costs of education in the United States of America and the United Kingdom for those overseas students was and is very substantial. The education that was provided in France at that time was free-it still is-at a number of universities,

1188 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

but our admission policies then and now remain more generous. Some of our universities at the time charged a surcharge. I remember that when I was running for student office at the University of Western Australia in 1970 one of the planks of my campaign was that the overseas students' surcharge imposed by the University of Western Australia should be removed. The argument that I put to the Senate of the University of Western Australia was that the fact that overseas students could come in here and study free was a useful, if somewhat minor, aspect of our foreign policy and aid program, and that the Senate had no business interfering with the position of the Australian Government in this regard by imposing a charge itself. This was a position that the Senate of the University of Western Australia accepted, and it abolished the overseas students fee. Those of us who were involved in the students' union at the time considered that a considerable triumph. I would point out that at that time a Liberal Country Party Government was in office at the Federal level.
It was a matter of note that We were supplying then what was effectively a free university for Asia. There were then about 8,000 students in this country from overseas. They were receiving a free education here. The average size of an Australian university at the time was about 6,000 or 7,000 students. The fact that we were prepared to support a free university for Asia was something that gained us a great deal of credit in the area. It must be said that Australia, in the process, quietly ameliorated some injustices in some of those countries from which we received students. A large percentage of the private students came from Malaysia. They still do. I understand that last year they numbered 2,279 out of a total of 5,386. The vast bulk of these students are of Chinese origin. For some years the Malaysian Government has sought to obviate racial tensions in that country by a policy which strongly favours Malay as opposed to Chinese students for entry to local universities. Obviously this is a matter of some contention. Our generosity is an important safety valve for that society, which is a society of a nation that is very important to us. I am pleased that the numbers from that area have not dropped, despite the imposition of this charge. I suspect, however, that this has less to do with the capacity of the students' parents to pay and more to do ~ith the fact that the difficulties in Malaysia to which I have referred are increasing. I seek leave to continue my remarks later.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.

HOUSING POLICY
Ministerial Statement
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-by leave-Honourable members will be aware that in recent weeks the Government has undertaken a detailed review of its housing policy. I am now in a position to announce on behalf of the Government the results of that review and the policy changes which the Government has decided to introduce. Before announcing the changes, let me explain the context in which the review has been carried out and the policy changes decided upon. First and foremost, there is the Government's strong commitment to preserving the highest practicable level of private home ownership in Australia. Private home ownership is an important element in the cohesiveness of Australian families, which is Cundamental to the strength of our society. Australia currently has a home ownership level of about 71 per cent, which I understand to be almost without parallel in the world. This Government intends to keep it that way. The policies I shall announce in a few moments will make a major contribution towards enhancing that objective.
In addressing this issue the Government has necessarily examined the Final Report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. This examination has addressed not only recommendations of the Committee affecting housing but also, in a preliminary way, recommendations of more general relevance to the banking system. In recent months, the focus of the. housing debate has sometimes exclusively been on interest rates. Whilst that may be understandable it would be wrong to lose sight of other quite fundamental problems. At the heart of this lies the problem of inflation. Many of the difficulties faced by home buyers arise from the pressure of costs on house prices. Increases in the price of land and increases in the cost of home buildings are often overlooked in the discussions of impediments to home ownership. These increases are part and parcel of the overall inflationary trends which can only be addressed by continued firm macro-economic policies.
The costs of building regulations and servicing costs have also posed very material problems for many home buyers, particularly in certain regions of Australia. State and local governments have a real responsibility to examine very closely their policies in these areas where they add to the ultimate cost of housing. There can be no doubt however that the current world environment of high interest rates-from which the Australian economy cannot realistically be insulated-has also

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1189

made a significant contribution towards difficulties which have arisen in the housing area. With institutions such as savings banks constrained in terms of what interest rates they can offer on deposits, household savers have tended to shift their deposits to other intermediaries. The most recent example of this has been the quite remarkable success of cash management trusts. In the short space of 15 months, they have accumulated total deposits of some $850m. They provide the household saver with access to professional markets at higher interest rates. Not unnaturally, those savers have found them to be increasingly attractive.
It is worth noting that the deposit experience of savings banks has been particularly subdued in recent times. The Government does not believe it is practical to extend controls to include those institutions which have been successful in bidding funds away from home lending institutions such as savings banks. It would appear that this view is shared by State governments which have the legal power to control many such institutions. It has been no part of any of the numerous proposals and submissions we have received from State governments on this issue that action be taken to control the interest rates of these institutions. In the Government's view, any response to the current housing situation had to include an improvement in the competitive position of traditional lenders, and most particularly the savings banks.
Problems with Housing Finance
The Government's examination of this issue identified four main problems: Firstly, the availability of housing finance for new borrowers; secondly, the Widening deposit gap for those seeking to purchase a home; thirdly, increased repayment burdens for recent borrowers; and fourthly, increased rental payments for some persons in rental accommodation. These problems are diverse and closely inter-related. Unfortunately, remedies which address anyone of them in isolation may exacerbate others. For example, in considering the availability of finance, the Government faced particularly difficult choices.
As I have said, one of the major problems confronting traditional savings institutions has been their eroding competitive position. The fact that these traditional lenders have not been able effectively to compete for deposits has meant that many have had to restrict their lending. Once again this has particularly been the case with savings banks and has also been the case with permanent building societies in some parts of Australia. If these institutions offer higher rates of

interest, thus improving their competitive position, they inevitably must be able to increase interest rates for both existing and pf0spective borrowers. In framing its policies, therefore, the Government has sought to achieve a balance between the sometimes competing interests of existing and potential borrowers as well as the interests of savers with traditional lending institutions. It should not be forgotten that there is a heavy preponderence of low income savers with institutions such as savings banks, who tend to be the most adversely affected by constraints on interest rates offered by such institutions.
Discussions with the Banks
The Government's examination of the issues has been assisted by detailed discussions with the major banks. These discussions have embraced not only the capacity of savings banks to compete for deposits but also the means by which the banks might, with greater flexibility and fewer unnecessary restrictions, increase the volume of their lending for housing.
As I have already said, the Government's policy review in this area has included an examination of recommendations of the Campbell report not only in relation to housing but also in respect of the banking sector. The responses to the report which are detailed in this statement are of a preliminary character only and the Government will continue its detailed examination of the recommendations of the Campbell report in respect of the banking sector, particularly so far as they relate to competition.
I am happy to say that the outcome of these discussions has been that, in response to certain measures to be taken by the Government, the banks have confirmed that they are prepared to lend an extra $400m for liousing over the forthcoming twelve months. The Commonwealth Banking Corporation, the nation's largest home lending organisation, has agreed to contribute no less than $160m. The other banks have informed me that they have agreed to increase their lending broadly in proportion to their shares of deposits. I take the opportunity of expressing the appreciation and the gratitude of the Government to the major trading banks and also the Commonwealth Banking Corporation for their co-operation in this area.
The measures which I am announcing today, and which should increase the competitive flexibility of the banks, should also give scope for a continued increase in the availability of housing finance in the longer term. The measures to which the banks are responding are: A one per cent increase, to 13t per cent, in the rate for savings bank

1190 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

owner-occupied home lending, the effects on certain borrowers to be cushioned in a manner I shall detail in a moment; a one per cent increase in trading bank interest rates for overdrafts of less than $100,000, to 14t per cent-but maintaining 13+ per cent for trading bank loans for housingwith corresponding adjustments to other controlled lending rates, which will only partly restore the more traditional relationship between this ceiling and rates currently charged on large uncontrolled overdrafts.
In this context I should, of course, emphasise that movements in the large overdraft area are uncontrolled and thus entirely subject to the commercial judgment of banks. The measures include: Certain adjustments to the Banking (Savings Banks) Regulations; removal of the requirement of one month's notice on withdrawal from savings bank investment accounts; permission for savings banks to offer small fixed deposits-less than $50,000-for terms of 30 days to four years; reduction from three months to 30 days of the minimum term for fixed deposits of $50,000 and less on which the trading banks may pay interest; and reduction from 30 days to 14 days as the minimum period for which trading banks may pay interest on fixed deposits and certificates of deposit in amounts of $50,000 or more.
Amongst the other recommendations of the Campbell report which were discussed with the banks, were those relating to lending guidance, the use of statutory reserve deposits and the interest rate payable on those deposits. I indicated to the banks that the Government would favour the Campbell committee recommendation that lending guidance be abolished, although it would need to be borne in mind that this could well involve a more frequent use of the statutory reserve deposits instrument, and others.
I also indicated that, against this background and in the light of market conditions, the Government would think it reasonable for there to be a modest increase in the rate of interest payable by the Reserve Bank on the statutory reserve deposits of the trading banks. A possible increase of about 2t per cent was mentioned during our discussions. I did, however, emphasise to the banks that the initiative in these matters rests with the Reserve Bank. I understand that these matters have been and continue to be under discussion between the banks and the Reserve Bank.
I mention also that I have put a proposal to Loan Council for a one per cent increase in the rate of interest payable on Australian savings bonds. Let me elaborate briefly on what these arrangements mean for borrowers of housing

finance; for banks and for savers. For borrowers, an extra $400m for housing means many thousands of additional home loans from the banking system. It means banks will have scope for some increase, where appropriate, in the size of loans, thus reducing the need for expensive secondary sources of finance. Depending on the average size of loans, these arrangements could result in about 12,000 additional loans being made. Banks, in turn, should enjoy greater flexibility in attracting deposits and in developing new loan techniques to supplement traditional mortgage arrangements. Finally, savers should benefit from the fact that banks will be able to offer higher interest rates on deposits.
Cushioning ofInterest Rate Increases
As I mentioned earlier, the Government has agreed on arrangements with the banks to cushion the impact of the one per cent increase in housing interest rates on monthly loan repayments for certain existing borrowers. The intent of' these arrangements is to avoid the creation of hardship for existing bank borrowers as a result of the interest rate increases I have announced. The Government sees that as an important element of the measures outlined in this statement.
In particular, I have agreed with the banks that those existing borrowers who have taken out loans during the last two years will have the option of having the impact of the one per cent interest rate increase on their monthly repayments deferred for two years. After those two years repayment levels will be reviewed with a view to increasing monthly instalments, generally so as to ensure that the loan is paid out within its original term. The effect is that the additional interest after the deferred two years is paid by increased instalments in later years.
The size and timing of the increases in instalments would be determined in light of individual borrowers' circumstances, taking into account such factors as increases in their income in the intervening period and their capacity to meet higher repayments'without hardship. I should emphasise that such cushioning arrangements will extend to some 160,000 borrowers who obtained loans from savings banks in the last two years, which represents some 46 per cent of the 350,000 loans outstanding.
The Government also attaches considerable importance to easing the repayment burden for certain categories of borrowers who will be taking out loans in the future. These would include particularly first home buyers, and those on lower incomes. It could also include, for example, those who were changing homes because of a change in

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1191

their employment and those who have experienced a change in their family circumstances, necessitating the purchase of a new residence.
In this context, I note that around 60 per cent of savings bank housing lending is for first home buyers, who would thus stand to benefit measurably from the introduction, for example, of more flexible repayment arrangements. The banks have given assurances that they will be developing arrangements designed to assist these various prospective borrowers, including such facilities as low-start mortgages.
The essential characteristic of a low-start mortgage is that, in the early years of the loan, repayments would be below the level which would apply under a traditional bank mortgage arrangement. Repayments in earlier years will be calculated on a notional interest rate significantly below the actual rate-which, as a result of today's announcement, is currently 13.5 per cent-that will be charged over the term of the loan.
Let us assume that a borrower negotiates a $30,000 mortgage with his bank with a twentyyear term. For a traditional savings bank loan at the new rate of interest of l3.S per cent, monthly repayments would be $362.
By comparison, under a low start mortgage arrangement, it would be possible for the initial repayment to be $320 a month for the first year, rising steadily at the rate of about 2 per cent per annum until the loan is repaid. For example, in the second year of the loan repayments would be about $320 and so on. Clearly, if this family's money increases faster than 2 per cent a year over the life of the loan, their mortgage instalments will decline as a proportion of their income throughout the life of the loan.
In the example, repayment in the first year is calculated as though the interest rate were 1l.S per cent; that is, a rate of 2 per cent lower than the mortgage rate actually applying. As the chart I am tabling with this statement shows, monthly repayments under this low start arrangement would be less than those under the traditional mortgage for at least the first six years of the loan. The initial years are of course those when the servicing of mortgages is likely to cause the greatest difficulty. The details of actual low start mortgage arrangements are expected to take at least a month to finalise and it is expected that there will be differences between the schemes that will be brought forward by different banks, as part of normal competitive process. As a result of the measures I have outlined, the savings banks will

have some improved capacity to compete for deposits.
It would have been quite unrealistic to seek additional housing finance from these institutions without, at the same time, improving the flexibility with which they can manage their funds inflow. Accordingly, as a matter of some urgency, the Government will amend the Banking (Savings Banks) Regulations with a view to removing existing asset requirements which serve to limit lending for housing, and moving to a minimum liquidity requirement of IS per cent for the savings banks. Appropriate transitional arrangements will be necessary and I shall make a more detailed statement as soon as possible. In essence, however, this measure will, in the present context, substantially improve the savings banks' capacity to on-lend new deposits for housing purposes. Such revised arrangements will not, at one stroke, give full effect to the recommendations of the Campbell Committee in this area. They will, however, represent a significant step along the path indicated by the committee towards greater freedom in the disposition of savings bank's funds.
I mention that the Government, in amending the Regulations, will also give consideration to another relevant recommendation from the Campbell committee, namely, that the restriction on sources of savings bank deposits be removed. The arrangements with the banks that I have outlined will constitute a major improvement in the general availability of housing finance from the nationally operating banks, while cushioning repayment burdens whenever feasible. Before turning to other areas of housing policy, I should like to mention those other banks, most notably the State-owned banks, which are also significant sources of housing finance. I expect-and I believe this is a reasonable expectation-that these institutions, after due consideration, will move to emulate the major banks in increasing housing finance availability in the period ahead. Beyond the major banks, other lending institutions are primarily the responsibility of the States. However, further to the availability of housing finance, the Government proposes to explore with the States the scope for limiting lending by the permanent building societies for other than owner-occupied housing purposes.
I turn now to a number of measures it is proposed to introduce which will alleviate the problems presently faced by particular home occupiers.
Family Home Tax Rebate
The burden of mortgage payments tends to be highest in real terms in the early years of a housing

1192 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

loan. The Government has therefore decided to .introduce a special tax rebate to help alleviate this particular problem, especially in the context of a package which necessarily involves some increase in housing interest rates. Not only will the rebate be available to eligible taxpayers who become home owners for the first time after the introduction of the scheme, but also, in recognition of the increases in interest rates which have occurred in recent years, it will entitle taxpayers who have bought their first home during the past five years to participate. The rebate will apply to interest payments after 30 June 1982 during the first five years of occupancy. The provisions introducing the rebate will contain a 'sunset' clause whereby the rebate will only apply when the taxpayer occupies an eligible dwelling on or before 30 June 1985 although, of course, the benefit of the rebate will extend beyond that date. Taxpayers will have the option of taking the rebate either as a lump sum on assessment or in their pay packets by having their pay-as-you earn deductions reduced.
The rebate will be $500 in the first income year of occupancy; $400 in the second year; $300 in the third year; $200 in the fourth year, and $100 in the fifth year. When the taxpayer has dependent children, the amounts will be respectively: $700, $600, $500, $400 and $300.
For those taxpayers who have become first home owners over the last five years, their entitlements will be up to the following maxima,

respectively: For those who purchased in 1981-82, $500 to be claimed against their 1982-83 tax; for those who purchased in 1980-81, $400 to be claimed against their 1982-83 tax; for those who purchased in 1979-80, $300 to be claimed against their 1982-83 tax; and so on. In the case of taxpayers with dependent children, each amount will be higher by $200. I shall provide more technical details of the rebate scheme in a separate statement. It is estimated that about 450,000 home buyers, representing about 28 per cent of all home buyers, will obtain a benefit under this scheme. The first full year cost of this measure is estimated at about $230m. However, its estimated cost in 1982-83 could be somewhat less than half this amount, due to the likelihood of a large number of taxpayers choosing to obtain the benefit on assessment and not through smaller PAYE deductions. Mr Speaker, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables which show details of the rebates.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman earlier in his speech, spoke of a chart, which he tabled. Did he mean to have that incorporated in Hansard also?
Mr HOWARD-Yes, if I am granted leave, MrSpeaker.
Leave granted.
(For technical reasons, c'hart not incorporated. )
The tables read as follows-

MAXIMUM HOME LOAN INTEREST REBATE Taxpayer with a dependent child/children

Year of occup!lncy

Year of Rebate

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83* 1983-84' 1984-85'

1982-83 1983-84 1984-85 1985-86 1986-87 1987-88
1988-89

300

400

500

600

700

700

300

400

500

600

600

700

300

400

500

500

600

700

300

400

400

500

600

300

300

400

500

300

400

300

* Occupancy assumed to have occurred on 1 July. Where occupancy occurs during an inc.ome year after 1981-82 the maximum rebate in the first income year of occupancy is a proportion of the relevant maximum rebate and in subsequent income years is a composite of the relevant maximum rebates, e.g. if occupancy occurs on 1 January 1983, the maximum rebate in 1982-83 is $350 and in 1983-84 $650 (i.e. t of$700 plus t of$600).
MAXIMUM HOME LOAN INTEREST REBATE
Taxpayer without dependent children

Year of occupancy

Year of Rebate

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83' 1983-84' 1984-85'

1982-83 1983-84 1984-85

100

200

300

400

500

500

100

200

300

400

400

500

100

200

300

300

400

500

Housing Policy-

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1193

Year of occupancy

Year of Rebate

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83* 1983-84* 1984-85*

1985-86 1986-87 1987-88
1988-89

100

200

200

300

400

100

100

200

300

100

200

100

* Occupancy assumed Lo have occurred on I July. Where occupancy occurs during an income year after 1981-82 the maxi-
mum rebate in the first income year of occupancy is a proportion of the relevant maximum rebate and in subsequent income years is a composite of the relevant maximum rebates, e.g. if occupancy occurs on I January 1983, the maximum rebate in
1982-83 is $250 and in 1983-84 $450 (i.e. t of$500 plus t of$400).

Mr HOWARD-I thank the House.
Deposit Assistance Scheme
The Government has reviewed the operation of the Homes Savings Grant Scheme and has decided to increase the effectiveness of this form of deposit assistance for first home buyers. The new Scheme will commence today and between today and the date set by necessary legislation for the expiry of the existing scheme first home buyers will be able to elect to participate under one scheme or the other. All applications for assistance for contracts to today under the existing Homes Savings Grant Scheme will need to be lodged one month from the date the legislation is repealed. The Commonwealth will discharge existing commitments under this Scheme as a matter of urgency, thus obviating the existing nine months waiting period. This accelerated payment of the homes savings grant is estimated to add about $63m to Budget outlays this year and to cost $16m in 1982-83. The new scheme is designed to ensure that assistance is better directed to middle and low income earners and is available at the time of purchase. It will include the introduction of an income test to determine eligibility, relaxation in the savings requirements and the abolition of value limits on the houses to be purchased. There will also be a $500 increase in the basic level of assistance.
The maximum basic grant will be available to home purchasers with a family income ofless than or equal to 130 per cent of average weekly earnings, with assistance tapering off to zero at 150 per cent of average weekly earnings. Family income will be assessed over the previous year. However, there will be some discretion in the administration of the new Scheme to meet situations in which family circumstances have changed significantly from that year. The basic grant will be increased from the present $2,000 to $2,500 and additional assistance will continue to be available to families with dependent children. The family bonus of $500 will be paid to a family with one dependent child and a bonus of $1,000 will be paid to a family with two or more dependent children. These

bonuses are available to families provided they receive a minimum basic grant of $10. The savings requirements for a maximum basic grant will be reduced to a dollar for dollar basis over a period of two years compared with the present $1 grant for $3 of savings over three years. The value limits on eligible homes will be removed. There will be no waiting period under the new Scheme-the grant will be payable at the time of purchase.
The cost of the new Scheme is estimated at about $2m this year and $88m in 1982-83. The legislation introducing the Scheme will contain a 'sunset' clause providing for termination of the Scheme after three years. This will allow the Government to reassess the effectiveness of the Scheme in the light of prevailing circumstances. All in all, the new Scheme should provide a more equitable and effective means of assistance for home purchase.
Housing Crisis Relief
The Commonwealth is also concerned to assist those low income buyers experiencing extreme diffieulty in meeting their mortgage repayments and those low income private renters experiencing similar difficulty in meeting their rental payments. Provisions of such assistance would, we consider, be better delivered at the State level, with joint financing by the Commonwealth and the States. There will clearly need to be strict limits on eligibility for this assistance-the aim is to concentrate ori cases of genuine need. The Commonwealth will examine with the States early next week the administrative and funding details of such a scheme. The Government is prepared to outlay up to $20m for this form of assistance in 1982-83 provided this is matched with similar new expenditure by the States on a dollar for dollar basis. As with the new income tested deposit assistance scheme, this mortgage and rent relief scheme will be subject to a 'sunset' clause providing for termination after three years.

1194 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

Housing Crisis Relief
The Commonwealth is also concerned to assist those low income home buyers experiencing extreme difficulty in meeting their mortgage repayments and those low income private renters experiencing similar difficulty in meeting their rent repayments. Provisions of such assistance would, we consider, be better delivered at the State level, with joint financing arrangements between the Commonwealth and the States. There'will clearly need to be strict limits on eligibility for this assistance-the aim is to concentrate on cases of genuine need. The Commonwealth will be examining with the States early next week the administrative and funding details of such a scheme.
The Government is prepared to outlay up to $20m for this form of assistance in 1982-83 provided this is matched with similar new expenditure by the States on a dollar-for-dollar basis. As with the new income tested deposit assistance scheme, this mortgage and rent relief scheme will be subject to a 'sunset' clause providing for termination after three years.
Mr Speaker, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table summarising the additional costs to the Budget of the proposals I have outlined in this statement.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
Home Finance: Cost of Measures ($ Million)

Family Deposit Housing Home Assistance Crisis Tax Rebate Scheme (a) Relief Total (a)

1981-82 1982-83 Full Year Cost

65

65

100

17

20

137

230

I

20

251

(a) Includes $63 million in 1981-82 and $16 million in 1982-83 for the accelerated payment of the Home Savings Grant. 1982-83 and Full Year Cost show additional expenditure over estimated cost of pre-existing scheme.
Mr HOWARD-I should indicate to the House that the additional cost will be $65m this financial year, $137m in 1982-83 and an estimated $251 m in a full year.
As I explained at the outset, the Government has conducted a very thorough review of housing policy within the context of a sober appreciation of the economic realities-external and internal-faced by Australia at the present time. The Government naturally regrets that the proposals I have outlined include an increase in interest rates for some borrowers. I should, however, make the point that quite apart from the other considerations I have mentioned in this statement, the new interest rate ceiling for home

loans from savings banks in Australia will still be below the predominant rate charged by most permanent building societies throughout the country.
Any realistic assessment of the measures I have outlined today must lead to the conclusion that they will be of major assistance to the availability of housing finance, while meeting the needs of those groups in the community most adversely affected by high housing interest rates. I warmly commend the statement to the House. I present the following paper:

Housing Policy Review-Ministerial Statement, 18 March

1982.

'

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

That the House take note of the paper.

Suspension of Standing Orders

Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:

That so much of the Standing Orders be' suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Reid speaking for
a period not exceeding 30 minutes.
Mr UREN (Reid) (5.34)-This statement
made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) clearly outlines the confusion as far as the Government is concerned on housing matters. At best one CQuid call it a gimmick or a band-aid treatment, if one wants to say that. But the sad thing about the proposal is that it will cost $325m this year and in the first year of its operation. If one looks at the program it can be seen that most of the money will be put into the fm;nily home tax rebate scheme which will cost $230m in a full year. The Minister said that this will help 450,000 people who have had a home loan over the last five years.
The sad thing about it is that because this Government has very few statistics it has very little information about first home buyers. The Mel-
bourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research carried out a survey in 1980 on housing finance. That survey revealed that 45 per cent of Victorian first home buyers earned in excess of 150 per cent of average weekly earnings. Therefore, the $230m to be made available under the
family home tax rebate scheme reallY means a subsidy of approximat'ely $100m in a full year to that wealthy section of home purchasers who earn in excess of 150 per cent of average weekly earnings. There is no means test in this proposal. Yet of the 1.6 million people who are paying off their
homes, 1.1 million will in future have to pay increased mortgage repayments. Because the bank interest rate is to go up by one per cent, these people will have to pay an extra $22 a month on a $30,000 loan repayable over 25 years. This will accumulate to $88 a month from March 1980 to March 1982. We know that the signs are there for further interest rate increases and' in my view

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1195

interest rates will rise to at least 15.5 per cent which will mean that home purchasers will have to meet increased loan repayments of something
like $132 a month since March 1980. That is an illustration of the role that this Government plays in housing matters.
Frankly, the sad thing about this statement is that the Government has done nothing at all about increased funds for public housing. I invite honourable members to examine the contribution
Labor made when it was in government. In its last full year in office 1974-75 it made available in constant terms $789m. This year the Government has made available less than $250m, which in itself is in one year a loss of something like $550m. The accumulated loss from 1976 until this year is about $l,500m with which another 20,000 dwellings could have been built. There is no mention at all in this statement about anything for the public housing sector. Yet we know that in Victoria where the election is on-and, this is why this Government has put forward these proposalsthe Minister of Housing is the major critic of this Government for making no real contribution to public housing. The only way we can solve the housing question is to attack it on a broad front and not on the single election gimmick that this Government has proposed. !think it will backfire. The electorate will understand the real problems that are involved.
Today we have seen the Treasurer engage in a transparent and a contradictory exercise. I say it was transparent because the statement was finalised at midnight last night. The fact is that the Government did not even make a copy of the statement available to the Opposition within the statutory two hours.' It made it available at twenty-to-four and the Minister started his speech at about 5 o'clock. Every time. I asked the Minister for a copy of the statement he said: 'The statement is not yet finished'. That is a sure'sign of panic. The panic button is being pushed because of the Victorian State election. I will go on to show the division that exists within the ranks of the Government parties. This proposal is
transparent because ordinary Australian people can smell the cosmetics surrounding the statement by the Government that home loan interest rates are to rise yet again. They can see how it has
attempted a cover-up.
As I said, in March 1980 the interest rate on bank loans was 9.5 per cent. In March 1982 it is 13.5 per cent. It has increased four percentage points in two years. As I said earlier, never before in Australia's history have interest rates grown so fast over such a period. Existing home buyers, intending first home buyers and tenants will all

suffer further hardships as a result. Last year savings banks made profits after tax in excess of $650m and are now to be given a gift of another $130m at the expense of the people paying off their homes. This one per cent increase will mean that the private banks will make another $70m after tax profit. The purpose of the grab-bag of gimmicks that this Government now puts out in panic is blatantly to influence the voters in the marginal electorates in the Victorian State election. I am sure it will not influence the Victorian people in the way the Government hopes. It is tragic for all Australians that such an ad hoc expedient approach to housing problems has been adopted by this Government. It is also curious in the light of the statement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) of 22 February. I quote from the transcript of the ABC radio program
PM in which the Prime Minister said:
We're not going to run off the main stream of our policies because of a by-election or a State election, and I believe that we will have more respect by sticking with and staying with policies rather than offering some short-term expedient that would not necessarily be a real answer.
That was the Prime Minister's statement of only a few weeks ago, on 22 February. We are talking about a question of respect. What respect can we have for a Prime Minister who, on the one hand, makes a statement like that during an election campaign and then, when he is bruised so badly and is under pressure because of his own Victorian base, turns around and brings out this package. Instead of helping the people who really need help, he again serves it up to the wealthy. The
wholt( basis of this Government's policies has been to transfer wealth away from the great bulk of the people across to that selective group. The.statement by the Treasurer today gives us no. real answer to Australia's critical housing problem. A short term expedient is being offered. It is a package which runs off against the mainstream of the Government's economic policies.
I am sure-I hope that the Treasurer for once will listen; he has been talking his head off since he finished making his speech-that the Treasurer is not happy about the statement he made today. Let us not be deceived about his unhappiness. He is unhappy because the housing loan interestrate has not been increased enough and he is unhappy
because the Treasury line, the Stone-HowardLynch line, was defeated in Cabinet. Treasury did not want to spend an extra $325m on home ownership or on any other scheme. Treasury did not want any truck with mortgage interest tax deductibility. Treasury did not want to move funds out of the trading banks into the housing sector. Let us be quite candid about this. It is the Treasury's view, as expressed by Mr Stone and endorsed by

1196 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

the Treasurer-I stress endorsed by the Treasurer-that Australia is over-housed, that too much of our national investment goes into housing and that the funds should be transferred into what it considers a more productive and more profitable sector for investment, namely, export orientated resource development. It is the Treasury's view, and it is a major thrust of this Government's economic policy, that the housing sector should be sacrificed to make room for expanded investment in resource development. If one examines every aspect of the Government's policy over the six years, we know that that transfer has been on during that whole time.

being offered. These rates reflect the seasonal demandof companies meeting provisional tax requirements in a context of tight liquidity. Normally, the statutory reserve deposit requirement is relaxed to provide sufficient funds to accommodate this seasonal demand. However, the Government has refused to reduce the SRD ratio which was set in September 1978 at 3.5 per cent but last set in January 1981 at 7 per cent. That is how tight the money situation is. The high rates in the short term money market are leading the rest of the financial system's interest rate increases, bolstered by high rates of up to 18 per cent offered on treasury notes.

Treasury and the banking industry take the view that ordinary home buyers should compete on the same market for finance as commercial giants such as Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd, CSR Ltd and those giant foreign corporations that are in fact trading on our present market. Let us also be clear that the interest rate increases are being used deliberately by this Government as a tool of its monetary and economic strategy. In the first place, Australia is importing high interest rates and allowing liquidity to drain out through the balance cif payments because of the Government's mismanagement of exchange rates. In the second place, the Government has imposed an over-tight monetary policy which has induced a credit squeeze.
In this context the increased demand for funds associated with resource projects and related activities are causing interest rates to rise in this country. For instance, foreign corporations have borrowed a total of $5,200m in funds on the Aus~ tralian capital market. Between 1977 and 1980 borrowings on the Australian capital market by foreign investors as a proportion of total savings of households and private corporations increased from one per cent in 1977-78 to 15.4 per cent in 1979-80. In 1979-80 the net foreign borrowings on' the Australian capital market were $2,376m representing 75 per cent of the total borrowings of the foreign corporations resident in Australia. In the same year capital raisings by the States for physical infrastructure, mainly for resource projects, totalled $620m or 4 per cent of total household and corporate savings. The hunger of foreign corporations and semi-government authorities for finance has pushed up interest rates, and in most cases it has been the housing sector that has had to suffer. But the interest rate increases have occurred mainly because of the Government's tight monetary policy.
At present the short term money market is going wild with interest rates of up to 21 per cent

The interst rate increases have resulted from the Government's failure to depreciate the exchange rate, its failure to adopt an accommodating monetary policy, its failure to co-ordinate the pace and pattern of resources investment, its failure to restrict borrowings on the Australian capital market by foreign investors and its failure to prevent foreign speculative activity in this country. It is the ordinary Australian people who are paying the real price for these failures. Let us look at how they pay the price in the area of housing, which is only one of the areas in which wage and salary earners have suffered a decline in their living standards under this Government. The situation for existing home buyers is that in March 1980, when the savings bank interest rate was 9.5 per cent, repayments on a $30,000 loan were $262 a month, with a total repayment of $78,630. In March 1982, when the savings bank interest rate was 13.5 per cent the monthly repayment had increased by $88 to $350 a month. The total repayment had increased by $26,300 to $105,000. Over the two-year period that total post-tax income of a household, consisting of a breadwinner on average weekly earnings, a de'pendent spouse and two children, rose by about $20 a month but the mortgage repayments over that period rose by $88 a month. As a result, such a family is worse off by $86 a month, or $816 a year.
The Government now proposes to give the family a maximum tax rebate of $700, which still leaves it $100 short. If interest rates rise still further-as they certainly will under this Government-the family will be even worse off. I
am trying not to be overly dramatic, but the logic of this Government's economic policy is such that interest rates will continue to rise. The provision of mortgage interest tax deductibility signals a further step in the direction of deregulation. Under deregulation savings bank interest rates will reach 15.5 per cent. Building society interest rates-which, in Victoria, are already at the level of 15.5 per cent-will go even higher.

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1197

A rise in savings bank interest rates to a level of 15.5 per cent will mean an increase in the repayment on a $30,000 loan made in March 1980 of $134 a month, or $43,700 over the life of the loan. Then this package of so-called assistance will be
fully exposed as the sham that it is. Then the Government will realise its mistake in allowing interest rates to rise beyond the means of ordinary people. Then the Government will be pressured to forgo further revenue through increased tax deductions and then it will find that the system of mortgage interest tax deductibility has become a bottomless pit of lost revenue. It will be revealed as a misallocation of resources-to people who do not need assistance to the same degree as do people who are dependent on public housing.
Let us look at some of the immediate implications. According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, in 1980 1.6 million Australian households were paying off their homes. The Government intends to provide partial assistance to 450,000 households or only 28 per cent of that number. A number of features of the proposed rebate system are frankly disturbing. The rebate will be provided to first home buyers of the last five years without a means test. That makes it a very blunt, badly targeted, unnecessarily expensive and highly regressive scheme.
According to the findings of the Home Finance Survey for 1980 of the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research, 45 per cent of first home buyers had incomes in excess of 150 per cent of average weekly earnings. That suggests that of the 450,000 households which are to obtain assistance under the proposed rebate scheme, 202,000 in the top 25 per cent income bracket will be getting assistance. Consequently, the proposal represents a misallocation of resources to that group that is of the order of $100m in a single year. This is nothing new for a conservative government; it has been doing it all along. It represents a blatant transfer of wealth through the tax system from low income earners to high income earners. Tenants will be subsidising the mortgages of home owners.
I now outline the effect of the proposals on prospective first home buyers. The one per cent interest rate rise lowers the borrowing limit of a
person on average weekly earnings by approximately $2,000. Such a person can obtain a loan of $30,000 at an interest rate of 12.5 per cent. Now he will be able to obtain a loan of $28,000 at 13.5 per cent. The Government proposes to increase the maximum amount obtainable under the Homes Savings Grant Scheme from $3,000 to $3,500. That is, an additional $500 will be provided to meet an increase in the deposit gap of

about $2,000. For a householder on average weekly earnings who seeks to purchase a $60,000 home, the deposit gap, after obtaining the maximum loan available, of $28,000 will be $32,000. That is the amount he will have to find elsewhere.
The maximum homes savings grant is now $3,500. That represents only one-ninth of the additional funds needed to purchase such a home. Thus, in no way is this new Homes Savings Grant Scheme an improvement, even at the bottom end of the market. In Sydney, for instance, the bottom end of the market is $60,000, but nowhere in Australia is it below the $40,000 mark, so honourable members can see that even though the position differs from State to State people everywhere will find it extremely difficult to bridge. the deposit gap. The buyer then has to turn to a finance company or a credit union to obtain a large second mortgage. The current interest rate charged by finance companies is 20 per cent, and that charged by credit unions 18 per cent. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables which show the interest rate charges of finance companies, credit unions and solicitors' funds and the monthly loan repayments for differing loan sizes.
Leave granted.
The table reads as follows-
Interest Rates for Second Mortgage (Calculated on Monthly Reducing Basis)

Date

(a) Finance (b) Credit

Company

Unions

(b) Solicitors Trust Fund

June 1976 June 1977 June 1978 June 1979 June 1980 June 1981 September 1981

Annual Interest (c) (%)

15.0

14.0

16.0

15.0

16.0

15.5

15.0

14.0

15.5

15.0

18.5

18.0

20.0

18.0

12.50-13.00 15.50-15.75 15.75-16.0

(a) Interest rates charged by one of the major sources of second mortgage funds.
(b) Interest rates typical of those charged for a second mortgage but a range of interest rates are charged.
(c) Some charges made by Finance Companies, e.g. establishment fee, i~surance, not applicable.
FINANCE COMPANY HOUSING LOANS Monthly Repayments for Loans Compounded
on a Monthly Basis

$5,000 loan with 5, 10 and 15 year repayment period

Annual interest(%)

12.5 13.0 14.0 15.0 15.5

Repayments ($)

over 5 years

.112.49113.77 11634 118.95120.77

over 10 years

73.19 74.66 77.63 80.67 82.21

over 15 years

. 61.63 63.26 66.59 69.98 71.70

1198 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

Annual interest (%)
Repayments ($) over 5 years
over 10 years
over ,15 years

15.75 16:0 18.0 18.5 20.0
120.93 121.59 126.97 128.33 132.47 82.98 83.76 90.09 91.71 96.63 72.57 73.44 80.52 82.33 87.81

$10,000 loan with 5, 10 and 15 year repayment period

Annual interest(%)

12.5 13.0 14.0 15.0 15.5

Repayments ($)

over 5 years

- 224.98 227.53 232.68 237.90 240.53

over 10 years

- 146.38 149.31 155.27 161.33 164.41

over 15 years

- 123.25 126.52 133.17 139.96 143.40

Annual interest (%)
Repayments ($) over 5 years over 10 years over 15 yea rs

. 15.75 16.0 18.0 18.5 20.0
- 241.85 243.18 253.93 256.66 264.94 - 165.96 167.51 180.19 183.42 193.26 - 145.13 146.87 161.04 164.65 175.63

$15,000 loan with 5, 10 and 15 year repayment period

Annual interest (%)

12.5 13.0 14.0 15.0 15.5

Repayments ($)

over 5 years

- 337.47 341.30 349.02 356.85 360.80

over 10 years

- 219.56 223.97 232.90 242.00 246.62

over 15 years

- 184.88 189.79 199.76209.94215.10

Annual interest (%)
Repayments ($) over 5 years
over 10 years over I5 years

. 15.75 16.0 18.0 18.5 20.0
- 362.78 364.77 380.90 384.99 397.41 - 248.94 251.27 270.28 275.12 289.88 - 217.70220.31 241.56246.98 263.44

Mr UREN-I thank the House. The householder who obtains a $10,000 second mortgage from a finance company at 20 per cent over a lO-year term must pay $193 a month in instalments, on top of $335 a month on a first mortgage loan of, say, $28,000. That brings the total monthly repayments for that family up to $528. I hope that Government members, who were so talkative before, are listening to these facts and figllres. I repeat" them: The mortgage repayments for the family we are considering total $528 a month or 40 per cent of gross household income.
The problems of the second mortgage market are not addressed by the Government's proposals. More glaringly, a biased degree of attention is given to borrowers from savings banks, to the neglect of borrowers from building societies. The Government has turned its back on the building societies and said: 'That is a State responsibility'. Like Pontius Pilate, it wants to wash its hands of all other sins. Building society loans represent about 27 to 30 per cent of all housing loans made yet this Government does not want to know anything about them. It has said: 'Our responsibility lies with the banks', and has therefore taken some steps in their direction but has completely turned its back on the building societies.
The Government alleges that for the.last two years it has been negotiating with the banks cushioning arrangements for first home buyers. But what about the 60 per cent of first home buyers who obtain their loans from other sources?

Does the Government expect that those institutions will freeze their interest rates? The Treasurer has already indicated that the Australian savings bond rate is to be increased by another one per cent.
There are several ironies in that proposal. On the one hand the Treasurer says that the .banks have agreed to lend an extra $400m for housing as a pay-off for the dereguhltion of deposit rates, and a $48m handout to them by way of, increased interest payouts on statutory reserve deposits. But the Government is stepping harder on the money supply brakes, thus preventing the banks from attracting additional funds. In spite of the fact that the banks provide only 53 per cent of their deposits for housing the Government has further decided to reduce the liquidity requirements for savings banks from 40 per cent to 15 per cent of depositors' funds in prescribed categories. That could immediately place up to $6,OOOm of government securities on the market, thus intensifying the pressure for further interest rate increases.'
As I have already stated, this ad hoc and expediept grab~bag of gimmicks is contradictory in its effects. Our estimate is that for everyone per cent rise in interest rates another 9,000 families are excluded from access to home ownership. In 1982 the number of households excluded as a result of a rise in interest rates by four percentage points is 36,000. Such exclusions have a significant impact on the private rental market and the housing industry as a whole.-
I emphasise that the housing industry is most labour-intensive. If we can stimulate it by finance totalling $100m we will create employment for at least 5,000 people. This contrasts with, say, ari investment of $300m in the uranium mining industry of the Northern Territory which creates employment for. only 250 people.
Let us consider the effect of this housing package on tenants, that quarter of Australian families renting in the private rental market. They will pay doubly because of the actions of this Government. First, as I have explained, they will pay through the tax system to subsidise home buyers a.nd; secondly, as a result of the increase of interest rates they will pay through rising rents. The ratio of unoccupied to total rental stock is now less than 1.5 per cent in most capital cities, whereas the Real Estate Institute of Australia argues that a ratio of between 3 per cent and 4 per cent is necessary to allow a balance between supply and demand. The Real Estate Institute argues further that the declining vacancy ratio is brought about by the exclusion of growing numbers of people from access to home ownership because of rising interest rates.

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1199

With ratios low, rents begin to rise but this Government is not prepared to consider the position and needs of tenants. It has made available in this proposal $20m for renters out of a total program of something like $325m.
This has been done at a time of growing poverty brought on by increasing housing costs and at a time of growing homelessness. Over 100,000 families a're homeless and 150,000 people are sleeping under bridges, in cars and in lavatories at night. Frankly, the way that this Government has allowed housing to deteriorate in the manner that it has is an utter disgrace. Next to unemployment, housing is the most serious social problem in this country. This package of gimmicks, in some cases band-aids and so-called electioneering, which I believe will backfire on the Government, is an utter disgrace.
The only way in which we can really attack the housing question is to attack it on a broad front. We need to attack it by making public housing a higher priority. We need atleast to provide more money from the Commonwealth to the States to meet their responsibilities. We need a program which will subsidise first home buyers to enable them to get their feet on the first rung of the home ownership ladder and assist them over the first five years. We need to have a legitimate subsidy scheme which will help those people through the real trouble that they face over the first five years with increased mortgage repayments due to interest rate increases. I am not talking about the wealthy people but about those in real trouble. We need to have a program for them; we need to work out a program with which we can direct money into the housing industry' particularly by using Part IV of the Financial Corporations Act. We would be able to direct money from those financial institutions. If we could direct something like 2 per cent of their funds across to thehousing sector, that would add another $600m a year. I refer also to insurance corporations. In 1961, 15.2 per cent of their money was used for housing and now the figure is only 3.4 per cent. If we could get it up to at least 6 per cent, another $600m would be directed to the housing sector.
Above all, w.hat we really need is to stimulate the housing industry and to wipe away that social blot of people who are homeless. The housing industry is labour intensive and it has significant flow on effects for other industries. A healthy housing industry means social harmony and economic strength. Stimulating the housing industry would be able to help eradicate from this country the scourge of unemployment. Other colleagues will speak later tonight on this matter but, on behalf of the Opposition, I condemn this housing

package that the Government has put forward tonight as inequitable and unjust.
Sitting suspended from 6.4 to 8 p.m.
Debate (on motion by Mr Dean) adjourned.
ABORIGINAL LAND RIGHTS LEGISLATIONAMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (8.1 )-1 move:
That the Bill be read a second time.
This Bill is designed to meet a number of specific objectives. The first of these is to meet the wishes of the people of Hermannsburg ih the Northern Territory about the grant of title to their land. Honourable members may be aware that the Hermannsburg lease is one of the areas listed in Schedule 1 of the Aboriginal Land Rights Act to be granted to Aboriginal trusts. It has not been so granted-and it is the only land in Schedule 1 which has not yet been granted-because the leaders of the traditional land-holding groups in the Hermannsburwarea did not want to accept a single title for the whole area, as Aboriginal people elsewhere in the Territory had done. Instead, they wanted five land trusts, each to hold separate titles to different parts of the land. As the Act is drawn, only one trust can be established for each of the areas ofland described in Schedule 1. The proposed amendments will 'permit the establishment of more than one land trust for the Hermannsburg area.
The leaders at Hermannsburg also said that they did not want to have a chairman of each of the trusts as provided in the Act and that, in at least one case, there were only three people who could properly be appointed members of the trust. At present the minimum requirement is a chairman and three other members. The amendments will allow the establishment of trusts with a minimum of three members and without a chairman.
The second objective is to allow the redrawing of the boundaries of the land held by the Tiwi Land Trust. The Tiwi people of Bathurst and Melville Islands have asked that Clift Island, a small island which lies off the west coast of Bathurst Island, should be included within the land trust area. The Northern Territory Government has supported this request. The Bill provides for the amendment of Schedule 1 to include all land lying within 5.56 kilometres of the low water mark within the description of Bathurst Island.

1200 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Aboriginal Land Rights Legislation Bill

The Tiwi Land Council has also sought the consolidation of the titles granted to the Tiwi Trust in respect of Bathurst Island and Melville Island and the Bill provides for this.
A third aim of the Bill is the extension of the provisions for financial assistance to people ap-
pearing before the Aboriginal Land Commissioner in relation to an application for the restriction of access to an area of sea adjoining Aboriginal land. Section 54c of the Act provides a procedure by which people appearing before the Commissioner in relation to land claims may make application to the Commonwealth Attorney-General for financial assistance. The Government considers that it is reasonable for the Commonwealth to extend this provision to people appearing in closure of seas hearings since these are conducted pursuant to the Northern Territory Aboriginal Land Act, which was introduced as part of the package of legislation complementary to the Commonwealth Land Rights Act.
In addition the Bill provides for a more practical system of repayments from the Aboriginals Benefit Trust Account to the Consolidated Revenue Fund in respect of monies advanced to land councils by the Commonwealth to meet their administrative expenses. Advances were necessary because payments into the Trust Account equivalent to royalties received by the Crown in
respect of mining on Aboriginal land were insufficient to meet the administrative costs of the land councils. I would point out to honourable members that the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Amendment Act 1979 already provides for the repayment of such moneys but as a once only lump sum payment. The amendments will provide the Minister with a discretion to direct periodical repayments from the Trust Acount to the Consolidated Revenue Fund taking account of the capacity of the Fund to meet such repayments. It should be noted that these payments will not reduce the funds available for distribution to Aboriginals generally in the Northern Territory from the Trust Account. Repayments will be made when the amounts available for distribution to land councils under section 64 (1) of the Act are greater than are needed to meet their administrative expenses and will simply reduce the surplus available for distribution by land councils to communities in their areas.
A further aim is to remove any doubt that might exist as to the Minister's ability to make progressive recommendations to the Governor General for the grant of land to an Aboriginal land trust following receipt of a report by the Aboriginal Land Commissioner. By way of example,

the Land Commissioner has recommended that there are some areas in the Alligator Rivers Region which should be granted to a land trust. These areas could now be granted, except for some parcels of land within the claim area which are currently the subject of, or may be affected by, certain applications now before the High Court. The amendments would permit the Minister to deal immediately with those parts of the claim area not affected by the legal proceedings and allow those areas which are affected to be dealt with at a later date. I am sure honourable members will acknowledge that the interests of the Aboriginals and of the community in general are best served by expediting the issue of title following the consideration of a report by the Land Commissioner.
For similar reasons, it is desirable to have flexibility in the Act to provide for situations where traditional owners may desire more or fewer land trusts than were recommended by the Aboriginal Land Commissioner in his report. It is important I feel to be able to respond to applications of that kind by a land council where that is appropriate. For instance, in the Borroloola land claim the Aboriginal people wanted a single land trust to hold the land for the benefit of both the island and the mainland people. They simply wanted to be seen as one people. But the Commissioner recommended that two trusts be established in re~pect of that land. The Act, however, did not allow the Minister at that time to accede to the r.equest. The amendment will allow a response if that or a similar request in respect of trust holding arrangements is made in the future.
The land councils have been made aware of the proposed amendments and I table certain documents which indicate the responses of the councils to the proposals contained in this Bill. I do not consider this Bill. to contain amendments which could be described as controversial but they are amendments which either derive directly from the requests of Aboriginal groups in the Northern Territory or are designed to facilitate the advantage of the Aboriginal people.
Finally, I wish to make it clear that these amendments are not in any way connected with other proposals that have been advanced in the discussions which are still in progress between the Commonwealth, the Northern Territory Government and the land councils about the Land Rights Act. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Barry Jones) adjourned.

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1201

AFGHANISTAN
Consideration r~sumed.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
HOUSING POLICY
Ministerial Statement
Debate resumed.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (8.1 I)-1 am proud to speak in support of this Government's housing package. It is a responsible but sensitive approach to the problems that some home seekers have faced in recent times. It provides assistance to home buyers-both existing. and those about to acquire a home for the first time-to renters and to the housing industry. It complements the Government's existing housing support through the States for lower income home seekers. It reinforces the Government's economic policy which has placed a high priority on maintaining a stable and productive housing industry. It is a package which should have drawn admiration from even the most biased of the Government's critics. I might point out that my honourable coIleague the Victorian Minister of Housing, who is not famous for lavish praise of this Government's housing policies, or of me, has described the package as briIIiant. He said: 'You could not get anything more creative'.
Against this background it is disappointing, although not surprising, that the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren), has been so cynicaIIy critical of the package and has failed so lamentably to produce a concrete positive alternative. Instead he has given vague promises, including promises to spend other people's money through a grab for finance company funds. He has also shown his party's lack of concern for ordinary middle income Australians in his vicious attack on our proposed assistance for home buyers. It Is simply wrong to characterise the bulk of the people we wiII be helping as wealthy silvertails in the way that the honourable member for Reid has done. His attack shows his party's innate deep down suspicion of home ownership and of private enterprise. I remind listening Australia of the words of the late Honourable John Dedman. He said: 'We don't want to allow our fellow Australians to be home owners. That would make them little capitalists'. We all recall the Australian Labor Party's pledge to have probate duties and to introduce a capital gains tax. Members of the Labor Party are not interested in home ownership. They do not want Australians to become home owners. They are labelled for what they are.

Mr Chapman-They were going to tax the rental value of homes.
Mr McVEIGH-That is quite true. When they were in government they were going to tax the rental value of homes. Quite obviously this philosophy-as my colleague who interrupted indic~ted-came through strongly in the attack by the honourable member for Reid on corporate investment. I take the opportunity of reminding the House that it is this corporate investment which provides the sinews of economic growth that are essential to provide us with the capacity to sustain income increases, improve employment prospects and to have a healthy and prosperous housing sector. The honourable member's contribution was also characterised by the irresponsible scare tactics which are so often and so characteristicaIly used by members of the Opposition. We all remember what the Premier of New South Wales said about interest rates.
Mr Hunt-What's his name?
Mr McVEIGH-The Honourable NeviIIe Wran. It is just a pity--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister wiII ignore interjections. Honourable members wiII further help by not making them.
Mr McVEIGH-In reply to the comment by my colleague the Minister for Transport I wish to point out that it is a pity Mr Wran did not pay more attention to the problems of electricity blackouts rather than guessing about interest rates. His exaggerated forecasts of interest rate increases wiII concern and worry many young couples and erode their confidence in making that vital decision to buy a new home. They wiII have to make it in the daytime because there will be no electricity at night for them to see. This is destructive criticism. It hurts me, Mr Deputy Speaker, because it is also un-Australian. It has been suggested by the honourable member for Reid, and others who share his cynical viewpoint, that this housing policy has been born in some sort of attempt at the last minute to cement the Victorian Government's chances of retaining power next month.
Mr Barry Jones-Would you deny it?
Mr McVEIGH-Not only is such thinking cynical but it is also at variance with the facts. The shadow Minister opposite does not worry about facts. He is interested in fantasy. The proposals contained in the housing package were first put before the Government in November last

1202 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

year. No one knew the date of the Victorian election at that time. The complexities of the problems facing home buyers, intending buyers and people in the rental market were so intricate that, by necessity, discussions on how to provide assistance were long and detailed. Careful consideration of the problems, and an understanding of them, was essential before the Government could begin to discuss remedial treatment. Added to this time-comsuming process was the release of the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System and the obvious need for the Government to consider housing assistance in the broad overall context of monetary policy. It is obvious to me that one indeed cannot please all the people all the time. If we had announced it last week we would have been accused of panicking because of a by-election result. If we announced it next week, or in a month's time, we would have been accused of indecision and unreasonable procrastination. Let me assure the honourable member for Reid and this House that the Government has not been hurried into making an announcement. It has not been successfully tempted with the idea of buying votes. We are interested in housing people. We are not interested in band-aid treatments.
I have said on several occasions-my colleagues have echoed my words, or perhaps vice versathat the Government would not announce its housing policies until it was sure that it had the policies right. We have got them right. We believe they are sound, broadly-based policies and the timing is now because we have confidence in our belief that the groundwork has been done thoroughly. The right decisions have been made, and the people of Australia sbould begin benefiting as soon as possible. To suggest that there was any ulterior motive in this evening's announcement by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is cheap politics. The honourable member for Reid, in his emotion-charged address to this House earlier this ev~ning, accused the Government of gimmickery and of offering band-aid assistance. He must have had nothing else to say. Any reasonable person looking at the total package which the Treasurer announced must come to the realisation that there are no gimmicks and there is nothing light-weight or cheap about our assistance proposals.
It is very easy for the honourable member and these who support him to be critical. It would appear that he adheres to the belief that the position one holds in Opposition carries with it no requirement for responsibility and no care for Australian families which seek home ownership. Those people who hold senior and responsible positions outside the political sphere certainly do

not share the honourable member's cynical attitude of gloom and desperation. In the media reports I saw and heard this evening they were highly congratulatory of the Government's decisions. I seem to recall that one very senior industry executive said this evening-in enthusiastic praise of the policies announced by the Treasurer-that the package was exciting; that it was an employment generator, and that it would lead to the construction of 5,000 more new homes in the next 12 months than would have been possible otherwise. Of course there are, and there will be, criticisms of and objections to the housing package. But it is a fair, generous and equitable package which demonstrates clearly the Government's continuing commitment to maintain Australia as one of the countries that can boast a high rate of home ownership, and we are proud of that.
The development of this package follows an intense, thorough and exacting review of housing problems, policies and programs. During that review the Government sought the views of as many interested groups and organisations as possible. The States, through their Premiers and housing Ministers, made major contributions, as did a large number of industry organisations. The Government greatly valued and carefully analysed these contributions. I pay tribute to those who assisted us in such a positive manner.
For my part, I consider that the package provides real help to those in need for the period of their need. Surely the honourable member for Reid would be generous enough to agree that that is the aim and the thrust, and that that is good policy. This is the basic principle which we consider must underlie all areas of housing assistance. Taxpayers' dollars must be spent wisely. They should not be spread around like confetti, as the honourable member's Government did, in the sort of fashion that we saw in the period from 1972 to 1975.
Let us look at the total housing package. Firstly, over the next twelve months there will be an injection of some $400m into the housing arena-a substantial sum which would otherwise have been denied to people seeking mortgages. Revisions to the Homes Savings Grant Scheme will cost an estimated $88m in a full year. A further $63m will be spent without delay in paying up grants c.nder the old scheme. It will be recalled that the present Oppositjon did away with the scheme when it was in government. The tax rebate scheme will cost some $230m in a full year and go to some 450,000 home buyers from 1 July. Some $20m per year will become available under the new proposals for those people having

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1203

exceptional difficulty meeting their mortgage repayments or paying their rent. I assure the honourable member for Reid that they are not silvertails. They are the people about whom this Government is also concerned.
If one takes into consideration also the $2m which I announced recently would go to the States for crisis shelter-type accommodation and the 18.9 per cent increase in the Commonwealth's financial contribution to housing and accommodating Australians, as announced in the last Budget, one is looking, surely, if one is honest, at a generous, humane and well directed program of social assistance. I repeat, $20m per year will become available under the new proposals for those people having exceptional difficulty meeting their mortgage repayments or paying their rent. We have not forgotten about people who pay rent.

which is twice the amount that New South Wales spent on welfare housing.
Mr Chapman-How much?
Mr McVEIGH-Some $240m was collected in stamp duty, and New South Wales spent $120m on welfare housing to help the poor. This is an area in which State and local governments have direct responsibility. It is up to them to tackle the problems. I shall be opening a national conference on housing costs in Adelaide on 17 April. I hope that the States, particularly New South Wales, will take that opportunity to announce vigorous action on the housing cost issues. If the States shoulder their responsibilities in this area--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired.

The Treasurer's announcement of the injection of at least an extra $400m worth of bank lending for home ownership will mean 13,000 to 16,000 extra loans, depending on the extent to which banks decide to increase their average loan size. It
will mean additional demand for private houses. If it is complemented, and I sincerely hope that it will be, by State action to ensure the competitiveness of State banks and building societies and to encourage lending for genuine owner occupation, it will move a substantial way towards offsetting the forecast declines in private house commencements. It will build on the 16 per cent increase in dwelling approvals in seasonally adjusted terms recorded in January by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. In particular, it will reinforce the strong 18 per cent increase in seasonally adjusted approvals in the State of Victoria.

Mr HOWE (Batman) (8.26)-The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) referred to fantasy in alluding to some remarks made by the honourable member for Reid (Mr Dren) in relation to the Government's tax rebate
proposals. I just want to quote what the honourable member for Reid said. I am sure that people listening will know that it does not represent fantasy. He said that, according to the findings of the home finance survey of 1980 of the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research, 45 per cent of home buyers had incomes in excess of 150 per cent of average weekly earnings. He went on to say that that suggests that, of the 450,000 households to obtain assistance under the proposed scheme, 202,000 households in the top 25 per cent income group will be getting assistance and that, consequently, the proposal represents a misallocation of resources in the order of

I have often accused the honourable member $100m in a single year. That is what the honourable member for Reid said, and I do not believe
for Reid of wanting to bury the corpse of the that there is anything resembling fantasy in those

housing industry. He has been handicapped by its remarks.

refusal to die as scheduled. Unfortunately for ~.

him, the alleged corpse is alive and kicking, and I welcome this opportunity to join in this de-

this package will be injecting still more vitality into its limbs. I have said that this package is responsible and sensitive. Of itself it will go a long way towards easing the problems of many home seekers. But to work to its fullest it needs to be supported by complementary State action to remove unnecessary costs associated with home acquisition and ownership.

bate on the statement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) on housing. The Government has finally succumbed to pressure from the housing industry and other groups and announced a policy which purports to meet the crisis which has been seen to be developing in that industry. The response, as one would expect, is an ad hoc response. As such, it will have consequences other than those which

Mr Cadman-Particularly in New South Wales.

are intended. There is the obvious implication of a rise in interest rates, not merely for home buyers but, because of the rise in trading bank interest

Mr McVEIGH-As the honourable member rates, for the whole Australian economy. So we

said, particularly in New South Wales where have had a movement from 9.5 per cent in April

$240m was collected in stamp duty last year, 1980 to 13.5 per cent-4 per cent in less than two

1204 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

years-and then we have had a considerable increase in trading bank interest rates, now running at 14.5 per cent.
This Government is now a government of dear money. It is going the way of the United States. It is going to restrict economic activity in this contracted economy by making money more and more expensive. This will have an impact not just on all the people who are purchasing houses but on everyone in the community who needs to borrow money. This will have a further downward impact on the standard of living of already hard pressed Australian families. People in Victoria, for example, need have no doubts as to what the impact on them will mean. The Government has been persuaded to act and all Victorians, one way or another, will suffer from this Government's action.
Of course, there is some relief here for a minority. Recent and intending home purchasers will receive some tax relief and new home buyers will also receive a larger homes savings grant if they qualify. However, all Victorians, and all Australians, will feel the inflationary impact of dearer money. There are even deeper issues which should be considered within the context of this debate. The most important of these is the Government's ad hoc approach to housing policy. No government crows more than this Government about levels of home ownership. No government does more to enshrine home ownership as an ideology while doing little to face up to the underlying issues in Australian housing policy. Rather than rhetoric, this Government needs substantive policy; yet that is just what it lacks-a real interest in substantive policy issues.
These issues exist at various levels. There is, of course, the matter of macro-economic policy. Here the Government has been the victim of its own rhetoric. It has been on about tight monetary and fiscal policies in an effort, I suggest, to reduce the real standard of living of ordinary Australian families. It has been on about a negative redistribution of wealth. It is getting more and more of people's savings and transferring those savings to the corporate sector. It is bringing more and more money into the hands of big investors. It has been on about restructuring the Australian economy so that more and more of our resources go into the resources sector of the economy. It has been on about boosting development rather than planning it. It has been-I think we see this, especially in these measures-about restructuring the financial system and about taking money out of the housing sector. These policies cannot be reversed by a

single action or group of actions. This Government is now facing a political crisis which flows from the failure of its economic policies.
Let me turn for a moment to the context of these proposals and housing policies. Let us look at what this Government has been about. It has sought essentially in the past to do two things: First, to reduce overall funds for housing and to make more expensive the funds that are available. Secondly, to redistribute what money is available from the public sector to the private housing sector. I do not think we need to go over the figures. No government has ever reduced public sector housing funds in the way that the Fraser Government has. We have also seen the Government from time to time introducing measures which have the effect of making it harder for people in the public sector to have a decent standard of living. The introduction of market rents and escalating interest rates for housing purchases make public housing much less attractive. The massive withdrawal of funds from public housing means that we have seen longer and longer queues for public housing in the various States.
The .Government toyed with the idea of the housing allowance voucher scheme, which Professor Henderson suggested as a way of helping low income renters, and rejected it. It abolished the Land Commission program, therefore giving up the opportunity effectively to reduce over time the price of land in developing areas. While the Government set up an inquiry into housing costs there has been no serious attempt to do anything which might reduce the price of the land and housing package which the Minister referred to in his speech. Welfare organisations have been drawing attention to the mounting crisis for low income people. More and more people live in caravan parks, particularly in areas of rapid development.
There has been a rapid increase in the cost of rental accommodation and there is a crisis in accommodation for single youth. People who are renting, whether in the public or in the private sector have been almost totally neglected by this Government. The $20 million or 5 per cent of the allocation in this measure will do nothing to remove this concern. Failure to provide adequate levels of supplementary assistance to pensioners also underlies this neglect.
Thus we have this housing package with all its political overlay. The policy has been stitched together, much as the Government stitched together its five or six various health schemes. The Government has failed to deal with any substantive policy issues. It commences with an allocation

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1205

of blame. The Government has said that interest rates are going up as a result of international conditions and pressures. When interest rates were 4 per cent lower, it said that that was the result of good government. Is it not bad government when they increase by that amount? The States have been blamed because they have not worked to reduce housing standards. They are blamed again because they did not move to regulate cash management trusts.
We see what the Government is about. It is not really about housing at all, but it is about the implementation of the recommendations made in the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System in relation to the deregulation of financial institutions and especially the deregulation of interest rates.
People who have been the victims of the nonbanking lending practices are now going to find that, even the banks, they cannot get money at any other rate but those that will apply on an open financial market. So we have this one per cent increase, on top of the 3 per cent increase over the past two years, to make 4 per cent. For the first time in our history we have moved to extremely dear money for housing. There has been a rise of $88 a month on a $30,000 loan in less than two years, and the summit has not been approached. How high will interest rates rise? Ken Davidson said this morning that interest rates will have to go up at least another 2 per cent. While this Government claims that it is on about home ownership, it is in fact on about destroying housing standards in the public and the private sector. That is the key thrust of this Government's policy. That is where it will take us. It will take us to highly expensive housing which can only be reduced in price if we are prepared to sacrifice housing standards.
We should not take the proposals too.seriously. They are not worthy of serious consideration. They will be swept away by inflation. The tax rebate means that people on very high incomes, as I have suggested, will get a tax wash. It has nothing to do with getting ordinary people into home ownership. The Homes Savings Grant Scheme bears no relationship to the deposit gap which, in New South Wales, can be of the order of $20,000. In Victoria it is of the order of $10,000 to $12,000. It is welcome, no doubt, but not realistic. The banks will provide for low mortgages on the assumption that people's incomes will rise. But that is an assumption which requires closer examination. The banks will pump another $400m into housing in return for raising interest rates and giving themselves a profit of at least $80m in the current year.

The Reserve Bank of Australia will pay more for money lodged with it, which means that the Australian people will pay again for the higher profit for the banks. The banks are getting what they want and the Government is allowing a movement towards the deregulation of all financial institutions and inevitably higher and higher interest rates for ordinary people. A move in this direction will, if taken to its logical conclusion, virtually destroy effective economic planning. It will allow our national priorities to be determined by companies and corporations which have no interest in Australia and the Australian people. It will mean that the priorities which we have fought to keep in this country, such as a decent home for every Australian, will go out the window. When it is a choice between an investment prospect, a housing estate and luxury high-rise apartments, we know which will win. But that is what conservative governments have always been about. They are not interested in social goals or priorities. They get so easily bored with policy, which is time'consuming and often seen to be a distraction. To take responsibility for seeing that a nation is properly housed, has good access to health services and a high standard of equitable education is not in the attention span of governments of conservative persuasion.
This Government lurches from political decision to political decision because it is philosophically and morally bankrupt. It is made up of people who are only interested in their own politi~ cal survival. That, of course, is why the Thompson Government will be thrown out in Victoria. The Victorian people will not be fooled by shadow boxing between a larrikin like Kennett and a benign but basically ignorant man like the present Minister. They know that neither the Fraser Government nor the Thompson Government has any commitment to housing the Australian people. I believe that they will believe John Cain when he said that he will spend $182m on housing in his first year of office. He said that he will boost public housing construction by $66m, not because there are votes in it but because it is what must be done in the interests of justice. He will ensure that there is a new deal for tenants and that protected tenants will not be thrown out on to the street. He has said that co-ops will get $35m to help people in moderate circumstance get a genuine share in home ownership.
These programs may be modest but they are based on priorities and needs determined after a great deal of thought, discussion and consultation with the people most affected. They will not represent some kind of electoral swindle which we

1206 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

see paraded in Canberra by this essentially lazy and corrupt government. They will represent a solid and realisable program which will be part of an overall strategy to restore the States economic fortunes and to tackle the real problems which exist.
We have seen a lot here of the Fraser Government and we can understand that it has been talking to its friends in the banking community and that it has been able to reach a settlement. The details are still vague, no doubt because it was a gentleman's agreement. But we know that in the future from this agreement people looking for housing, for small business assistance, a car or whatever, will be paying more for their money.
We have to decide in this Parliament whether we are going to continue on this depraved road that this Government would take us. It is a road of illusion and trickery and, above all, it lacks substance. The housing policy which has been announced tonight is really a smokescreen for banking deregulation. It is not about a housing policy but about winning housing votes. Some people may be fooled, but not many. They will get out their slide rules and work out what is not said. They will realise that they will lose more on interest rate rises than they will get on tax rebates and that housing costs will continue to go up because this Government has friends in the High Court of Australia who will ensure that there is no effective tax on property speculation. The people who deal in housing will make more money. The people who are buying--
Mr Cadman-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The term 'friends in the High Court who will do certain things' is a reflection on the gentlemen of the High Court and, as I understand it, that is not permitted in this Parliament.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! There is no point of order.
Mr HOWE-The people who are buying a single family home will be on a treadmill which will make them wonder whether there is any alternative. That takes me back to where I started: We need to rethink housing policy in this country in a new and more radical way. We need to set national standards for housing. We need to look at the distribution of housing to see how we can distribute the stock in a fairer way. Thousands of people are living in overcrowded housing. Many people live in large houses which are a burden to them. We need to consider ways of taking out of land transactions the speculative element which distorts the whole property market. We need to come up with nationally uniform landlord and tenant legislation which gives tenants rights

and security. In particular, we need to find ways of helping people which do not simply put a few dollars in someone else's pocket but which help the genuine purchaser or renter. We are on a treadmill and I believe that unless we get much more sophisticated debate and more sophisticated proposals the result will be greater and greater inequity in housing markets.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr ROCHER (Curtin) (8.41)-The package announced by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his statement seeks to come to grips with the worst of a series of problems confronting recent house purchasers, as well as attempting to preserve the prospects of home ownership for potential first home buyers. In this initiative, the Government has had to balance the best interests of Australian taxpayers with the hopes and aspirations of hundreds of thousands of our fellow Australians who desire the security of their own home for themselves and for their families. Given the number and variety of proposals put to the Government over the past 12 months and more, it has been a difficult and time consuming task.
From my knowledge the proposals put before the Government-I have not seen all of themranged from the bizarre to the absurd, from the well-intentioned to the self-interested, and covered a whole range in between. All of them had in common the notion that either the Australian taxpayer or Australian investors should be required by the Commonwealth to subsidise the housing needs of those whose economic circumstances make house ownership difficult in some cases and impossible in others. At the same time, governments were grappling with the wants of those in need of special help-the needy who, for want of a better term, rely on welfare housing programs. While the Commonwealth accepts responsibility for providing taxpayers' funds for welfare housing, administration and the setting of priorities remains the sole responsibility of the States and that is how it should be.
However, I am more than disappointed that State governments have not done all they should in best utilising funds available over the last 20 or 30 years. It has been a long-standing concern of mine that people no longer in need continue to occupy dwellings provided by the States under their welfare housing schemes. Given that welfare housing is heavily subsidised by taxpayers, that accommodation should be available only to those demonstrably in need. To maximise space available, it would be equitable, in my opinion, to require those no longer in need either to purchase or

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1207

to vacate taxpayer-subsidised housing if they cannot satisfy eligibility crite~ia at present in place. The result of such a requirement would be either
more accommodation for those in immediate need or more cash, generated from sales, which could be ploughed back into new buildings for the benefit of the needy. Either way, a better welfare housing situation would prevail.
On the matter of mortgage interest rates, the Commonwealth has the legal power to control only bank lending and bank borrowing rates. Confronted with the decreasing rate of growth in savings bank deposits, it could simply have opted for the status quo. Lending long, as they do for housing loans, the savings banks would be left with no alternative but to reduce and eventually to stop lending for this purpose. By easing controls and permitting lending rates to increase by one per cent banks may both attract funds and lend them.
The alternative to higher interest rates is an absence of funds. Even though interest rates on bank housing loans is higher than we in Australia have been accustomed to paying, a high interest is more
acceptable than a lack of funds, which artificial, unrealistic controls, will generate. There is a lack of realism on the part of the Opposition in this connection. Not only does the Australian Labor Party advocate controls and yet more controls, planning and yet more planning, but also it prescribes monetary mayhem. While the problem is alleviated by the decision to allow savings bank interest to rise by one per cent, let us not forget that controlled interest rates also deprive .investors of income. Savings bank depositors are not corporate investors out to take advantage of exorbitant interest rales. Savings bank depositors are, by and large, citizens of modest means seeking to put their limited funds to work in a safe place to accrue interest and thereby to supplement their incomes. Controls which prevent banks lending at something like going interest rates necessarily prevent depositors with the banks earning interest at something like the market rate. It is not reasonable that the less well off in our community
should forgo interest to finance house pilrchasers who often possess greater wealth. Insult is often added to injury when those same less well off
people also subsidise others' housing through the taxation system at present in force in Australia.
It is axiomatic that if revenue is to be forgone, as it is, by tax rebates of the magnitude announced tonight, either other taxes must be imposed or deficit spending must be increased. In either event, Australian taxpayers shoulder the burden. Government members are aware of question~ of equity which arise out of the decision to grant tax

rebates to first home buyers. It is arguable that taxpayers in general should be called upon to subsidise further the purchase of a capital asset in the form of a dwelling while the value of that asset is appreciating at a rate comparable with or in excess of the interest payable pursuant to that purchase.
Despite any doubts, the Government has made a conscious decision to maintain a private home ownership at maximum levels. In that, coalition governments have been singularly successful in their performance. Unlike the Australian Labor Party, for more than 30 years Liberal Party and National Country Party coalitions have consistently recognised the need to encourage private home ownership. The result of this sustained effort is the highest percentage of private home ownership of any comparable country. About 71 per cent of all Australians own or are buying their own residences. Commitment to private home ownership is consistent with this Government's policies which promote and sustain Australian families as self-supporting units.
In the tax rebates scheme announced, first home buyers with children will be entitled to $200 a year more than those without children, a total of $700 a year. For low income earners in the throes of buying a house, who find themselves in difficulties, special funding to the States will be forthcoming. Low income renters are also to be helped-with the co-operation of the States, of course. By outlaying $20m to assist low income earners, which sum must be matched dollar for dollar by the States, the Government is paying more than lip service to the plight of the needy. In deciding to phase out the Homes Savings Grant Scheme and to substitute the new Deposit Assistance Scheme, the Government has taken another important initiative. Entitlements under the DAS will be decided on more relevant criteria. More importantly, the funds available under the new scheme will be paid to beneficiaries in sufficient time for them to be used to defray their mortgage debt. That means that repayments over the life of the mortgage will be less than was previously possible under the Home Savings Grant Scheme.
With the availability of in excess of a further $400m for housing loans as a result of the announced measures, it is difficult to imagine impediments in the way of the house building industry other than, of course, the challenge of normal competition. It is to be hoped that this fillip to the building industry does not lead to even greater pressures on building costs. Despite claims to the contrary, the total industry is operating at levels somewhere near its capacity. In acknowledging

1208 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy,

some localised exceptions to that general appreciation of building activity, I should also note the buoyant state of the non-residential building sector. Already there are pressures on materials and labour prices which could be exacerbated by increased cottage building. Let us hope that is not the outcome. Let us hope that we can shake off the mentality that economic growth facilitated by this and other measures is not wasted away because wage demands are made which take us beyond gains in productivity. Let us hope that mindless wage grabs do not bring the building industry to its knees and cause undeserved unemployment.
It is incongruous, to say the least, that the Op- ,position had nothing constructive to say about the package. Even the criticisms of Opposition members were couched in emotive terms with little regard for the confidence and benefit that will ensue. In addressing itself to housing issues, in times of budgetary restraint, the Government has come up with positive measures. By cushioning interest rate increases; by introducing family home tax rabates; by adopting the Deposit Assistance Scheme and by deciding, in co-operation with the States, to provide money for housing crisis relief, the Government has addressed itself to the real issues facing this country in relation to housing, and it has done so in a very positive way.
Mr DUFFY (Holt) (8.53)-After almost 6-1years of appalling neglect of a housing policy we have heard tonight the results of the review of the housing policy. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) in delivering the statement told us that in recent weeks the Government had undertaken a detailed review of housing policy. This is the Government which has allowed housing finance to dry up and which has allowed unprecedented interest rate increases. Now, two weeks before the Victorian election, it has rediscovered housing and decided to review its policy. It is a cynical gimmick as an attempt to save the discredited and inept Victorian Liberal Government. This Government and the people of Australia must be reminded of the record of the Fraser Government in housing both in the private and public sectors.
The dream of owning a home has disappeared for hundreds of thousands of Australians and those struggling with crippling mortgage repayments face a desperate struggle to retain their homes. For them, the dream has become a nightmare. The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) delights in telling us that we have the world's highest level of home ownership.
Mr Cadman-Hear, hear!
Mr DUFFY-The honourable member should just wait. But economic conditions caused by the

deliberate policies of this Government have led to a fall in home ownership from its peak in 1978 of 73.4 per cent to 71 per cent.
Mr Uren-And still falling.
Mr DUFFy-It is still falling, as the honourable member for Reid says. That is a matter which does not particularly concern the Government but it should realise that the drop represents a decline of more than 70,000 in the number of Australians who own their own home-a drop of 70,000 under the policies of this Government.
This Government has known the facts for yearS but it has refused to take any action to assist those in desperate need. The Australian Labor Party has continually spelt out the position, and there is an abundance of independent information avail~ able. Mr Ross King of the Centre for Environmental Studies at the University of Melbourne in his work 'House Prices-Some Aspects of, the Melbourne Housing Market, 1966-80' spelt out the problems with such clarity that even members of this Government should have appreciated the gravity of the situation. His paper indicated that a household on 1t times average male earnings, which in 1972 could purchase an average priced house in any of Melbourne's 55 local government areas, was now excluded from virtually all the eastern and north-eastern suburbs and from the bayside. The choice of people in Melbourne as to the areas in which they could live if they were, in receipt of 75 per cent of male average weekly earnings was reduced from 20 local government areas to nil. There was not one local government area in which they could still afford to buy a house if they were on 75 per cent of the average male weekly earnings.
Mr Cadman-But they are after the terminating funds.
Mr DUFFY-The terminating societies?
Mr Cadman-Yes.
Mr DUFFY-They get a tremendous amount of money from this Government! We have seen what you give to them through the housing assistance scheme.
Mr Cadman-How much do the States putin?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will ignore interjections. He will address the House through the Chair.
Mr DUFFY-In the public sector the performance of this Government has been absolutely diSgraceful. Federal Government expendittue peaked in 1974-75 and real expenditure ,has suffered drastic cut-backs in every year' of the Fraser Government. As a result, public houshlg

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1209

construction rates continue to decline and waiting lists and waiting times continue to increase. On this point I refer to an"impeccable source-the Real Estate Institute of Australia-to see the devastation that this has caused. A survey last year by the Institute showed that the problem was exacerbated by the inability of the private sector to assist. This survey showed a very high demand for private rentals of houses and fiats with low vacancy rates. Those who were unable to purchase homes and who were ignored by the Government in the public sector housing, were therefore forced into the private rental market at exorbitant rents. Figures released by this Government as at 31 December 1980, which now represents the tip of the iceberg, showed a waiting list of 14,000 for .rental accommodation in the public sector in Victoria. It is terrifying to think what that figure is today. This situation has arisen as a rysult of a combination of the policies of this Gpvernment and its Liberal counterpart in Victoria.
The Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement introduced by this Government in June last year fixedtotal Federal Government expenditure on housing at $200m for each of the next five years. By 1985-86 that amount, miserable and inadequate as it is, will be worth less than 70 per cent of what is required to maintain its real value, using 1981-82 as the base year. That is an illustration of the performance of this Government and coupled with the performance of the Victorian Liberal Government it is little wonder that housing in Victoria is in a tragic mess. In that State the incompetence of the Government has been coupled with a scandalous waste of public money in the infamous land deals. It is interesting to note the wholesome attitude tonight of the Minister for Housing and Construction towards the Victorian Minister of Housing, Mr Kennett. Mr Kennett is the man who has been described by the Federal Minister as a political gelding. That delightful description was, of course, given well before the elections in Victoria.
Mr Falconer-Even geldings win races.
Mr .DUFFY-The honourable member does not have any desire to be one though. On the basis of what was put to us tonight by the Federal Minister, we are now expected to believe that the Victorian Minister has been restored to full political health. The real crunch for home buyers is the deposit gap,- together with the crippling interest tates.. On the. subject of the deposit gap, this Government has returned to direct subsidies which will at least in part be added to the purchase price of houses. The other part of the

scheme announced tonight will not assist lower income earners. There will still be the deposit gap and interest rates will continue to run wild. The Government must face the fact that almost half of the employees in Australia earn less than $200 weekly. The normal maximum loan term is 30 years and an increase of one per cent as announced tonight in interest rates reduces by $2,500 the borrowing power of a family which can afford around $100 weekly on a $30,000 mortgage. To sustain weekly payments of about $100 a couple requires a gross weekly income of about $350. These people will still be forced to borrow from finance companies at outrageous interest rates on second mortgages in order to bridge the deposit gap.
The extent of this problem was clearly seen in the figures released by the Australian Bankers Association Research Directorate in September 1981. In those figures, again from an independent source, we really see why this Government has refused to listen to all the independent information given to it in relation to housing. The real problem is that, firstly, it does not understand the problem and, secondly, it does not care sufficiently to try to understand it. Those figures released by the Australian Bankers Association Research Directorate in September 1981 disclosed that the value of housing loans from banks grew by 5.2 per cent over 1980-81. For the
same period the value of housing loans from building societies increased by 2 -per cent. But the value of loans from finance companies in the same period increased by a massive 44 per cent.
The Minister for Housing and Construction did not understand the significance of this. In fact, to him, it indicated that people still have a commitment to home ownership; that was his response to those figures. It is really a tragic situation when we have a Minister who just cannot comprehend why people go and borrow money from finance companies on second mortgages at interest rates of 20 per cent and upwards. To him it indicates a commitment to home ownership. To anybody who thinks about it it indicates absolute desperation.
The other factor is that the policy announced today, as has been indicated by the honourable
member for Reid (Mr Vren) and the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe), is in fact a political gimmick which has come about in a desperate attempt to save that inept and hopeless Government in Victoria. But one thing that should be mentioned in relation to that is that whatever is in the policy-there is very little of benefit, as I have indicated, to lower income earners-for those who will get some benefit from

1210 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

it, it will not change when the Cain Labor government takes over. The people of Victoria should realise that not even this cynical Government is sufficiently bad in fact to have a caveat on this. It will not withdraw this policy when the Labor government is elected in Victoria.
The Minister, when he spoke tonight, very briefly dealt with the public sector, which is not surprising. He had very little to say about it because it is something that the Government prefers to ignore. On the subject of Victoria, and being very specific, the Westernport Regional Housing Council prepared a paper for the Ministry of Housing. That research showed that in the Westernport area rental stocks of houses and flats totalled 2,045 for a population of almost 400,000; that is, rental houses and flats as a percentage of population was 0.5 per cent. The consequencesfor that area have been devastating. The waiting lists for 17 of 22 estates with family dwellings is indefinite, for two estates the waiting time is three years, for a further two estates one year and the other estate is reserved for members of the armed forces. The waiting lists for 21 of the 27 estates with elderly persons dwellings are indefinite, for three estates the wait is four years and for the further three estates it is 12 to 18 months. That is the record in public housing of the Victorian Liberal Government, aided and abetted by the Government which sits opposite. It is a tragic reflection on any government that it can ignore a problem for six and a half years and then come in here tonight and expect us to accept its policy. It is nothing more than a gimmick and a desperate attempt to save a government in Victoria which is sinking so fast that there is no way that it can be saved.
Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (9.5)-There are a number of positive factors put down in the statement by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) of which I thoroughly approve and which I am sure will be met with satisfaction in the Australian community. However, there are a number of other aspects included in the statement of Government intentions which, to me, are of a lesser quality than I would have expected from the Treasurer. This is a matter of great public interest and it is an interest that has been generated in the last few days by the continuing leaks in the Press about this matter, leaks which resulted in 14 callers contacting my electoral office in the past 24 hours in distressed situations relating to their home finance. I must say, lamentably, that none of those 14 people will be helped by the schemes announced today. Therefore, it seems to me that this is obviously-the statement

and the intentions-a collision between political necessity and economic reality.
Long ago governments decided to intervene in the provision of housing and, over a long number of years, they have effectively balanced the financial system in favour of housing construction and home ownership. There have been no better governments than Liberal-National Country Parties federally, and particularly the Playford Government of past years in South Australia, which have made use of that available finance. A great amount of subsidy has been provided, firstly, as has been stated on a number of occasions, by the lenders themselves through the financial institutions such as savings banks accepting negative interest rates in relation to their yield as depositors in those banks. Direct subsidies from governments have amounted to thousands of millions over the years. Now it would appear that our intervention of the past, -and the scale of it, is not satisfactory. It is not good enough because of the basic alteration in interest yields on investments, a
yield which has moved heavily into the positive area with investors demanding-quite rightly, of course, from their point of view-a positive yield in advance of that inflation.
The basic cry around Australia today isfrom a number of very distressed areas in the housing market. It comes from people who have overbought. In this last week I have had two constitu-
ents contact my office to SHY that they blame no one but themselves; they have over-bought and they must trade down. They are about to sell their overly expensive homes in order to buy homes of a lower quality or. smaller size in the community. For those who are unemployed or who face sud-
den unemployment, their situation needs a great deal of understanding from the lending institution and it means a great deal of financial hardship on the part of the purchaser.
There are those who face increased family costs. I refer particularly to the position of young couples, both of whom have been earning, when the wife leaves her employment to start a family. That produces one of the greatest shocks that many Australian households can receive. There are newly married couples who contemplate, with great trepidation, venturing into today's high cost housing area. There are those who must move interstate. No greater penalty can be suffered than for one to be obliged to move from, say, Western Australia or South Australia to the city of Sydney in the pursuit of one's occupation. An enormous penalty is involved in selling a house in a low cost State and buying one in a high cost State or city. There are those who are contemplating shifting from a rental to a purchasing position. There is no

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1211

doubt, therefore, that housing contains a social as cent. I invite honourable members to check my ar-

well as an economic factor. This legislation simply ithmetic. It may be a point or so off but basically it

confirms that as we become significantly involved is correct. On a $30,000 loan a $500 rebate con-

in a decision to spend money on assistance. That tributes 1.7 per cent subsidy on interest paid; on a

expenditure, in turn, must have a real effect on $15,000 loan it contributes a 3.3 per cent subsidy;

future Budgets which a Treasurer must formulate. on a $5,000 loan it contributes a 10 per cent sub-

I would have thought that legislation which dealt with such a widely accepted social factor in
the community should likewise apply very widely or be targeted exactly on those who are in need. There is no doubt that practical bankers-not only those who manage trading banks, which are making good profits, but those who manage State

sidy; and on a $3,700 loan one is left with no
interest bill whatever. Honourable members might say that these are very low figures but the
point is that one finds in the housing market
people of varying financial capacity. I have in
mind one person who last year borrowed $15,000 to buy a house. He put down a considerable sum.

banks or savings banks-will tell one that it is Mr Young-It would have been in Boothby.

necessary to raise interest rates if the housing field

is to compete with other demands for the limited Mr STEELE HALL-No, unfortunately it

finance that is available. However, it is difficult to was not. That person's subsidy will be 3.3 per

convince one's constituents of this when the cent. In my opinion that is simply not an equitable

trading banks are making such large profits. I am spread. Who needs the greatest assistance? Is it

the first to say that it is great that Australia has the person with a larger loan or the one with a

strong financial trading banks, but let us be facsmaller loan? It may be the same run, but surely

tual. As members of parliament it is difficult to we cannot grade the need as being equal when one

convince constituents who have a housing probhas a $5,000 loan and the other a $30,000 loan.

lem of the realities involved in the making of yet How can it be? Is that targeting? I say that it is

another increase in interest rates-which cannot, not.

I may say, harm the banking institutions. It is
difficult to convince suburban Australians that their housing loan must compete in some way with Reagan's policies and the United States
deficit. It is difficult, in fact, to convince people that a diminishing debt means for them a greatly diminished responsibility; that every six or seven years, at the present rate of inflation, the real value of the debt is halved. That is a fact which people who complain about their debt must
understand. But that IS no consolation when they
must stretch their weekly or monthly budget to meet ever increasing interest rates.

Let us now consider the $700 rebate. On a
$60,000 loan the subsidy represents 1.16 per cent, on a $30,000 loan 2.3 per cent and on a $15,000
loan 4.7 per cent. On a $5,200 loan no interest is
payable. It is all wiped off in that year. I bring
those points to the notice of the House in order to consolidate the view that this is not an equitably
targeted scheme. I do not want to dwell on it.
Honourable members can do their own sums. Probably other sums could be made from it. I be-
lieve the first principle that should have been ap-
plied to the rebate was a means test. We apply a means test to the new deposit scheme. I thought

Therefore, I believe that such a scheme should that, since there had been something of a debate

be as fair as possible. One must ask the question: ' in the community in recent weeks concerning the

Does it turn the spotlight on those who are really future capacity of government to meet various

in trouble; does it effectively find them? I believe claims for assistance, that principle should have

it is defective in that regard. It assumes that been applied. But in this scheme we are branching

simply by selecting a given category one finds out into a major new area of expenditure which is

within it all who are in major trouble. That is not means tested. I simply do not understand that,

simply not the case. However, I am interested in in view of the demand and stringency of govern-

assessing how the proposals will apply in practice. ment finances and the statements that have been

I have taken out some figures to find out what the made about them in recent days. The greatest

interest subsidy will be on various sized loans. I help will go basically to those who have the lowest

understand from the Minister for Housing and loans. I know that there is a middle group of loans

Construction (Mr McVeigh) that there is to be no in respect of which the highest assistance should

means test on the rebate. As long as one pays be given. It might be said of a person with a very

interest up to the rebate amount one will receive a high loan that he is not only providing a home but

commensurate rebate on next year's tax bill. In also investing, and that is his business. But in that

that event-as I have been assured by the higher-middle group there is a very real area of

Minister-on a $60,000 loan the subsidy need that must be greater than that of people with

represented by a $500 a year rebate is 0.83 per the lower level loans that I have mentioned.

1212 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

As have mentioned, the proposals have a number of very good aspects. The provision of an additional $400m in loan funds must prove of great help to the larger cities where houses are a great deal more expensive than they are in th smaller States such as South Australia. Generally, South Australian residents are not deeply involved in the second mortgage market. One of the reasons is the excellent provision of finance by State and private instrumentalities, but particularly State banks, in support of housing. The deposit assistance scheme is good as it is tied to means. I believe it merits support because of that. The rent crisis apportionment is significant because it is dollar for dollar. If it is fully taken up the provision of $40m must help. I hope that it will help in the case of some of those who have rung my office and who do not fall within the main parts of the scheme announced by the Treasurer. Loan adjustment-the lengthening of responsibility-is a good scheme.
There is much to be approved of in the proposals generally. However, it will be largely judged by the increase in interest rates which apply to more than housing loans. We must not forget the almost 400,000 small businesses in this community employing fewer than 50 people
which must now face an addition of one per cent to their overdraft rate. It will be judged by the increase in interest rates and the operation of the family tax rebate scheme.
I note in passing one interesting factor. How
will the scheme fit in with the Victorian scheme, as announced by the Victorian Treasurer? It is only a complication, but it provides an interesting situation, and I had expected that it would be explained in the Treasurer's statement. The increased interest payment by the Australian home buyer is to be offset basically by the tax rebate scheme, which will help 28 per cent of those who are repaying loans. It will not help, I understand, those who must move interstate to follow their occupation or those who must move intrastate for that purpose. It leaves aside the question of what is perhaps the greatest need of Australian families, which I mentioned when I began. I refer to the couple who have both worked to earn combined funds with which to set up their home. When the wife leaves her employment to start a
family, the financial crunch begins. This scheme basically will put those couples, at the most financially stringent time of their lives, beyond the reach of help. I am sorry that they will miss out if they are substantially outside the five years time limit.
There is an inbuilt problem in housing finance in times of shortage. That inbuilt problem is

simply that long term loans needed for housing can never compete on an open market with loans which are taken out for short term responsibilities such as for consumer goods or the short term requirements of companies. There can never be adequate competition from the housing area. We therefore have to take a continuing interventionist role. I congratulate the Treasurer on taking an interventionist role. However, I believe this scheme falls far short of where it should reach. It falls short basically because it is not means tested. It falls short also because there is none of the general income tax relief which is needed throughout the Australian community to put more money into people's pockets. Housing assistance should be means tested and spread more widely than this assistance is.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (9.21)-The statement which is the subject of debate by the House is certainly a statement of bad news. An attempt has been made to sugar coat the bitter pill of increased interest rates but essentially it remains a bad news statement. It is understandable that it should be made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) because he is rapidly becoming known as the Minister for bad news. Presumably, if it had been all good news, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) would have made the announcement, as was rumoured earlier in the week as part of the flood ofleaks which we have had in respect of this statement. Since it was to include a one per cent increase in interest rates, the Treasurer has had to bring the bad news to us once again.
It is tremendously important that the people and the Parliament should understand exactly what this statement is about. It is about an increase in all the regulated interest rates, not just for housing but for overdrafts as well, of one per cent. Various other things are done to try to soften the impact of that to some degree, particularly in the housing area. Nevertheless, it .remains a
further one per cent increase, a further step in the continuing upward ratchet of interest increases which have so marked and dogged this economy in the last couple of years. The impact of this statement on the nation will be considerable. It is bad news first because of the one per cent increase that I mentioned, which is the fifth increase in mortgage interest rates in the past two years and
takes them to a level four per cent higher than they were in March 1980.
The impact of that increase on Australian households is very considerable. Each one per cent rise in the interest rate on bank mortgages and on housing mortgages generally increases interest payments by $300m. The total mortgage interest payments in Australia go up by $300m.

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1213

So, a four per cent rise, such as that which we have seen in the course of the last two years, would increase total mortgage payments by $i,200m, an extraordinarily large sum which will come out of the pockets of home buyers and potential home buyers throughout the nation, reducing the living standards of families who are buying homes, freezing families out of the market and pushing them into a rental situation which, because of the increased demand, pushes up rents.
Admittedly, the Government has tried to reduce the impact of this latest rise but the great majority of Australian households will receive nothing. In fact, over 90 per cent of Australian households receive nothing from this Government's statement now before the House. They receive nothing to alleviate the impact of increased interest rates. The increase in the small overdraft rate increases the cost of finance for small businessmen and farmers. This in turn makes life much more difficult for them. It makes it much more difficult for them to expand their activities. It make it more difficult for them to provide jobs. It makes it more difficult for the economy overall to increase its rate of economic growth. It has the opposite effect in that regard; it is highly likely to diminish further the rate of economic growth which is already low and getting lower.
Another aspect of the bad news of this statement is that the Government has begun to implement segments of the momentous report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. Admittedly the aspects of that report which are implePlented. in this statement are relatively minor but we are beginning on the road towards implementing the recommendations of the Campbell report. If the Government is to go right down that road, we know that at the end of that road lies the certainty of much higher interest rates. I remind the House and the nation that the Campbell Committee said that if interest rates were to be deregulated, as it suggested was necessary, that would send the regulated rate, which was 12.5 per cent when the report came down, up to the bond rate of 15 per cent or whatever the bond rate might be. It is currently 15 per cent.
A further study by two economists at the Australian National University showed that deregulation would send the average mortgage rate of 13.6 per cent-that is the average right across the financial institutions-up to a level of between 17 per cent and 18 per cent. Clearly, moving down the road of deregulation, as the Government now is, is a dangerous step indeed and one which bodes ill for the Australian nation if the Government is to go right down that road, fully implement the

Campbell report and bring about the horrendous interest rate increases which such a policy would imply.
It must also be understood that, although this is basically a bad news statement, it is not bad news for the banks. The banks will do very nicely out of this statement. Increased interest rates will mean even higher profits for the banks, profits which soared in recent years as interest rates have risen. The total profits of the major private banks have increased from $160m in 1977 to $S30m last year, a 230 per cent increase in four years. The major reason for that increase is that the banks have been able to utilise their higher interest rate regime to earn higher profits. This is particularly so in respect of the trading banks because they have been able to charge interest rates which are increasing all the time whilst, on the other hand, 30 per cent of their deposits are in cheque accounts and do not earn any interest whatever for the depositors. The banks pay no interest on those accounts.
The profit on those cheque accounts, which is known as an endowment profit, was the major motivation for the Thatcher Government, an extraordinarily conservative and right wing government, introducing a special tax on the British banks, which are even more profitable under the deregulated system in Britain than the Australian banks. This shows what an extraordinary increase in bank profits we would be likely to see in this <;ountry if we move down the deregulation path. It also indicates that higher interest rates do bring with them extraordinarily high bank profits, as we have seen in the United Kingdom and as we have seen very much in this country.
Why has the Government increased interest rates further? It says it is necessary because it is essential to get more funds into housing. We agree that getting more funds into housing is a worthy objective. As my colleague the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) said in his speech earlier tonight, it is absolutely essential to get more funds into housing. I make two points about that matter. Firstly, for the Government to say that it is necessary to get more funds into housing does not absolve it from the responsibility for the increase in interest rates which has occurred and, secondly, measures other than those involving higher interest rates could have been used to get funds into housing.
In regard to the first of those two points, the reason why bank deposits have increased only slowly is the higher level of interest rates in the rest of the capital market. The reason why funds have gone out of the banking system, or have not

1214 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

come into it as rapidly as they might have, is that some depositors have been enticed into other segments of the capital market where interest rates are higher and have been increasing in an unregulated way. The Government has allowed that situation to develop. That is not something which is outside the Government's ambit; it is not something over which the Government has no coiltrol.lt is something for which this Government is responsible, for which it has a responsi-
bility to the nation. Interest rates, not just regulated interest rates but the whole interest rate structure, are something which this Government is responsible to the nation for.

To say we have to increase these regulated rates

to get more money into the housing area does not

absolve the Government from the responsibility

of what is happening right across the interest rate

spectrum. Of course what has happened is that

there has been a policy of not only allowing this

interest rate rise to occur in the rest of the

unregulated area but also I would suggest even en-

couraging it to occur. The evidence for that is the

enormous rise, for instance, in treasury notes. The

Government has been pumping treasury notes

into the system, forcing up the rate on treasury

notes at an enormous rate. They have gone to 18.6

per cent on the latest tenders. This must be part of

a conscious policy to increase interes~ rates as a

means of attracting capital inflow into this

country so that the Government can overcome

the balance of payments problem without having

to move to a devaluation. I do not want to pursue

that complex argument any further but I suggest

that is very at present.

Imt uiscdhepliabretroatfetlhyepGroomveortninmgeantp'solpicoylicoyf

increasing interest rates at present with that

object in view. The result is that it makes it extra-

ordinarily difficult to stop interest rate increases

flowing, as we now see again, right across into the

,housing aI:ea and the regulated area ofoverdrafts.

So we find that the Government's policy has been

to allow and to encourage these interest rate rises

to occur, and it is not absolved from responsibility

at all in that regard.

There are other possible means of providing funds for housing other than the measures that have been announced here tonight. What the
Government has done regarding savings bank regulations, reductions and increasing interest rates on savings bank deposits is only one way to create funds for housing. Other ways which do not require increased interest rates would be, for instance, to require the savings banks to lend more for housing. Currently they are lending only 53 per cent of their deposits for housing. They are allowed to lend 60 per cent but they are lending

only 53 per cent. If they were required to take home lending up to the allowable 60 per cent an extra $1,600m would be created for housing. As against that the Treasurer with his one per cent increase is going to come up with a whole $400m extra for housing. Well, big deal-tremendous! We pay the penalty of an increase in interest rates and all the Treasurer can come up with is another $400m from the savings banks and trading banks in additional funds for housing. The Treasurer could get $1,600m if he required the savings banks to lend the full 60 per cent that they are currently allowed to lend for housing. This, of course, would make an enormous amount of additional funds available for housing.
The fact that the banks have agreed to make this $400m available for housing also must be looked at in .the context that they have been allowed to reduce the current 40 percent requirement of liquid and government securities to 15 per cent which theoretically makes available $5,800. That is, the 25 per cent of savings bank deposits between the 40 per cent requirement now in government securities and liquid assets and the 15 per cent liquid and government securities ratio which will apply in future is $5,800m. Well, $400m out of that is pretty small beer too.' In other words, the banks are not going to lend most of that additional money for housing which they could do with that change in the regulation. There has been no attempt to force the banks jn to lending more money for housing. Indeed, the Government has made all the payments and the banks are the ones which are going to make all the gains from this situation. I believe this is an absurd situation to have been allowed to occur.
Another way this matter could have been approached is through the trading banks which currently lend only 5.6 per cent for housing. They could have been required to lend, say, another 2 per cent which would make another $400m available. Also, the Government couldhave proclaimed Part IV of the Financial Corporation Act and required life assurance companies and superannuation funds which have greatly reduced funds for housing in the last decade to lend a certain proportion of their funds for housing. More funds could have been made available in this way. We also could have enticed funds ,out of the longer term institutions by offering them indexed bonds as proposed by the Victorian branch of the Australian Labor Party when the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) asked the States for some ideas.
I want to mention quickly the effect of, the Government's policies to reduce theimpact.of higher interest rates on people. The key proposal

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1215

is, of course, the tax rebate for some home buyers. One can see immediately that the total impact of a one per cent rise in interest rates is not offset by this scheme. The cost of the rebate scheme is $230m but the cost of the increase in interest rates is $300m. So we can see immediately that the scheme does not cover that cost. The Treasurer admits that only 28 per cent of home buyers will qualify for the rebate in any way-not all households, just home buyers. So 72 per cent of home buyers-:-that is about-!.2 million people-will receive nothing except higher interest rates. In fact, the 450,000 households covered by this scheme represent less than \0 per cent of all households, taking into account rented households and households which are owned. So over 90 per cent of households will receive no benefit whatsoever from this key element of the sugar coating-that is, the tax rebate. Many householders in that 90 per cent-the non-qualifying home buyers and renters-will be adversely affected by what this Government has done.
Furthermore, as I have mentioned the interest bill has gone up over the last two years by $1,200m. The Government is now giving back $230m. In other words, the home buyers of Australia are still $1 ,000m worse off. And I think this puts the whole matter in some perspective. A family of a man, wife and child which gets the maximum rebate will still be $10.45 a week worse off as a result of interest rises over the last two years.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Cli'arles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (9.36)-1 support the statement made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard). It is regrettable that the Opposition, which has been criticising the Government for not taking immediate remedial action on the housing problem, should now criticise the Government for taking action. Whenever any initiative is taken by the Government, whether it be in the form of tax cuts or income support increases, the Opposition always claims it is either not enough, it is too late or it is done for the wrong reason. Those in the Opposition who see this statement as a cynical political exercise, engineered for a State election, can have little knowledge or sympathy for the real plight of new home owners. Well, I understand this problem, its urgency and the need for immediate relief of one kind or another because I have experienced the problem personally, in the early 1970s as a low-middle income earner in a one income family with several children facing rising mortgage repayments. I can assure the House that it is hard going. I can attest to that. The pressures

on the family budget are enormous. One has to make all sorts of expenditure sacrifices and undertake additional employment simply to hold the home. For the whole of lower and middle income Australians mortgage repayments are the largest household bill and one over which tJ.1e family has almost no discretion if it wants to keep the home. I therefore welcome this statement as a crisis response to a most pressing problem for many families around Australia.
The Opposition has said that the program of assistance announced by the Treasurer is not sufficient. But in terms of adjustments to tax rebates or income support programs I cannot recall such a substantial increase in family incomes for many years as a result of direct government action. The assistance helps overcome a substantial portion of the erosion of family disposable income resulting directly from home interest rate increases, quite apart from any recent increases in wages, salaries or other sources of family income. The benefits conveyed by these proposals are very significant. In a full year these measures will cost some $250m. The Family Home Tax Rebate Scheme, which will help some 450,000 home buYers, will cost $230m in a full year. The Housing Crisis Relief Scheme, involving matching funding from the States, will involve another $20m in a full year. That is a program completely justified on the basis of social justice and involves assistance to the low income home buyers and particularly low income renters who have largely been forgotten in the public debate on this issue. The Deposit Assistance Scheme, which will overcome many of the deficiencies of the Homes Savings Grant Scheme will account for the remainder of the package cost of some $250m. In aggregate terms that is very big money.
On an individual family basis substantial benefits are available, particularly to recent home buyers whom everyone agrees have been hardest hit because their mortgage repayment increases have outstripped their income increases. For example, under the tax rebate scheme recent and intending first home buyers with dependents will receive a rebate of nearly $60 a month in the first year of the scheme in a lump sum, on assessment or in their pay packets. They will receive $50 a month for the second year of the loan. That is big money. If the Opposition wants to scoff at those amounts I would suggest that it has lost contact with the average income earning family. These are highly significant amounts for individual families which, taken in conjunction with normalwage and salary increases, will help home buyers over the difficult initial stages of their loan commitments.

1216 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

One of the most interesting and disappointing aspects of the public debate on this issue over the past six months or so is the widely divergent opinion as to the relative movements in recent years of both monthly mortgage repayments on certain sized loans and weekly income. Various lobby groups representing home buyers, Opposition spokesmen and others have pointed to a widening gap between monthly repayments and income. They have stated that this places an intolerable burden on home buyers. I think that has been the position. Others have stated the opposite. The West Australian newspaper of 20 February contained a detailed table showing that for incomes rising in accordance with average weekly earnings and in relation to an average sized loan which was taken out as recently as June 1980, the percentage of income going on repayments had fallen from 27.7 per cent to 26 per cent in February 1982. It is a very serious matter that no solid, impartible and irrefutable data is available as a starting point for all debate, assertion and policy making in this area. The issue is not helped by spokesmen parading the country stating that real household disposable incomes have risen by nearly $3 billion after tax in 1980-81. I mean, which families, in what circumstances, on what incomes and in which States? These aggregate figures do not have meaning to the average householders which people such as I represent.
What I am saying is what I have been saying in this place for years now until I am blue in the face: We need highly specific data on the typical Australian family in order to direct policy accurately to that most important element in our societythe family unit. Packages such as those we are presently debating could then also be more specifically directed to the families most in need rather than indiscriminately. I have constantly advocated the compilation of family impact statements. We need to take a relatively small sample of families from each State-say, with two or three children-which is on an average family income and with normal family obligations. We need to assess the circumstances of those families as they are affected by policiesfrom all levels of government-Federal, State and local. At each level of government there is a broad range of departments and policies which affect the incomes and expenditures in the typical family budget. Until we get that information we cannot properly target policies in a way which will give optimum concern to the family unit and to families most in need. I again call on the Treasurer and the Government to consider this proposal. The data and the statistics are all there. They simply have to be collated within the framework of the sample

to which I have referred. They would .be very helpful in designing proposals such as those presently before us.
There is no doubt that the proposals contained in this package by the Government will help many families which are under pressure as a result of interest rate increases. This is only one program in a wide range of policy areas which need to be brought together to provide a reasonable assessment of the welfare of the family. Notwithstanding the conflicting evidence which has been used in the public debate on housing regarding the relative movements in mortgage repayments and incomes, one fact remains. No matter what the mortgage value, no matter how long the mortgage has been held, and no matter what the income of the mortgagee might be, the amount of discretionary income in the hands of Australian families buying homes has been reduced by the interest rate increases on housing loans. The only solution to that is of a long term nature-to reduce the pressures on interest rates and to move towards lower taxation for everyone-because the proposals before us tonight constitute a crisis response and not a long term remedy. This is not a criticism of these proposals because they do help recent home buyers who have been hard hit. There will be criticism of any ad hoc response to a problem of this nature. It will certainly offend those who are not embraced by the program. That has always been the case and it always will be.
In the long term the top priority of the Government must be to reduce the burden of taxation in this country and to remove the bias in the present taxation system against the family unit. This is not a condemnation of two-income families. I think that ought to be a matter of choice and not a financial necessity. What I am condemning is a tax system which has as its basic assumption the belief that a spouse who stays at home to raise a family is not performing a worthwhile service to the nation. That is not the intention but it is the effect of the tax system as it is presently structured. I can think of no more important or challenging task.. Yet we find the tax liability of a oneincome family to be much higher than that of the same income produced by two individuals. When the Treasurer introduced his statement this eveninghesaid:
First and foremost there is the Government's strong commitment to preserving the highest practicable level of private home ownership in Australia. Private home ownership is an important element in the cohesiveness of Australian families, Which is fundamental to the strength of our society.
I could not agree more with that statement. The proposals announced tonight will help many families which are confronted with urgent housing

Housing Policy

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1217

finance problems. In the long term, if the traditional family unit and the traditional family home are to be preserved, this individually based taxation system ought to be changed to a family income basis, and preferably, of course, within the context of a lower taxation burden. Tax cuts are pretty hard to achieve. I think that a one cent reduction in the tax scale costs something like $700m. It is difficult to get that lower taxation system because we live in a world in which everybody expects the Govefnment to do more and provide more services, and at the same time reduce taxes. If the tax burden is to fall-to the benefit of all home buyers-government expenditure must fall. Neither the Australian Labor Party nor the Australian Democrats seem to acknowledge that. If Government expenditure is not to be financed by taxes it has to be financed by borrowings. That simply increases interest rates. It hurts home buyers and puts the next generation of Australians into hock to finance the present generation's demands. That is not complex economics; it is just simple arithmetic.
We cannot escape from these kinds of realities when we talk of high interest rates and the prob~ lems facing home buyers. In other words, if people want governments to build better roads, to subsidise the opera, to build sports stadiums, to give incentives to industry, or to do the many other things which people demand of government, they have to realise that this has to be paid for by higher taxes or by increased borrowings and interest rates. If they are not financed in either of these ways and we allow the Government to run an increased deficit, inflation results, investment dries up, jobs are lost and living standards fall. What does that achieve for the home buyer? Ken Davidson, whose remarks have been quoted here previously tonight, said in this morning's issue of the Age:
The fundamental determinant of interest rates on long term loans such as housing mortgages is the current and anticipated rate of inHation.
In other words, all these things are related. Choices must be made and priorities established. In a world of single issue lobbyists for government expenditure increases, these broader repercussions of Budget extravagance are not considered or, if they are, they are ignored. It is hard to explain to someone who wants a grant that if all such requests are granted someone else will have to pay by way of higher taxes, higher interest rates or lower living standards. If in the longer term the housing interest rate problem is to be resolved, the Government will have to control its Budget. Only in this way-notwithstanding international economic pressures-can we optimise

our chances to reduce interest rates, help home buyers and lower taxes for the average family in the longer term.
Any undue reliance on monetary policy as a result of budgetary extravagance inevitably means, as this housing debate has shown-as this housing crisis has shown-that welfare and other objectives of government are destroyed because monetary pressures, such as interest rate increases, are applied indiscriminately and without equity. For that reason I again say that responsible budgetary management is essential-not just for the general good of the economy but for the specific good of all components of the economy, including the home buyers. I therefore acknowledge the Government's need to introduce these housing finance proposals, which are a necessary but short term reactive therapy for a problem which in the longer term will not arise under sound fiscal management of the kind which only this Government can offer. To those honourable members opposite who have scoffed at the amounts of savings that are to go to recent and intending home buyers, I just say that the Housing Industry Association, which has often been very critical of this Government, said today:
The Commonwealth Government's housing policy initiatives announced today will dramatically increase home ownership opportunities for ordinary Australian families and be of immeasurable assistance to the industry. Not only does the package ensure the restoration of an adequate supply of housing finance, but because of the substantial funds for mortgage crisis relief, it will help needy families who are experiencing real financial hardship.
I support the Treasurer's statement.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley) (9.51)-The honourable member for Perth (Mr McLean), who will be sitting on the slenderest of margins in the next election campaign, will be bitterly disappointed, because the facts are that the policy which he is now supporting will be shown day by day, as we lead on to the Victorian election, to have been introduced by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) only because of his fear of being demolished by his own party. The Prime Minister hopes that by helping the Premier of Victoria, Mr Thompson, he will save his own skin. If the honourable member for Perth had listened tonight to the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall), he would have heard the policy being utterly and completely condemned by a member of his party. It was condemned tonight by the honourable member for Boothby, who fired the first shots in support of the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) becoming the next Prime,Minister.
The facts indicate that this will happen. The Prime Minister is under challenge from his own

1218 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Housing Policy

back bench. He knows that. He is trying to save his,own skin. This man, who, as late as this morning, said that the Government would wait and consider its policy very carefully before it announced it, suddenly got the Treasurer (Mr Howard), the monkey on the stick, to rush into the House and announce it for him to try to save his own skin. The facts are that this is a bankers' policy, a bankers' statement. It takes $70m out of the public coffers, out of the taxpayers' funds, and puts it into the hands of the banks. This is a net profit for the banks taken out of the taxpayers' pockets. If ever there was a case of a thimble and pea trick, if ever there was a case of transferring funds deliberately to the banks, this is it, as I shall show. We all know that the banks are already profiteering. We all know that 30 per cent of their deposits are in cheque accounts on which they pay no interest whatsoever. The banks have been on a strike of capital. They have refused to lend for housing until they have wrung their last drop of blood out of the Government. They knew that they could do that because they knew of the craven fear of the Prime Minister himself.
Mr Bourchier-Oh!
Mr ARMITAGE-The honourable member for Bendigo is a great supporter of the Prime Minister. The honourable member put him where he is and he knows that when the Prime Minister goes he will go as wel\. As I have said, when the Treasurer announced the deregulation of deposit rates, he said that he had had a good discussion with the banks and the banks had given him a firm assurance that they would act responsibly. The fact is that banks have not acted responsibly. They have gone on to increase deposit rates time and again, and that means that the dog has to chase the tail. If one deregulates deposit rates, in effect one is already deregulating interest rates, because one must follow the other, obviously. If one increases deposit rates, one will automatically increase lending rates. That is precisely what has happened. The banks have not acted responsibly, contrary to the assurance by the Treasurer, by the monkey on the stick himself. The fact is that that assurance is worth as much as any assurances given by the Prime Minister himself.
Mr Humphreys-Another broken promise.
Mr ARMITAGE-Of course, another broken promise, another broken assurance. In 1975 the Prime Minister promised that he would not interfere with the housing interest rate deductibility scheme. He gave a firm promise. In 1976 he wiped it for everybody except first home buyers, and the following year he wiped it altogether. That is one of the 30-odd promises that he has broken. Of

course, it is because of these sorts of broken promises, these completely immoral and dishonest policies adopted by the Government and the Prime Minister-one of the greatest tax avoiders of all time-that the people of Lowe showed their attitude towards the Government only last Saturday.
Mr MacKeIlar-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. We have let the honourable member for Chifley go so far, but is it in order for him to accuse the Prime Minister of being one of the greatest tax avoiders of all time? I ask the honourable mem~er to withdraw that accusation.
Mr ARMITAGE-Time and again I have raised the question of the Prime Minister's tax avoidance and I have offered time and again--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The Chair has not ruled on the point of order. As the House will recognise, the occupancy of the chair was just in a state of transfer. If the remarks were accurately attributed to the honourable member for Chifley, the Chair would suggest that they border on impropriety and that the honourable member should exercise greater restraint.
Mr ARMITAGE-You, Mr Deputy Speaker, have been in the chair when I have come into the House prepared to document the tax avoidance scheme of the Prime Minister and asked to be allowed to table the documents and the Treasurer himself has refused to allow the documents to be tabled. They were documents from the Corporate Affairs Commission of Victoria.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Chifley is making statements which more properly should be the subject of a substantive motion, if he is of a mind so to move. The Chair rules him out of order.
Mr ARMITAGE-At the first opportunity I shall move it, because it relates very much to the Nugan Hand affair at present.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Chifley is lacking totally in restraint and relevance to the matter before the House.
Mr ARMITAGE-I withdraw, Mr Deputy Speaker. Government supporters are deliberately taking up my time to stop me making the most important points that I want to make. Everything that has happened, including this increase in interest rates today, means that the Premier of New South Wales was correct when he made the prediction, on the basis that there would be a full deregulation of interest rates in the near future, that we shall see the norm of 18 per cent for housing interest rates. The facts are that, despite the-

Adjournment

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1219

rabble on the Government benches, the interest rate structure overall in Australia is today the highest in the world-that is overall, right across the board. We had the highest interest rate structure in the world before this one per cent increase, and now it has become even greater. The monkey on the stick is coming in to hear about it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will withdraw the reflection. In that context, it was clearly intended as a reflection.
Mr ARMITAGE-I am sorry, the Treasurer. As I have mentioned, the Prime Minister broke all his promises in respect of the interest rate deductibility scheme. But I go one step further than that. Let us look carefully at the scheme, taking as an example a couple with no children who bought their house in 1980-81. This will show the fallacy of it. They will receive $400 in 1982-83. But, at the same time, they face a one per cent increase in their interest rates. That will mean that they will have to pay about $50 a month more in repayments. Multiply that by 12 and the answer is exactly $600. So, in actual fact, they are given $400 but the Government takes $600 at the same time. Is it any wonder that I am claiming that this is a thimble and pea trick?
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Citizenship Ceremonies: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Local
Government: Funding-Mr Phillip Jellie-Petroleum Prices-Coal Industry-Department of Defence: Motor Vehicle Accident Claim-Migrant Centres-Defence Force Wage Increase
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.0 p.m., I propose the question:
Thallhe House do now adjourn.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (lO.O)-In the one minute that I had available to me in the adjournment debate last night, I directed attention to the problems of local government bodies which conduct citizenship ceremonies since the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs withdrew assistance for those ceremonies. As I pointed out, some municipalities hold a considerable number of these ceremonies and they provide excellent facilities. There is no doubt that the conferring of Australian citizenship is a Commonwealth responsibility. Local government assists in the process because naturally those accepting the citizenship like to have the ceremony locally. It is an area they know and also it is very easy for their friends

and so on to gather on this very important occasion.
I raise this matter because it seems to me that, under the new federalism policy, the action of State and Federal governments is to try to place further loads on to local government; loads which local government has not the flexibility in its financing to be able to carry. I know that the income tax revenue directed to local government has been put up to 2 per cent of that revenue and that would seem to be of considerable assistance, except when all the specific purpose grants have been removed are removed.
Mr John Brown-It is only 2 per cent of personal income tax receipts.
Dr JENKINS-That is right, 2 per cent of personal income tax receipts, but it is a lot better than local government got before the Whitlam Government came in and started the scheme. One of the problems is that, although local government receive these increases, the specific purpose grants have been removed. That means that there is pressure in a number of areas, and one of these is welfare.
For example, in my electorate the Region 14 youth emergency accommodation scheme was funded for three years by the Department of Social Security. The Victorian State Government disburses those funds. It has handled them so well that there is no money left from the State Government for the last two months of operation. Where do honourable members think the pressure is to make that up? The ethnic care force is very important in an area with a high ethnic population. There has been no increase in funds for that function since 1978. In the last three months, there has been a 30 per cent reduction in staff. It has lost a social worker, a family aide, and the part-time services of a receptionist. The pressure is now to ask local government 'to do something about it.
The Community Health Centre in the suburb of Lalor was to be opened in 1979 or 1980. It actually opened towards the end of last year. It was to be done through Victorian State finance. It was to have an establishment of one consultant psychiatrist, one social worker, three community nurses, one stenographer and one clerical aide. What has it got? It has a part-time consultant psychiiltrist, one social worker who serves two community health centres, one community nurse and a receptionist. This is supposed to be set up for the good of the community. The pressures are on local government to substitute for it. But it has not the flexibility in that sort of area to raise the extra revenue. The Migrant Resource Centre set up by the Federal Department of Immigration

1220 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Adjournment

and Ethnic Affairs is supported by the State Department. It has a deficit for the financial year 1981-82 of over $12,000. How can it operate in that area of need?
The point 1 am making is that the Victorian State Government and this Government have abdicated their responsibilities in so many areas and are trying to push these functions on to local government. 1 believe that local government is being very unfairly treated in this way and this last penny-pinching episode of not giving assistance for citizenship ceremonies is just so ridiculous that it is unbelievable.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (10.5)-ln the few minutes allowed to me tonight, 1 pay a special tribute to an old and dear friend of mine who passed away a couple of weeks ago. He is also well known to many of the members on my side of the House, in particular the honourable member for Mitchell (Mr Cadman), who is in the House tonight, and also the Treasurer, John Howard. His name was Phillip Jellie. He was an elderly man. He died at the age of 71. But when we first met him, he was very spritely. He first came to Canberra in 1976. 1 suppose we could call him a lobbyist in the sense that he arranged a meeting of a small group of men from New South Wales, Sydney in particular, who were service station proprietors. They thought that they had a grievance. They came to Canberra in the hope that they could persuade the Government to change certain things. He came first of all with that little group to talk about the advent of ACTU-Solo into the market place of Sydney. He thought the introduction of ACTU-Solo would disrupt the market place there and, in fact, put a lot of people out of business.
We found him a very dedicated and sincere fellow. 1 think he impressed everbody to whom he talked in Canberra. 1 am sure that the honourable member for Mitchell would agree with that. He became very persistent in his belief that the ordinary, small service station proprietor was being put at a. disadvantage by some of the oil companies. 1 believed at the time that he had a very good case and a lot of other people felt exactly the same as 1 did. As a matter of fact, he continually reminded me that 1 had 15 years in that particular industry. Of course, he kept reminding me that things needed to be done. As a consequence 1suppose 1have been an agitator, if! can use the word 'agitator', in trying to get reform within the service station industry and trying to get protection for some of those small businessmen who put a.lot of their money at risk and who work terribly hard to provide a decent and respectable living for their families.

Phillip Jellie was dedicated to that cause,Unfortunately at the time of the fun,erallast week 1 was overseas and I know that, for a particular reason, the honourable member for Mitchell could not attend. The funeral was well attended by his fellow service station proprietors. They are men who were involved in the industry. It was also attended by oil company representatives who knew that Phillip Jellie was dedicated and sincefe in his desire to influence people to try to get a fair go for the service station proprietors of Australia. 1 turn to yesterday's Sydney Sun. Under the heading 'Oil Glut Sparks Price War.' the article states:

The glut in the world's oil is about to spark another-,petrol price-cutting war in Sydney.

The first shots were fired yesterday when the Shell company and a group of independent operators slashed pri~es.

Today it is possible to buy fuel as low as 31.9 cents a litre . . . more than seven cents under the top retail mark.

Yesterday some Shell self-serve stations dropped the price for super grade at 33.7 cents a litre and standard to 32.9.

The petrol companies use the excuse that there is a world glut. They forget that in Hobart; Tasmania, we are paying about 42c a litre. There is a variation in the price of petrol all over Australia. The motorists of Australia are being taken to the cleaners by Australian oil companies. It has gone
on for such a long time and poor fellows like Phil Jellie, who was 71 years of age, found it necessary to leave his--

Dr Theophanous-Here is the man who canflx it, the Treasurer.

Mr GOODLUCK-I ask the honourable
member not to start. He does not know what he is talking about. Phillip Jellie found it necessary in a desire to protect the small busine~sman to try to influence governments to change their policies. He did a dashed good job. He was a dashed good fellow. 1 will miss him because unfortunately vie find that a lot of people today are not very dedicated or sincere. They come to this place and they think that by buying a bottle of ch!J.mpagne they buy a member. But they do not. When Phillip Jellie bought a glass of water, he did so because he was dedicated and sincere.

Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (19.9)-1

am pleased that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is in

the House tonight and will be able tohear what I

have to say. It has to do with money', even tho\lgh

it is not directly to do with his Departmen(' 1

think his policies are partly the causeofw~atI.am

about to say. It is a short story. It st!J.r'tedwi'tl1,im

accident last July between a iady dtjyer .iri 'a

stationary hicle. The

car and a Defence

Department of vehicle ran into

Dtheefeb,naccekv6e-f

that lady's car and didco~srderab{e

Adjournment

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1221

damage-$1,486.38 worth. The Department accepted liability in October and the car was then repaired. Everything was going along' fine. The usual procedure is that if one is dealing with an insurance company it pays up and that is the end of the matter. Buta problem arose when the bill for $1,48'6 was sent to the Government to pay and the lady received a letter and a cheque from her solicitor. The lady comes from Traralgon. She does not mind being named-her name is Mrs Eastwell. I shall read the letter to the House:
Dear Mrs Eastwell,
We refer (0 the above matter and advise that the Department of Defence has only forwarded to our office the sum of $1.186.38.
The total amount that was' to be forwarded was $1,486.38---'
That is, $300 short-
however, we are advised by the Crown Solicitor's office that the Department of Defence at present has no funds available and therefore is' unable to pay the balance of the amount owing.
It is a great country; is it not, when a department informs a solicitor that no further funds are available and that solicitor then sends such a letter to a person Who could be expected to receive the right 'amoupt of money for the expense! The panel 'beater has been waiting a long time for the money, yet the lady gets a letter like that saying 'I'm sorry, but we can only send you part payment at this stage'. It is a real indictment of how this country is going at the present time. The letter .continues:
They have undertaken to forward to us the balance of the monies as soon as the Government grants send them the allocation.
Mr John Brown-How are they going to pay for the subtnarines?
Mr CUNNINGHAM-Yes, and the aircraft carrier. It is hilarious when one thinks of it. The tetter c6ntihues:
We find t'hat situation is most unsatisfactory for you as it' would appear to us that of all defendants, the Government is the one who certainly should have the funds to meet claims ,made by members of the community for damage suffered as a resl'lt of Government action.
We-are unable to take any further steps in relation to this maller.until such time as supply is granted to the Department of Defence by the Government.
As soon' as we receive the balance of the funds, we shall forward them to-you..
The lady has been verypatient. She is still waiting for the:: $309. Apart from that, the panel beater, 'the small ,businessman who tonight has been hit .with another one per cent on the, interest rate on
'the overdraft he is running, not only has to pay
that interest,but also has to carry the Department of berel1ce for $300. It just makes. one wonder ,w6erew.e'are going and what state the economy of

the country is in when departments c~nnot honour their debts and we have this sort of situation occurring. I hope that the Treasurer can quickly get on to this matter tomorrow with the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), who was made aware of it today and was quite alarmed to think that such a situation is developing. This is not the only case of this type. There are other areas in which the Department of Defence is dragging its feet. The economy is sick. There is no doubt that this Government does not know where it is going. Tonight's statement on the housing situation clearly indicates that. When the small people out in the community are getting these types of letters sent to them we have a clear indication of why we will see a change of government, not only in Victoria but also in this Federal sphere at the next election.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (10. 14)-Great concern has been expressed by colliery owners and people associated with the coal mining industry in New South Wales concerning the shipping delays affecting coal exports to traditional markets throughout the world. This situation has been brought about by industrial action at our ports by the various unions which operate in this field. It is interesting to note that the figures recently issued by the Joint Coal Board indicate that coal exports in New South Wales were up one per cent last year, whereas Queensland's increase in coal exports was 39 per cent. That gives us an indication of how Queensland operations compare with New South Wales operations. The situation in New South Wales is due solely to industrial unrest. At the present time 40 vessels--
Mr MacKenzie-How many?
Mr O'KEEFE-As many as 40 vessels are waiting off the port of Newcastle and ships are waiting off Port Kembla and Balmain to load coal for overseas markets. We are not the only country with an abundance of coking coal and steaming coal. We have very severe competition from Brazil, South Africa, Canada, America and other countries. These people must be delighted with the situation in New South Wales as they are able to supply markets with reliable shipping. We will lose valuable trade as a result. When visiting countries such as Holland, France, Taiwan, Korea and Japan, the question is always asked: 'Why can we not rely on coal shipped from New South Wales ports?' This is very much in evidence when one goes to Japan and talks to representatives of Nippon Steel and then goes to Korea and talks to representatives from Pohung Steel. They want to know why they cannot rely on exports of coal by ship from New South Wales.

1222 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Adjournment

Coal exports worth over $120m will be affected by a decision by coal shippers and industry authorities to severely restrict exports from New South Wales ports next month. This decision has been reached because of the congestion outside the ports of Newcastle, Port Kembla, and Balmain. Exports totalling 1.5 million tonnes from Newcastle and 950,000 tonnes from Balmain and Port Kembla will be affected by these restrictions. Coal exports of more than 5.3 million tonnes, worth over $250m, have been lost or badly delayed since the start of the 1981-82 financial year, plus the millions of dollars that have been lost in demurrage. When a ship is off the ports of Newcastle or Port Kembla--
Mr MacKenzie-it costs $10,000 a day.
Mr O'KEEFE-I thought it was $13,000-we differ a little in the figures. It is a serious situation. The restrictions are being imposed to reduce the shipping queues to a more manageable level. Coal company officials state that if the restrictions work, the ships scheduled to arrive this month, as well as those waiting to load coal, should be loaded and cleared from the ports by the second week in May, provided there is no further industrial trouble.
Mr MacKenzie-it is scandalous.
Mr O'KEEFE-My honourable colleague from Calare says it is a scandalous situation. So it is. There are mechanical problems at the coal loading complexes. The congestion at ports has been an industry problem for the past 12 months. That is a long time to put up with this situation. Coal is vital to New South Wales and Australia. It is our biggest single export earner. For the six months ended 31 December 1981 the export of coal amounted to $1, 132.2m. How much more export earnings would this commodity have brought into Australia if industrial strife had not occurred in the areas I have mentioned? Those unions concerned in industrial action have done themselves and this country a great disservice indeed and they should be brought into line. Another problem facing the coal people in New South Wales is that the New South Wales Government has increased by 25 per cent its rail freight rates on coal. That represents a total increase of 80 per cent in two years.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (10.19)-1 want to spend a moment replying to the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe). It is easy to score political points on this issue. The fact is that Federal unions are involved in this matter,

not New South Wales unions; therefore, this matter is the responsibility of the Federal Government. If the honourable member wants to talk
about port facilities he should look at his Government's record. The fact is that .it has not put a single dollar into the development of infrastructure at the ports.
However, I want to raise another matter of some importance. Yesterday I read with concern
in the Sydney Morning Herald that the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs has made substantial reductions in the time immigrants are to be allowed to stay in migrant centres or hostels after their arrival in Australia. It seems that the Department has issued a directive whereby English speaking immigrants will be limited to a six-week stay in these migrant centres and nonEnglish speaking immigrants, or rather those who wish to avail themselves of an English speaking course,to a stay of a maximum of 20 weeks.
I ask honourable members to compare these new limits of six weeks for English speaking migrants and 20 weeks for non~English speaking migrants with previous conditions under which married couples with children were allowed to stay in migrant centres for up to 12 months, married couples without children were allowed to stay for up to six months and single people for three months. Honourable members will then begin to have some idea of the enormity of the changes which are involved. Not unexpectedly the revision of policy arose out of the razor gang report and subsequent cuts in all areas of government expenditure. One of the recommendations of the razor gang report was to sell out the administration of migrant centres to private enterprise, thus absolving the Government of yet another area of responsibility in relation to newly arrived migrants. Now we find that this stony-hearted Government is going to kick out some migrants from the centres only six weeks after their arrival in this country, irrespective of whether they have
jobs or houses to go to.
We are all aware of the crisis in housing and in the job market in Australia today. This crisis affects low income earners particularly and there is information available to suggest that migrant groups are amongst the hardest hit of all. Furthermore, unemployment is disproportionately high amongst certain migrant groups such as Turks, Lebanese, Asians and Greeks, to name just a few, and there are no signs from the Government that things are going to get any better. With a staggering 7 per cent official unemployment rate in Australia as a whole, we have a figure of close to 10 per cent unemployment for many migrant groups. Migrants need time in order to intergrate

Adjournment

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1223

into the community and to find work and housing. Under those circumstances, what is the Government's response? Well, if you are an English speaking migrant you have to find a house to purchase or accommodation to rent and a job within six weeks. This is unrealistic. Indeed it is an outrageous assumption on the part of the Government and on the part of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. It is one further example of the inhumane approach of the Government which is completely out of touch with the social needs of people.
It is absurd to attract migrants to this country only to treat them as unwelcome guests once they arrive. It is perhaps an unusual irony that on this occasion it is the English speaking migrants, who are discriminated against even more heavily than the non-English speaking migrants but both groups will suffer and one wonders how the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs arrived at such a magic formula of six weeks and 20 weeks to allow people to adjust to this country. Unfortunately, it would seem that the Department had no intelligent or realistic criteria in mind at all. It is simply another penny-pinching exercise which does not take into account the serious consequences that it will have for newly arrived migrants. We should be welcoming these people when they arrive in this country, assisting them to intergrate into our society, assisting them with geting jobs and housing. We should not simply make an artificial rule which provides that after six weeks or 20 weeks, irrespective of whether they have work or housing, they will be kicked out of these centres.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (10.24)-1 would like to use this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr Phillip lellie who passed away late last week and to pay tribute to the work that he did for the small businessman in Australia. Phillip lellie was hard working and dedicated, a very direct Australian, one who believed in the role of private enterprise and a fair return for hard work. I first met Phillip lellie in 1976 when he was involved in what he called a task force to convince the Federal Government that the activities of ACTU-Solo, the unusual arrangements connected with it and the favouritism it had received due to the activities of the previous Labor Government, were damaging the market-place for the small businessman and the small petrol retailer. Phillip lellie quickly developed an interest in the fourth report of the Royal Commission on Petroleum and, together with colleagues from the Service Stations

Association, the Motor Traders Association and the Australian Automobile Chamber of Commerce, worked hard to convince members of parliament and members of Government that special consideration should be given to small businessmen in Australia to ensure that they did not suffer undue hardship or lack of competition from the activities of large businesses, and particularly the oil companies.
Like my friend and colleague the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck), Phillip lellie was a Tasmanian. He loved his home State and visited frequently. In doing so, he always managed to find time to stop over in Canberra and express himself most forcefully over the table to government members, committees and to Ministers. I would like to pay tribute to the work done by Mr Phillip lellie. We privately called him 'petroleum jelly' and it was a name that we enjoyed between us because of his dedication to the well-being of petrol retailers and lessees of petrol sites in the petrol retail industry. I think his main achievements were in convincing governments that there should be special consideration of terms for petrol retailers. Owing to Mr Phillip lellie, in particular I think, special legislation, franchise legislation, for the petrol dealer was established for the first time. That legislation is currently under examination by the responsible Minister because it has proved to be effective. The industry is happy with it, but it is currently under review. Mr Phillip lellie also was instrumental in establishing a limitation on the number of sites that could be operated by commission agents in the industry across Australia. I would like to convey my sympathy and condolences to his wife Sylvia and to his family.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.28)-1 understand that next Thursday Service personnel will be receiving four and a half months of back pay following the Government's very sensible decision to increase Service pay following the report of the Coldham Corrimittee of Reference for Defence Force Pay and following the announcement last December of the Government's determination to act on that inquiry. I must say how pleased I am that, for example, naval personnel in the Macarthur electorate will receive this substantial increase in salary along, of course, with an increase in Service allowances, in their pay packets next Thursday.
Mr Cadman-The Air Force personnel in my electorate will be pleased also.
Mr BAUME-As my honourable friend says, the airmen in his electorate of Mitchell will be keen to receive this increase. The Government's

1224 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Adjournment

sense of responsibility to servicemen is very significant indeed, particularly in view of the continual criticism from opposite of the Government's defence effort. There is nothing more tangible which will illustrate this Government's commitment to defence and to the people in the defence forces than the very large increase in pay which will in fact end Up in pay packets next Thursday, 25 March. This will in fact cost about $160m this financial year and $260m in a full year. It will mean that a private soldier or ordinary seaman will receive an increase of about $1,900 a year and a major or a commander about ,$3,700 a year. These are significant rises. I am certain all members of this House will be pleased that not only have the rises been made and justice given to this very important section of our community, the defence forces, but also that this will in fact end

up in their pay packets next Thursday. I commend the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) and the Government for accepting the Coldham Committee's report which did bring justice. I am glad to say that it is interesting to see that this recognition by the Government of the worth of the defence forces has been implemented in such a tangible way by substantial increases to their salaries.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 1.45 p.m. on Tuesday next.
House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.
PAPER
The following paper was deemed to have been presented on 18 March 1982, pursuant to statute:
Customs Tariff Act-Order-Developing Country-No.2 (1982).

Answers to Questions

18 March 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1225 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Fishing Permits to Foreign Fishermen
(Question No. 3765)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 16 February 1982:
(I) Has the former editor of his Department's magazine, Australian Fisheries, Mr Peter Pownall, stated that there were too many Australian fishing boats trying to share too few resources.
(2) If so, did he also state that the situation was particularly serious for the prawn fisheries on the east coast of Queensland.
(3) To what extent has the declaration of the Australian Fishing Zone and the issuing of permits to foreign fishermen affected the catch of Australian fishing boats, particularly Queensland pra wners.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Mr Peter Pownall made these statements in evidence before the Senate Standing Committee on Trade and Commerce on 17 November 1981.
(2) Yes.
(3) Implementation of the Australian Fishing Zone and the granting of access to foreign fishermen has had no effect on the operations of Queensland prawn trawlers. Since the implementation of the Australian Fishing Zone (AFZ) on I November 1979, no foreign fisherman has been issued with a licence to fish for prawns, in accordance with the Government's policy not to permit foreign fishing operations in those fisheries currently fully exploited, or those likely to be in the near future by Australians. Current fisheries agreements cover operations by Japanese tuna longline vessels and Taiwanese pair trawl and gillnet vessels. In order to minimise interference with Australian fishing operations, areas of the AFZ have been closed, either permanently or on a seasonal basis, to Japanese and Taiwanese fishermen, which has resulted in a reduction of their catch from that previously taken in our waters before the Zone was implemented.
Cash Packaging of Salaries: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 3874)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
(I) What was the cost of cash packaging for salary payments in each of the departments and statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction in each year since 1976-77.
(2) What is the estimated saving on cash packaging charges for salary payments in each department and statutory authority under the Minister'sjurisdiction in the 1981-82 financial year due to the elimination of cash payments to staff.
(3) Which industrial payrolls are still being paid by cash in each of the departments and statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(4) What is the charge for cash packaging of these salaries.
(5) How many staff positions in each of the departments and stat utory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction have been abolished due to the elimination of cash payments..

(6) Are any fees paid to (a) building societies, (b) banks and (c) credit unions for carrying out salary transactions by each of the departments and statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(7) Has any study been conducted by any of the departments and statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction as to the effect on private enterprise security organisations and cash packaging organisations of the elimination of cash salary payments; if so, what were the results of each of these studies.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 3866 which appeared in Hansard of9 March 1982, page 739.
Resources of Admiralty House and Kirribilli House
(Question No. 3914)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 17 February 1982:
Has the Committee on Official Establishments twice recommended that the resources of Admiralty House and Kirribilli House be pooled; ifso, (a) when were these recommendations made and (b) what action has been taken, or is being taken, to implement the Committee's recommendations.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Interim Report of April 1977 and the Final Report of May 1979 of the Committee on Official Establishments contained a number of references to the use of Admiralty House and Kirribilli House as a combined facility and to the integration of the grounds of these adjoining residences.
The committee did not place a high priority on implementing these recommendations.
When tabling the Committee's Final Report I said that implementation of its recommendations would be subject to examinations and funds approval in the normal budgetary process (House of Representatives Hansard, 20 September 1979, pages 1360and 1361.)
Australian Participation in Space Shuttle
(Question No. 4078)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 25 February 1982:
(I) What action has he taken to expedite the signing by the Government of a letter of agreement with the National Areonautical and Space Administration in the United States of America in order to ensure that an offer of space on the space shuttle can be taken up by Dr L. Dintenfass, Research Director, Sydney Hospital, to study the effects of zero gravity on human blood.
(2) Is it a fact that (a) Dr Dintenfass has an international reputation in space medicine and has worked with NASA since 1977 and (b) the reason for the delay is that the Attorney-General has expressed concern that Australian participation in the space shuttle might lead to liability for suit if the shuttle crashed on a city.

1226 REPRESENTATIVES 18 March 1982

Answers to Questions

(3) Is it also a fact that the delay in signing the letter of agreement jeopardises the prospects for Dr DintenFass' el{periment.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Alternative wording has been prepared by the Crown Solicitor's Office which removes the Commonwealth's obj~c tions to the original wording proposed by NASA. The alternative text is currently being considered by NASA, and I will keep the honourable member inFormed.
(2) (a) No. I am inFormed that Dr DintenFass has an international reputation in the field of biorheology and hacimorheology, that is, the viscosity of blood and other biological fluids. He ha.~ been in contact with NASA since 1977

For the purpose of defining this particular experiment and adapting experimental equipment For flight in the space shuttle.
(b) There are several reasons why an agreement with NASA has not yet been completed. One of these is the need to establish, and set limits to, the el{lent of potential liability to the Commonwealth should the Space Shuttle cause damage to a third party. A second is the uncertainty over the last Few years regarding the funds available to Dr DintenFass for his el{periment. A third was NASA's decision at one stage to remove Dr Dintenfass's el{periment From its scheduled flight For NASA's internal financial reasons; the el{periment was subsequently reinstated on a different flight.
(3) Yes. NASA requires a signed letter of agreement before the el{periment can be flown on the space shuttle.


