House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 129, 1982 Wednesday, 20 October 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Questions without Notice

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2255

Wednesday, 20 October 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
SYDNEY AIRPORT
Notice of Motion
Mr MAHER (Lowe)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(1) deplores the failure of the Government to choose a site for an international airport for Sydney, which airport will be free of a curfew upon arrivals and departures, and
(2) calls upon the Government to desist from constructing a second close-spaced runway at Sydney Airport and, in lieu there of. declare a site for Sydney's second airport.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Notice of Motion
Mr CADMAN (Mitchell)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House expresses its serious concern for-
(I) The impact of wages and conditions claims on the competitiveness of Australian industry;
(2) The debilitating effects of stoppages in key and essential industries, and
(3) the failure of the Opposition to encourage responsible attitudes in influential unions.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAX AVOIDANCE
Mr ARMITAGEI refer the Prime Minister to the Treasurer's statement of 27 June 1982 that, under the Part IVA legislation of May 1981, vendor shareholders in both dry and wet Slutzkin schemes would stand to pay heavily for involvement in such activities. Does the Prime Minister recall his electorate talk of 31 May 1981 in which he commented generally on all the schemes covered by the Part IVA legislation and in which he described all such schemes as 'anti-social tax avoidance', 'blatant and contrived' and 'antisocial activities'? Does he recall describing people involved in schemes covered by the legislation as tax cheats--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will cease giving information and seek information. He should ask his question.
Mr ARMITAGE-Why has the Prime Minister retreated from his unambiguous condemnation of those involved in dry Slutzkin schemes?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-As the honourable member has made perfectly plain, those past

comments of mine did not relate to just one element of tax avoidance or tax evasion. Different parts had particular reference to people involved in bottom-of-the-harbour schemes but the references were also aimed at those involved in the industry. It is to the great credit of the Treastlrer, and through the Treasurer this Government, that the tax evasion industry has largely been destroyed as a result of the legislation and measures of this Government. That is one of the things that will continue, to the great credit of the Government.
Yesterday the Opposition and today the honourable member who has just asked his question have sought by implication to confuse two things. The first is a full-blooded condemnation of the industry, an industry that has been destroyed by the legislation of this Government. That full blooded condemnation I am prepared to reinforceat any point. But if members of the Opposition want to use that condemnation as a vehicle to bring into the Parliament condemnations of named individual Australians who have no right of reply, if they think it gives them an excuse to use this place as a star chamber to impugn the names of people who have been proved innocent in the letters of Mr O'Reilly, the Commissioner of Taxation, it is a matter of a very different kind. The condemnation of tax avoidance and tax evasion in their artificial and blatant forms remains and stands without any detraction whatsoever. But at the same time this Government is not going to stand for this Parliament being used as an anti-democratic, McCarthy-like star chamber of the kind that would bring untold shame to this nation.
ISRAEL: UNITED NATIONS MEMBERSHIP
Mr McLEAN-I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to recent reports indicating that Israel's credentials to participate in the General Assembly of the United Nations will be challenged later this month. Will the Minister advise the House of the latest developments in this matter? Will he assure the House that Australia will support the United States of America in opposing any measure designed to remove the only democratic nation in that region from the General Assembly of the United Nations?
Mr STREET-The Australian Government is greatly concerned at recent proposals to exclude Israel from the United Nations and some of its agencies. We have always strongly supported the principle of universality of membership of the United Nations. To exclude Israel from the United Nations and its related agencies would

2256 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Questions without Notice

undermine this principle and indeed frustrate the main purpose of the United Nations, which is to resolve disputes amongst nations. The United States Secretary of State has made it clear that, in the event of Israel's exclusion from the current session of the United Nations General Assembly or specialist agencies, the United States could withhold payments to the United Nations or certain agencies until Israel's right to participate was restored. This obviously would have very serious implications. The very strength of the American reaction underlines the damage which would be caused to the United Nations by a move to exclude Israel. We, for our part, would carefully consider how best we should react if there were a successful challenge to Israel's right to participate in the current UNGA session. We call on all members of the United Nations to oppose measures to exclude Israel, because such action would only damage the organisation.
TAX RECOUPMENT LEGISLATION
Mr FREE-I refer the Prime Minister to the Treasurer's comments in today's Sydney Morning Herald that the 'principal good and proper reason' for limiting the recoupment legislation to wet Slutzkins was that illegal evasion of tax was involved. I ask the Prime Minister whether he recalls saying in an electorate broadcast on 31 May 1981:
There is no real difference between the person who finds an artificial loophole to slip out of tax and the person who falsely declares his income.
Does he recall saying that the effect of Part IVA of the tax legislation, which applies to dryas well as wet Slutzkins, 'will be to force people to do what they surely knew was right ... indeed if every antisocial activity had to be banned by law we would be overwhelmed by law and freedom could not survive'? Will the right honourable gentleman inform the House whether the Government's policy is reflected in the Treasurer's emphasis on legality or in his own assertions of morality?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I think it is perfectly plain that the legislation which has been introduced-it will be reintroduced into the House today or tomorrow--has been directed to bottom-of-the-harbour operations for very specific reasons. There was an unpaid tax liability at the time of the sale of the companies. There was a tax liability which remains to this day, and the legislation is designed to collect that tax. In the other scheme which the honourable member referred to in particular there was no unpaid tax liability at the time the companies were sold. One of the things that the Australian Labor Party is seeking to do is to impugn the position of people

who had made sure that at the time of the sale of a company all tax liabilities had been paid. On that basis the Labor Party is seeking to establish that letters written by Mr O'Reilly, as Commissioner of Taxation, in relation to certain individuals whose names the Labor Party has introduced into this House, should not be accepted. When the Commissioner says that at the time of sale there were no tax liabilities in relation to certain companies and that there would be no liabilities under the recoupment tax legislation, that is good enough for this Government and it will be good enough for the people of Australia. If members of the Australian Labor Party continue trying to throw mud in respect of these matters it is only going to stick on them.
VISITORS AND PROHIBITED IMMIGRANTS: ILLEGAL WORK
Mr TUCKEY--I refer the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs to his reply on 14 October to a question relating to the crackdown on the estimated 50,000 foreign visitors who have been working illegally in Australia. Can the Minister advise me whether the immigration officers conducting the inquiry have asked questions as to how those immigrants, with the obvious disadvantages including that of being from a foreign land, were able to obtain and maintain employment that eligible Australians could not? If not, could such questions be included in the future so that this information related to successful job seeking might then be passed on to Australia's unemployed?
Mr HODGES-I am not aware whether such questions are asked but I certainly assure the honourable member for O'Connor that I will make investigations and convey that information to him. I believe that there is some merit in the suggestion he is making. Every effort should be made by all employers around Australia to ensure that people who are seeking jobs in this country are in fact permanent residents of it. If that were the case, we would have very few prohibited immigrants receiving jobs or, indeed, people who are here legally as visitors able to obtain work illegally.
TAX AVOIDANCE
Mr HAYDEN-My question to the Prime Minister follows the answer he gave to the honourable member for Macquarie in which he sought to excuse resort to the dry Slutzkin tax avoidance practice in the past on the basis that 'there was no unpaid tax liability at the time of sale'. Does the Prime Minister recall specifically dealing with the so-called dry Slutzkin practice of

Questions without Notice

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2257

tax avoidance? He said on 31 May 1981 in his electorate talk:
We believe that there is no real difference between the person who finds an artificial loophole to slip out oftax--
That is a dry Slutzkin type of approach-
and the person who falsely declares his income.
That is a tax evader. What has happened in the last several days to cause the Prime Minister to turn on its head that principle and that moral outrage which he expressed? Finally, in relation to the matter that he is referring to more specifically, did he note in evidence given before a Senate Estimates committee that the Commissioner of Taxation, Mr O'Reilly, referring to an investigation into the affairs of Mr John Reid and companies with which he was associated, stated in relation to the letter he sent to the Prime Minister-which the Prime Minister persistently declares exonerates Mr Reid in all respects on the matter of taxation-that in fact 'that letter, that particular letter, does not say anything at all about any accumulated profits in the company'- that is, about anything that might be related to a dry Slutzkin tax avoidance measure? Did he note that Mr O'Reilly subsequently in his evidence said that the Australian Taxation Office, with authority, had the resources available to make an assessment as to whether tax liable on accumulated profits might have been avoided according to the practices of the dry Slutzkin approach? In the circumstances, will he now approach Mr Reid and seek authorisation from Mr Reid for the Taxation Commissioner to investigate the possibility that a dry Slutzkin was in fact embarked upon by Mr Reid and his co-directors in the disposal of companies into the maw of the Maher tax avoidance and evasion operation?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am glad that the Opposition has given what I said in that radio talk so much attention because it represents a general statement of attitude which is the reason why legislation after legislation has been introduced into this Parliament outlawing various practices as they have come to light. I think over 20 pieces of legislation have been introduced and over 50 artificial devices have been outlawed by this Government over the last few years. We take great credit for the fact that the tax evasion industry has been destroyed as a result of the actions of this Government. Indeed, the taxation benefits that will shortly start flowing through to all taxpayers in Australia have been made possible in no small measure because of the success of the Government's moves against tax evasion and the tax avoidance industry. That represents very general benefits across the whole spectrum of Australian taxpayers. It emphasises in the starkest

terms the benefits of the actions the Government has undertaken.
The Leader of the Opposition persists in his attack on Mr John Reid. It is worth noting that he persisted in an attack on one of three trustees in relation to those particular companies. It is worth noting that he persists in taking the view that the statement by Mr O'Reilly that there was no t".x liability at the time of sale--
Mr Hayden-Come off it. You are the man who said that dry Slutzkins were as immoral as tax evasion. You change your principles when you get into trouble.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent. I indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that he asked his question in silence. As a matter of fundamental fairness he should listen to the answer in silence.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It is interesting to note that if there had been any genuine approach by the Australian Labor Party in these matters it would have named from the outset all the trustees in relation to those companies. The fact that it picked on Mr John Reid and Mr John Reid alone shows the nature of the smear and the nature of the political process operating within the Australian Labor Party. Perhaps it is bad luck for the Leader of the Opposition that a highly respected person from Sydney, Mr David Moore, was one of the co-trustees. Indeed, Mr David Moore's former firm, as I understand it, acted as solicitors for the affairs of those companies. He is Chairman of the New South Wales Public Service Board. He sent a letter to Mr Wran as Premier and that letter was read out in the New South Wales Parliament by Mr Wran. As a result of all of that, Mr Wran indicated that he regarded Mr Moore as being a perfectly fit and proper person to continue as Chairman of the New South Wales Public Service Board, that he did not intend to take the matter any further, and that it had been appropriately answered.
Mr David Moore has indicated publicly, in the plainest terms, that the Leader of the Opposition does not know what he is talking about and that at no point did Mr Hayden bother to ring him to try to find out what the facts were. The Leader of the Opposition just came into this Parliament with smear upon smear upon smear. That is what this Leader of the Opposition does best. It is worth noting that when he wanted to launch attacks, when he wanted some support from his front bench on this matter, the only person he could get to support him was that arch smearer of all, the honourable member for Dawkins. Where was the

2258 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Questions without Notice

honourable member for Wills? The honourable gentleman has not--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The right honourable gentleman will use the appropriate nomenclature of the honourable member for Fremantle.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable member for Fremantle, who has not yet--
Mr Holding-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I draw your attention to the Standing Orders. I ask: Is it proper parliamentary usage for the Prime Minister to refer to a member of this House in the terms he used, namely, 'the arch smearer of all'? I suggest that you should apply the Standing Orders even to a person so exalted as the Prime Minister.
Mr SPEAKER-- I will apply the Standing Orders, and if the honourable member for Melbourne Ports accuses me of bias I will deal with him too. The point of order is not upheld. It is not unparliamentary language.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It is worth noting that it was only the honourable member for FremantleI apologise to the electorate of Fremantle for misnaming it-who was able to or apparently prepared to support the Leader of the Opposition when he went into his smear against John Reid. We have had enough of this smearing in the Parliament. It is time the Leader of the Opposition stopped using the coward's -privilege of the Parliament to smear innocent Australians outside the Parliament.
TERTIARY STUDENT LOANS SCHEME
Mr FISHER-My question is directed to the Minister representing the Minister for Education. What will be the effect of the delay in the implementation of the Tertiary Student Loans Scheme? Will young people seeking assistance in undertaking tertiary education be disadvantaged by the action in another place?
Mr FIFE-The proposed Tertiary Student Loans Scheme to which the honourable member referred has been delayed by action of the Opposition parties in the Senate. If this legislation is held up for much longer it will mean that the very real benefits that will flow to thousands of students throughout Australia will not be available at the commencement of the 1983 education year. The Government has taken a series of decisions, which were announced by the Treasurer in this year's Budget, to provide a very real increase in assistance for Australian students. The Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme benefit has been substantially increased. There has been a liberalisation of the means test. The Tertiary Student Loans Scheme to which the honourable

member referred is to be an additional means of support, not to take the place of some existing program. It is a new program in addition to those programs that already exist. All TEAS beneficiaries as well as a large number of other people who are not eligible for TEAS benefits will be eligible to apply for loans. So the action of the Senate is a mean action directed against students. It is a political action designed to cause some kind of embarrassment to the Government. Indeed it will not cause any embarrassment to the Government but it is designed to do so. The efforts of some people to cause embarrassment to the Government are denying, in a very mean way, benefits flowing to a large number of students throughout Australia.
TAX AVOIDANCE AND EVASION
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister: Is it a fact that a wet Slutzkin tax evasion practice is related to the evasion of tax on current profits? Is it a fact that a dry Slutzkin tax avoidance practice relates to the avoidance of tax on accumulated profits? I ask the Prime Minister whether it was because there is absolutely no qualitative difference in these practices that he was led to declare on 31 May 1981 in his electorate talk:
We believe that there is no real difference between the person who finds an artificial loophole to slip out oftax-~
That is a dry Slutzkin-
and the person who falsely declares his income.
That is a wet Slutzkin. Is that why he made that declaration? Why does he no longer have the moral courage to stand by it?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition happens to be wrong. What was stated in that electorate talk was a general attitude to tax evasion and tax avoidance which has led to many pieces of legislation outlawing devices and blatantly fraudulent schemes designed in an improper way to minimise tax. The Government takes a great deal of credit for that. The Leader of the Opposition is seeking to relate that statement to a so-called dry Slutzkin scheme alone. The Treasurer has made it very plain that there are distinguishing features in relation to bottom-of the-harbour schemes: At the time of the sale Qf the company there was company tax unpaid. There was a current tax liability which was due and remains due. The legislation before the Parliament is designed to collect the tax that remains due. Under the other device there was no current tax that had not been paid. There would be no way in which the Leader of the Opposition could, in a sensible and rational fashion, distinguish between a so-called dry Slutzkin and I suppose many other devices that have been outlawed. But

Questions without Notice

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2259

there were distinguishing features in relation to bottom-of-the-harbour schemes which have been identified time and again.
The reason why the Leader of the Opposition is pursuing this matter is to try to impute guilt to Mr John Reid in relation to the sale of six companies. Mr John Reid has been fully and totally cleared by the Commissioner of Taxation, Mr O'Reilly. He has been cleared by the Chairman of the New South Wales Public Service Board as co-trustee. He has also been cleared by Mr Wran as Premier of New South Wales. Mr Wran has made it perfectly plain that he accepts the explanation of Mr David Moore. He accepts that Mr David Moore is a fit and proper person to be Chairman of the New South Wales Public Service Board. It is not possible for Mr Wran to accept that in relation to Mr David Moore without accepting it in relation to one of his co-trustees, namely, Mr John Reid.
If the Leader of the Opposition persists in trying to say that Mr Reid and Mr David Moore carry some guilt, he is then in direct conflict with Mr Wran who has rejected totally what the Leader of the Opposition has said. In addition to that, it is worth noting that Mr David Moore has said that never at any point did the Leader of the Opposition try to get in touch with him to find out the facts. The point plainly is that when these companies were sold the tax liabilities had been met. There would be no obligation under the recoupment legislation. All that the Leader of the Opposition is doing, under cover of privilege, is continuing the smear in this Parliament~the smear of innocent Australians who are not able to answer back as members of this Parliament might be able to if they are attacked by the Leader of the Opposition. The Leader of the Opposition would never be game to say from the steps of Parliament House what he said under the privilege of this Parliament in relation to Mr John Reid and impliedly in relation to the other trustees. The Leader of the Opposition is even outdoing the honourable member for Fremantle in relation to smears. Why has he done it? He came into this Parliament and moved a motion, thinking he was going to be able to impugn the Government through guilt by association. He found that that bounded back upon himself. He does not have the decency or the basic honesty to do the only proper thing that he should do in this Parliament; that is, apologise to John Reid and to David Moore.
PRIME MINISTER: FAMILY TRUSTS
Mr HOLDING~I direct my question to the Prime Minister. I hope that, as the super arch smearer in this Parliament, he will not regard my question as a smear.

Mr SPEAKER~Order! I ask the honourable gentleman to ask his question.
Mr HOLDING~I ask the Prime Minister: Does he recall holding on 5 March 1979 a wellpublicised Press conference in which he indicated to the Press that he was winding up two family trusts, namely, LJ.W. Nominees Pty Ltd and the Nareen Trust? Can he inform the House of the method that was employed in accomplishing this winding up? Can he give the House a clear and unequivocal assurance that it is not the case that the trusts were stripped of their assets in such a manner as to enable him and the beneficiaries under the trusts to avoid paying large amounts of taxation which otherwise might have become due?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER~ The nature of the Opposition is all too plain. The company L.J.W. Nominees was liquidated. I know there were one or two Press reports at the time about Nareen Trust. That was set up in my father's time and, because of the nature of it, it is not within my power to wind it up. They are matters purely within the family and they do not, in any sense, involve any of the devices which are the subject matter of debate.
ROAD FATALITY RATE
Mr KATTER~I address my question to my friend and colleague the Minister for Transport and Construction. I preface it by pointing out that the road fatality rate in this nation is probably the greatest scourge we have, with the possible exception of the member for Fremantle.
Mr SPEAKER~Order! The honourable gentleman will ask his question.
Mr KATTER~My question is: Will the Government encourage in every way some project devoted to highlighting the matter of road safety during the period leading up to the Bicentenary and include it in the bicentennial road funding?
Mr HUNT~I thank the honourable member for Kennedy and also the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety for the tremendous work that the Committee has done in promoting road safety in this country. It really has made a tremendous contribution in assisting both Commonwealth and State governments in devising policies that undoubtedly are having a very beneficial effect in reducing the incidence of road deaths and accidents. The Committee might consider speaking to the Australian Bicentennial Authority about whether the Authority would sponsor a Bicentennial project to highlight the importance of road safety. I remind the honourable

2260 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Questions without Notice

gentleman that the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program will provide a tremendous stimulus to improving the road systems generally in this country. We expect--
Mr Mountford-In your electorate?
Mr HUNT-Yes, I dare say that there will be improvements to roads in the electorate of Gwydir, which happens to cover one-third of New South Wales, and for that I make no apology whatsoever. The program will improve the road network throughout Australia. Projects that will have a beneficial effect on road safety on our national highway system will receive a priority in consideration. Overtaking lanes will be built on many of our arterial road systems. We will also provide a four-lane highway between Sydney and Melbourne. Sylvia's Gap, which has always been a hazard to motorists in the electorate of Humethe honourable member for Hume is well aware of the seriousness of that part of the Hume Highway-will certainly be improved. We expect to have a four-lane highway there in the not too distant future. I assure the honourable gentleman that I will be giving very serious consideration to any submissions that the States might make for inclusion in the Bicentennial Road Development Program of projects that will enhance road safety.
TAX AVOIDANCE AND EVASION
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister why, if the so-called dry Slutzkin tax avoidance schemes are suddenly so innocent and decent now, as he is declaring to the Parliament, he was moved to condemn and outlaw them in 1981. Having condemned and outlawed them in no uncertain terms in 1981, how does he now justify defending them in the Parliament?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition fails to distinguish between statements which were made in 1981, and which I support and continue to support, about a general condemnation of fraudulent and blatant tax devices. The Leader of the Opposition keeps coming back to one particular device, but I remind him that this Government has outlawed many devices over the last several years. There is all the difference between that and smearing in this Parliament innocent Australians who have a full tax clearance from the Commissioner of Taxation-a smearing to which the Leader of the Opposition returns time after time. The Leader of the Opposition not only does not accept the word of Mr Reid but also does not accept the word of that Labor appointee, the Chairman of the New South Wales Public Service Board, Mr David Moore, whose firm happened to act as the solicitor for those companies. He does not accept the word of

Mr Wran in relation to those matters. He does not accept the word of the Commissioner of Taxation, Mr O'Reilly, in relation to those matters. The Leader of the Opposition is out by himself.
COMPANIES: EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION
Mr FALCONER-My question to the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations concerns the announcement in the Budget Speech that there would be a tax incentive for employees to acquire shares in their employer companies under approved schemes. Has the Minister, who has responsibility for this matter, consulted with employer organisations and, indeed, union organisations on the implementation of these schemes? What has been the reception by those organisations? Can he give us some indication of the guidelines that will apply to such schemes that will qualify them as approved schemes under the legislation?
Mr MACPHEE-The guidelines were actually issued by the Treasurer who is the responsible Minister because of the tax deductibility question. I have consulted the employer organisations in particular, because they are the ones who can communicate the idea to their members, and also the trade union movement. The reception has been a favourable one. I would say that it has been a realistic one as well. Some years ago when I was Minister for Productivity, with the then President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Director-General of the Confederation of Australian Industry, I launched a statement on employee participation and the various concepts involved. This was a tripartite description. This was one of a series of concepts.
I caution employers that the mere fact of introducing employee shareholding of itself will not bring about an improvement in employeremployee relations. A total review of the systems of communication and consultation between management and their employees and the dealings of management with union officials is necessary. The mere fact of having some sort of employee shareholding will not of itself improve industrial relations. Having said that, within the broader concepts the scheme has been well received. On Friday of this week a sub-committee of the National Labour Consultative Council, which I chair-I also chair the sub-committee in question-will be looking at this and other methods of employee participation in the hope that we in this country will eventually show enough maturity to get away from the them and us syndrome and get some sense of partnership as we try to take this country forward.

Questions without Notice

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2261

TAX AVOIDANCE-
Mr HAYDEN-As the Prime Minister unfortunately missed the opportunity to answer my last question to him, I ask him again: As the so-called dry Slutzkin tax avoidance schemes are now innocent and decent, according to him, why did he outlaw and condemn them in no uncertain terms in 1981? Having taken that fairly firm and unequivocal action in 1981, how does he now justify defending them?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Nobody is seeking to defend any particular tax evasion or tax avoidance approach. I have mentioned on a number of occasions that we have outlawed over 50 such devices through the period of this Government. But there are distinguishing features in relation to the bottom-of-the-harbour operations, namely, that somebody in some part of the transaction had to act illegally and there is a tax liability that to this day remains unpaid and which legally is payable. The operations of those schemes were cut down by the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act 1980. That distinguishes the so called bottom-of-the-harbour schemes from any others. What the Leader of the Opposition is seeking to do is to smear one particular named individual. That is rejected by the Premier of New South Wales. It is rejected by the--
Dr Theophanous-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Prime Minister has used the word 'smear' repeatedly in reply to these questions. All the Opposition has done is raise the question as to whether this gentleman should hold a public office. That is what has been raised.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is making an argument. It is a point of argument. The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I thank the honourable gentleman for his interjection because it helps me in the answer. It underlines the nature of the smear. If there had been no smear, if the Leader of the Opposition had genuinely sought information, he would have raised the question not only in relation to Mr John Reid but also in relation to Mr David Moore, the Chairman of the New South Wales Public Service Board, who was appointed by Mr Wran and whom Mr Wran recently confirmed as being a continuing fit and proper person to hold that post.
If there is any guilt in relation to these actions, it is guilt that must be shared between the two. But we assert that there is no guilt; that there is innocence. Again and again the Leader of the Opposition refuses to accept the proposition that the Commissioner of Taxation has very plainly stated that tax liabilities had been paid; nothing

had been evaded; there are no obligations under the recoupment legislation; and in relation to taxation, the companies as they were sold were in the clear. The fact that the Leader of the Opposition cannot accept that point emphasises again and again the nature of the smear. It emphasises again and again that the Leader of the Opposition ought to apologise. If there was one shred of decency in his soul, one shred of generosity in his heart, he would have apologised days or even weeks ago. This man, having thrown mud, having thrown dirt, wants to grovel in it himself.
TAX AVOIDANCE
Mr BAUME-I ask the Treasurer: Has the Commissioner of Taxation written off the tax apparently avoided before the Government's successful anti-avoidance campaign in recent years blocked $3,OOOm in evident claims? Are assessments still existent for this money? Does the Treasurer expect to recoup these funds under preexisting legislation, including Curran schemes before they were blocked with special legislation from 1977? Has the Commissioner had recent legal success in pursuing this money following a changed view by the courts of these matters?
Mr HOWARD-The honourable member for Macarthur has raised a very important question in this debate about tax avoidance.
Mr Uren--He would be a specialist.
Mr HOWARD-This point is material if honourable members are really interested in recovering unpaid tax. The Opposition has frequently argued that the defect in the Government's approach until the passage in May 1981 of the new anti-avoidance section-Part IVA, which meant that anything caught was struck down from that date-was essentially that it was like closing the stable door after the horse had bolted. The reality, of course, is that just because in individual cases the Government had passed specific legislation, that did not of itself mean that the Commissioner of Taxation had given up trying to raise assessments under the law that existed prior to the bringing into operation of those amendments.
Perhaps the most spectacular example of the operation of that principle is in respect of the Curran scheme, which is still, in my view, the most notorious in terms of revenue loss of the tax avoidance arrangements that have emerged in this country in recent times. In respect of that scheme, legislation with effect from 17 August 1977 was passed by this Government a few years ago. I confirm to the House that just because that legislation operated from 17 August 1977 it ought not

2262 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Questions without Notice

to be assumed that the Commissioner has accepted without demur people who entered into Curran schemes prior to that date. In fact, he has challenged a very large number of those Curran schemes. He has indeed had very recent and very important success in the Supreme Court of New South Wales, where Mr Justice Rogers has struck down a fairly representative example of a Curran scheme having been entered into long before August of 1977, under the law that existed at that time, on the very simple proposition that the arrangement of the scheme did not come within the precise circumstances that were sanctioned by the High Court in the original Curran case in 1974.
I say in answer to the honourable member for Macarthur that under the administration of this Government not only has ad hoc legislative sanction been adopted, followed by general antiavoidance legislation, but also even prior to that the Commissioner of Taxation ~was vigorously pursuing, under the law then existing, examples of these tax avoidance arrangements in a way that will be to the ultimate benefit of revenue to a much larger measure than honourable gentlemen opposite may imagine.
FAMILY TRUST
Mr FRY-I ask the Deputy Prime Minister: Does he recall the Canberra Times on 26 November 1977 reporting his statement to a Press conference that his family trust was a way of avoiding tax? Does he still use his family trust for tax avoidance? If not, when did he stop? If so, has he told the Prime Minister about it?
Mr ANTHONY-Opposition members are really chasing people. They normally do so in the House but apparently they are looking up old quotes. I mentioned in the election campaign in 1977 that I was party to a family trust. That family trust was formed basically to try to avoid death duties.
Mr Armitage-Aha!
Mr ANTHONY-That was the basic reason for which it was formed. It was to try to protect the interests of my children, as many other Australians do.
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the Australian delegation to the thirty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly 1981.

AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF ANIMAL HEALTH
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report prepared by the Australian Bureau of Animal Health on the Australian National Animal Health Laboratory and Exotic Diseases.
TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE AUTHORITY
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to section 30K of the Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973, I present the annual report of the Temporary Assistance Authority for the year ended 30 June 1982 together with a statement outlining the action taken during the year on reports made to the Minister.
ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ACTIVITIES OF THE AUSTRALIAN
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION EMPLOYEES AND BUILDERS
LABOURERS FEDERATION
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report of the Royal Commission into the Activities of the Australian Building Construction Employees and Builders Labourers Federation.
Motion (by Sir James Killen)-by leaveagreed to:
(I) That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of the Report of the Commissioner appointed to inquire into activities of the Australian Building Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers' Federation, and
(2) That the report be printed.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr DAWKINSYes.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr DAWKINS-During Question Time the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made certain accusations about me. I think the Prime Minister said that I was the arch smearer of them all and the honourable member for Kennedy said that I was a worse scourge to Australia than the road toll. I am unlikely to be mortally wounded by the accusations of these moral and intellectual pygmies who would not recognise

Personal Explanations

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2263

truth and honour if it bounced up and hit them in the nose but there are certain matters to which I want to refer because the allegation, at least of the Prime Minister, was based--
MrTuckey-Why are you upset?
Mr DAWKINS-If the honourable member for O'Connor wants to keep that up I will deal with him later.
Mr TuckeyWhere would you like to do it?
Mr DAWKINS-I have got plenty on you! As soon as I get the chance--
Mr Tuckey-- What about your air tickets?
Mr DAWKINSYou ought to be in prison.
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the honourable member for O'Connor that he should not interject while a member has the indulgence of the Chair to make a personal explanation. I warn him to cease doing so. I ask the honourable member for Fremantle to withdraw his last statement.
Mr DAWKINSI withdraw, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle has my indulgence to continue his personal explanation.
Mr DAWKINS-Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister's allegation was based on the suggestion that in supporting my Leader, in seconding a motion concerning the appointment of Mr John Reid, I had engaged in a smearing activity, or words to that effect. I am not precisely sure of the Prime Minister's interpretation of the word -smear'. I would have thought a smear is when somebody, falsely, makes unsubstantiated allegations about an individual and does not attempt to provide any justification for those allegations. Of course that is completely false in the case of the motion which was moved by the Leader of the Opposition and supported by me. The Prime Minister has sought to unilaterally change the nature of that motion. What that motion set out to show, what it successfully demonstrated and what the debate which followed it effectively demonstrated, was that Mr Reid was associated with companies which did end up in the hands of the Maher organisation. In the process of the dispOSition of those companies it has now been admitted, certainly by other directors involved, that tax of $43,000 was avoided in the process.
What has to be remembered is that that motion and that whole debate did not just appear as some sort of apparition. The debate was raised because this gentleman was nominated by the Prime Minister to conduct what he seems to think is a fundamentally important review of the Public Service

because the Public Service is finding it difficult to deal with tax dodgers and other kinds of crooks. Therefore anybody who is going to be involved in that sort of inquiry must be absolutely beyond reproach. It was perfectly justified for us, for the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and me to examine carefully the credentials of Mr Reid because if it could be established that Mr Reid had engaged in the sorts of practices which made the task of the Public Service impossible-as the Prime Minister maintained-why on earth would he be the appropriate person to not only conduct the review but also provide the sorts of recommendations to deal with that sort of practice. What I did on that occasion was a perfectly justified exercise. I am absolutely astonished that the Prime Minister has been totally incapable of adequately defending or rebutting the serious allegations which have been made.
The other point I want to make is that there is no suggestion of me or the Leader of the Opposition requiring the protection of parliamentary privilege to deal with these matters. Either of us is perfectly happy to debate with the Prime Minister or that nong, the honourable member for Kennedy, at any time and in any place. In conclusion, if I ever descend to the bottom of the gutter I will find that the Prime Minister has been comfortably established there for years.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy)-I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr KATTERI wish to make a very brief one, MrSpeaker.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr KATTER-I resent being called a pygmy. Perhaps I am a little sunburnt but I am not a pygmy.
CIRCULATION OF NOTES
Mr SPEAKER-It has been brought to my attention that today a number of notes, which purport to come from one honourable member addressed to another but in fact have not, have been circulating in the House. Although they bear the signature of an honourable member he is not the author of the notes. It is occasioning very considerable discomfort to some honourable members. It is a very puerile and childish procedure. I ask all honourable members, if they receive such a letter, to ask for identification from the alleged signatory.

2264 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Australia-United States Logistic Support

AUSTRALIA-UNITED STATES MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
ON LOGISTIC SUPPORT-FURTHER DEVELOPMENT
Ministerial Statement
Mr SINCLAIR (New England--Minister for Defence)-by leave-On 25 March 1980, the Parliament was informed that a Memorandum of Understanding on Logistic Support had been signed between the Government of Australia and the Government of the United States of America. We were told the ANZUS Council agreement said there should be more definitive understandings about the continued availability of the supply and support of defence equipment which we procure from the United States. This Memorandum of Understanding contains an important body of principle for logistic support to the Australian Defence Force during peacetime, during periods of international tension or in circumstances of armed conflict.
The Memorandum of Understanding included, at the time of signing, only a single annex-annex A-titled 'Co-operative Logistics Supply Support Procedure'. However it called for review meetings at least annually, and provided for the addition of further annexes reflecting agreed implementing arrangements. Since then, negotiations conducted with the United States Department of Defence have resulted in five additional annexes, sponsored by Australia, being accepted by United States authorities. These cover procedures for advancement of normal lead times for purchase of weapons and munitions, facilitation of cooperative logistic support between Australia and other countries in the south-west Pacific area, exchange of information of equipment plans and programs, technology transfer, and activation and expansion of the Australian defence production base in certain circumstances.
The procedures have now been formally accepted by both governments, and become an integral part of the Australia-United States Memorandum of Understanding on Logistic Support. They give further recognition to the special relationship between Australia and the United States in defence matters. I now table these documents.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-by leave-The Opposition does not object to the Australia-United States Memorandum of Understanding on Logistic Support although there are some matters in the documents which are of concern and there are other matters related to the purpose of the documents which are of greater concern. I raise one matter contained in annex C which seems to place

a limitation on activities of the Australian Government in the Pacific area in respect of its obligation there. The Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) will be aware, as he has been Acting Foreign Minister on a number of occasions, that there are certain problems relating to United States law on protection of United States vessels catching migratory fish. The Minister will be aware that serious problems of that kind arose with Papua New Guinea a very short time ago.
Under the Memorandum of Understanding the Australian Government would not be able to provide assistance to a Pacific country were that country in dispute with the United States in respect of its migratory fishing laws. That may seem to be an exaggerated case but I think I should direct the Minister's attention to events leading up to Vanuatu's independence to show how an artificial situation which would prevent Australia
from providing assistance can quite easily evolve. An American based company tried to set Vanuatu up as an economic colony and tax haven. Suppose that company had created a dispute involving United States fishing vessels. Under the Memorandum of Understanding the President of the United States would have been obliged by the law of the United States to prevent Australia from rendering assistance involving military equipment provided to it by the United States. That is a serious matter because it affects our ability to carry out our functions in the Pacific.
There is a more serious question arising out of the whole area of defence procurement and defence supply and the availability of logistic and other defence support to the Australian defence forces should a sudden emergency arise. Over the last two years a significant portion of the defence budget has been financed by a rundown in the available supplies for the Australian defence forces to the stage where in some instances they are dangerously low and would not support action by the Defence Force for any long period. There is a growing dependence, and a consequent rundown of Australian capabilities, on the United States of America and other countries for smaller items of defence equipment which have been available from Australian sources in the past but which it is doubted will be similarly available in the future.
I draw attention to representations which were made to the Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner) not long ago relating to the future of the Lithgow Small Arms Factory in response to which the Minister made it quite clear that he could not see a future for that factory as a producer of light defence equipment. I draw attention to a statement made yesterday by the same

Public Accounts Committee

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2265

Minister in which he made it quite clear that the Government was seriously considering discontinuing the manufacture of destroyers in Australia and that it had before it serious proposals for the replacement of follow-on FFGs in United States shipyards-not even from alternative Australian yards. A number of other defence industries are being run down which will cause significant amounts of employment and skills to be dissipated. That includes the defence aircraft industry where substantial retrenchments will take place shortly.
This agreement may provide some comfort in that it suggests that equipment will be made available. One doubts its availability under the pressure of any hostilities in which the United States is involved. Those Ministers who were involved at the time of the Vietnam war will be aware that the supply of equipment is not necessarily available merely because an agreement exists; it is consequent upon the ability of the United States to provide that equipment. The agreement in itself provides some insurance in respect of the provision of equipment for Australia. Unfortunately, that insurance is becoming more and more necessary because of the Government's continuing rundown and neglect of Australia's capacity to provide its own defence equipment.
SOCIAL SECURITY LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE EVIDENTIARY PROCEDURES
MrCONNOLLY (Bradfield)-by leave-This morning's Press carried a number of reports concerning certain documents that the Joint Committee of Public Accounts requires in its inquiry into medical fraud and overservicing. Honourable members may be aware that at a hearing of the Public Accounts Committee yesterday the Crown Solicitor refused to provide documents that the Committee had summonsed him to provide. The Crown Solicitor argued that, given professional privilege between a solicitor and client, he was unable to provide the documents unless his client, the Commonwealth, agreed to their being made available. Later in the day, in answering a question in this House, the Acting Attorney-General (Mr N. A. Brown) made some comments on the fact that the Committee had formally summonsed the Crown Solicitor to produce the documents, and went on to say that he had exercised his discretion to assert legal professional privilege.

Lest there be any misunderstanding about the Committee's position on this matter, the Committee felt an explanation to the House was necessary. The documents required by the Committee concern a number of cases of suspected fraud by doctors which were the result of investigations by the Victorian office of the Department
of Health and which were referred to the Australian Federal Police and the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Melbourne. The Committee has
examined a number of actual cases in order to ascertain the way they have been handled by the Department of Health and the police. To conclude this examination, we need to investigate how these cases were dealt with by the Crown Solicitor's Office. Allegations have been made by a number of witnesses that the Crown Solicitor's Office has not acted with due diligence in pursuing possible cases of fraud. It is important, in fairness to the officers concerned, that the Committee be able to test this evidence so that the Committee can give the Parliament and the Government a report of substance and merit upon which policy can be developed.
The terms of reference of this inquiry were prepared with the full support of the Government and successive Ministers for Health. As the Parliament would be aware, the Committee has been asked by the Minister for Health to table a progress report next month so that he will be able to initiate remedial action within his Department as soon as possible. Thus the claim by the Crown Solicitor for privilege on behalf of his client, the Commonwealth, would appear to be inconsistent in relation to the Government's wish that the inquiry proceed expeditiously. The Parliament has empowered the Committee under the Public Accounts Committee Act 1951 to summons persons to appear before the Committee and to produce documents. These and related provisions are spelt out in sections 13, 17 and 19 of that legislation.
The Committee does not use its statutory powers without careful consideration, although it has used these provisions for over 30 years of its investigations. The minutes of the Public Accounts Committee show, for example, that as far back as 1954, in the context of its inquiry into the Australian Aluminium Production Commission, the then Solicitor-General, Sir Kenneth Bailey, advised the Chairman of the Committee that, as witnesses' rights and duties depend on a summons, it would be advisable for the Committee to have witnesses summonsed to appear, in addition to the usual letter of invitation to attend. Sir Kenneth subsequently appeared before the Committee.

2266 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Public Accounts Committee

With respect to the Committee's current inquiry into medical fraud and overservicing, the Committee has previously summonsed officers of the Department of Health and the Australian Federal Police to provide documents on individual cases. The Crown Solicitor has not been singled out for special treatment; nor should he, as in this case he does not appear before the Committee as an adviser, but as the officer responsible for the conduct of the Crown Solicitor's Division which has been the subject of allegations. Officers of the Department of Health and the Federal Police responded fully to summonses and have provided the Committee with documents concerning the same cases covered by the summons to the Crown Solicitor. The Committee thus already has a great deal of documentation on the seven cases in question. The files already provided to the Committee include a number of documents originating in the Victorian Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office. The Committee, of course, holds such files on a strict confidential basis.
Early in its inquiry into medical fraud and overservicing the Committee was concerned not to place individual public servants in a difficult situation when giving evidence and providing documents, given section 130 (I) of the Health Insurance Act, which requires officers not to divulge information on individual doctors except in the performance of their duties. The Committee therefore sought an opinion from its legal adviser, the Honourable Mr Justice P. B. Toose, CBE., which I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The opinion read as follows-
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
JOINT PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, A.C.T. TEL. 72 7455
LEGAL OPINIONMR JUSTICE TOOSE
Pursuant to section 5 of the Public Accounts Committee Act 1951 the Joint Committee of Public Accounts was established. The duties of this Committee are specified in section 8 of the Act.
In carrying out its duties inquiries are conducted by the Committee during which officers of the Public Service often appear to give evidence. On occasions the appearances of such officers are voluntary while on other occasions the officers appear under summons to attend.
In this connection from time to time the problem arises as to whether the officers are completely free to give evidence or whether they are prevented by Law from disclosing information that is acquired by them in the course of their duties.
The associated question also arises as to whether the Committee can guarantee witnesses immunity from proceedings arising out of their giving evidence.

For example, section 130 of the Health Insurance Act 1973 provides:
(I) A person shall not, directly or indirectly, except in the performance of his duties, or in the exercise of his powers or functions, under this Act, and while he is, or after he ceases to be, an officer, make a record of, or divulge or communicate to any person, any information with respect to the affairs of another person acquired by him in the performance of his duties, or in the exercise of his powers or functions, under this Act.
Penalty: $500.
(2) A person who is, or has been, an officer shall not, except for the purposes of this Act, be required:
(a) to produce in court any document that has come into his possession or under his control in the performance of his duties or functions under this Act; or
(b) to divulge or communicate to a court any matter or thing that has come under his notice in the performance of any such duties or functions.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions of this section, an officer may:
(a) if the Minister certifies that it is necessary in the public interest that any information acquired by the officer in the performance of his duties, or in the exercise of his powers or functions, under this Act, should be divulged, divulge that information to such persons as the Minister directs;
(b) divulge any such information to any prescribed authority or person; or
(c) divulge any such information to a person who, in the opinion of the Minister, is expressly or impliedly authorised by the person to whom the information relates to obtain it.
(4) An authority or person to whom information is divulged under sub-section (3), and any person or employee under the control of that authority or person, shall, in respect of that information, be subject to the same rights, privileges, obligations and liabilities under sub-sections (I) and (2) as if he were a person performing duties under this Act and had acquired the information in the performance of those duties.
(5) Nothing in this section prohibits the publication of statistics by the Commission or by the Commonwealth statistician but such statistics shall not be published in a manner that enables the identification of an individual patient or an individual practitioner.
(6) In this section, "officer" means a person performing duties, or exercising powers or functions, under, or in relation to, this Act.
In addition, guidelines on official conduct of Commonwealth public servants were announced by the Prime Minister in October 1979. This statement referred inter alia to proposed guidelines for official witnesses appearing before parliamentary committees. (See pages II to 14 of statement).
Subsequently, the guidelines were promulgated, the relevant guidelines being as follows:
Statutory Committees
32. The Public Works Committee Act and the Public Accounts Committee Act provide for the summoning of witnesses and raise some special considerations: e.g. in section 23 of the Public Works Committee Act special provision is made in relation to the hearing of evidence in confidential matters.

Public Accounts Committee

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2267

33. In these and similar cases the special provisions of the relevant Act take precedence.
It is important to examine the power of the Committee to summon witnesses and the privileges and protection of witnesses provided in the Public Accounts Committee Act 1951.
Section 13 of that Act makes provision for the Committee to summon a person to appear before it to give evidence and produce documents. The ancillary power to issue a warrant in the case of disobedience to a summons is provided in section 14.
Section 15 requires a person on whom a summons has been served to appear.
Section 16 then provides as follows,
A person shall not knowingly dissuade or prevent a person from obeying a summons under section 13.
Section 17 of the Act provides:
A person summoned to appear before the Committee shall not, without just cause (proof whereof shall lie upon him) refuse -
(a) to be sworn or make an affirmation;
(b) to answer a question put to him by the Committee or by any member thereof; or
(c) to produce a document which he is required by the Committee or by a member thereof to produce.
The privileges and protection of witnesses is covered by section 19, which is as follows:
(I) A person summoned to appear or appearing before the Committee as a witness shall have the same protection and privileges as a witness in proceedings in the High Court.
(2) A person shall not use, cause, intlict or procure any violence, punishment, damage, loss or disadvantage on or to a person for or on account of his having appeared as a witness before the Committee, or for or on account of any evidence lawfully given by him before the Committee.
The question therefore is whether the provisions of the Public Accounts Committee Act are in any way cut down by such provisions as section 130 of the Health Insurance Act 1973.
In considering this question my attention has been drawn to an advising by the Attorney-Genera!'s Department No. 72/3457 of 13 October 1973 in relation to the seeming contlict between sections 25 and 30 of the Public Works Committee Act 1969 and Crimes Act 1914-1973 section 70 and the Public Service Regulations 34 and 35.
There is great similarity between section 30 of the Public Works Committee Act 1969 and section 17 of the Public Accounts Committee Act 1951. In addition there is also great similarity between section 25 of the Public Works Committee Act 1969 and section 19 (I) of the Public Accounts Committee Act 1951.
There is a similarity of concept between the contents of Section 70 of the Crimes Act and Section 130 of the Health Insurance Act.
In its advising on the Public Works Committee Act 1969 the Attorney-Genera!'s Department quite reasonably draws a distinction between an officer of the Public Service giving evidence voluntarily before the Committee and one who gives evidence under summons to attend, stating 'a public servant who is not summoned to appear before the Committee and who voluntarily appears before the Committee other than in the course of his duty would probably be required by reason of Regulation 35 of the Public Service Regulations to obtain the

authority of his Chief Officer to divulge official information to the Committee'.
That advising also suggests that to get over any possible difficulty in relation to Section 70 of the Crimes Act, the officer concerned could ask the Committee to exercise its discretion under Section 23 of the Public Works Committee Act to take the evidence in private.
The Attorney-Genera!'s advising states in convenient form the purposes of Section 25 of the Public Works Committee Act. This statement is as follows:
The purpose of this section is to extend to witnesses who give evidence before the Committee the same protection and privileges and liabilities as are given by the general law to witnesses who give evidence in proceedings in a superior court. Examples of protection and privileges given to witnesses are the rule that witnesses are privileged from arrest or civil process when going to, attending at, and returning from the place of trial, and the rule that witness may refuse to answer a question on the ground that the answer may tend to expose the witness, or the husband or wife of the witness to any kind of criminal charge or penalty or forfeiture. As to liabilities in civil or criminal proceedings the rule of law is that no action, whether of defamation or otherwise, lies against a witness in respect of evidence given by him in the course of legal proceedings. The remedy against a witness who has given or procured false evidence is by means of the criminal law.
The same comment would of course apply to the purposes of Section 19 of the Public Accounts Committee Act 1951.
It should of course be noted that sections such as section 130 of the Health Insurance Act 1973, while requiring officers to observe secrecy contain certain exceptions. The first exception is contained in section 130 (I). This exception anticipates that an officer will disclose information in the performance of his duties. It is my view that the giving of evidence before a statutory committee is a part of the duties that an officer must perform in relation to an Act under which he functions. The other exceptions are contained in section 130 (2), section 130 (3) and section 130 (5). The exceptions referred to in sections 130 (2), 130 (3) (c) and section 130 (5) are not relevant to the present matter. The exception contained in section 130 (3) (b) is also not relevant as the authorities prescribed by the regulations are the Medical Boards of each State. However, the exception contained in section 130 (3) (a) could well be relevant. Any officer who wishes to give evidence voluntarily before the Committee and who wishes to obtain full protection such as the Minister's Certificate would provide, should refer the matter to his Permanent Head with a view to obtaining the necessary Certificate from the Minister. If, however, he does not wish to take this course he may be content to rely on such protection as section 130 (I) of the Public Accounts Committee Act 1951 itself provides. Any officer who actually appears before the Committee whether voluntarily or under summons has the full protection under section 19 of the Public Accounts Committee Act 1951. When an officer appears before the Committee it is then for the Committee to determine what evidence shall be given and whether or not it will be given in camera or in public.
In these circumstances if an officer operating under the Health Insurance Act 1973 wishes to make a submission or to give evidence voluntarily before the Committee he may feel it prudent to consult with his Permanent Head with a view to obtaining the Minister's Certificate. If, however, such an officer is summoned to attend by the Committee bringing with him such documents as the summons specified then he must do so irrespective of the attitude of any of his superior officers. If after a summons has been served on an officer to attend and a superior officer or any other person endeavours to dissuade him or take any other steps to prevent his appearance such a superior officer or other person would be committing an

2268 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Public Accounts Committee

offence under section 16 of the Public Accounts Committee Act 1951. If any action is taken against the person after having appeared as a witness the person taking such action would be guilty of an offence under section 19 (2) of that Act.
When an officer is summoned to attend and is then required to give evidence on matters which will ordinarily be covered by the requirements of secrecy then the Committee should give consideration to exercising its discretion to hear the evidence in camera. If the officer requests that the evidence should be taken in camera the committee should give this request great weight in exercising its discretion. If the Committee desires to ensure that an officer including a Permanent Head should give evidence or produce documents (including unedited submissions of other officers) the device of a summons should be used specifying the documents which should be produced.
In my view provisions. such as section 130 of the Health Insurance Act 1973 do not cut down the provisions of the Public Accounts Committee Act. but nevertheless may provide the climate within which the Committee determines whether or not the evidence will be heard in private or in public.
The Committee cannot of course guarantee to a witness that no action will be taken against him. However by reason of the statutory provisions and guidelines to which I have referred it is unlikely that any action would be taken against him or if taken would succeed. This observation of course does not apply where action is taken against a witness in relation to his giving false evidence.
The Hon. Mr Justice P. B. Toose. CBE
I July 1982
Mr CONNOLLY-Mr Justice Toose's opinion deals at some length with the desirability of issuing summonses to witnesses who may be affected by section 130 (I) of the Health Insurance Act. This opinion dealt with interpretations of section 130 and took into account the advising of the Attorney-General's Department No. 72/3457 of 13 October 1973, which draws a distinction between an officer of the Public Service giving evidence voluntarily before a Committee and one who gives evidence under summons to attend. The Judge's opinion also took into account the Prime Minister's guidelines for official witnesses appearing before parliamentary committees.
On the basis of this advice the Committee decided in July formally to summons witnesses where information is sought concerning individual doctors or other evidence that could be affected by section 130 (I), rather than simply requesting in such information. It should be emphasised that the Committee's primary concern in issuing summonses to witnesses has been to protect individual officers who are providing information at the request of the Committee. As the Crown Solicitor was being asked to attend as a witness and to provide documentation, it would have been inconsistent not to have protected him by a summons. It is also worth noting that in appearing before the Public Accounts Committee yesterday, the Crown Solicitor stated that he appreciated the protection afforded by a summons.

The Committee believes that the claim of professional privilege is inappropriate where the conduct of the Crown Solicitor's Division itself in the cases in question is under scrutiny. The Committee must be in a position to examine the activities of the Crown Solicitor's Office which involve the expenditure of Commonwealth funds. Furthermore, I am advised that a solicitor for a party in court proceedings cannot claim privilege where the solicitor's own conduct in relation to the proceedings is called into question. This general question is also covered in the 1972 paper prepared by Greenwood and Ellicott on parliamentary committees. In outlining the general powers of committees of the Parliament, they went on to state:
It also follows from the wide powers which committees can exercise that, if ordered to produce a document which contained communications which were privileged before Courts of law (eg. between solicitor and client). a person would be in contempt if he did not do so. Although these privileged communications are usually respected by committees, committees are not restricted in the same way as the Courts.
While the Committee recognises that there is a professional client relationship between the Government and the Crown Solicitor, nevertheless we believe that some means must be found by which the Committee will be able to acquire the necessary information to enable it to complete its inquiries.
The Committee, being a statutory committee of the Parliament, asserts its right under its Act to make the ultimate decision on whether a claim for privilege should be upheld or rejected. It should be noted that if the Crown Solicitor's claim to privilege in this case were to go unquestioned, no committee of the Parliament would be confident of being able to investigate fully the efficiency of departments in relation to the conduct of litigation and prosecutions on behalf of the Commonwealth.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra)-by leave-In the light of the statement made today by the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly) I believe that unless these documents which the Public Accounts Committee has subpoenad from the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor's Office are produced then appropriate parliamentary action must follow. I believe it is important that the integrity of the parliamentary Committee-a committee of the whole of this Parliament-is protected. The documents subpoenaed from the Crown Solicitor's Office are essential to the work of the Committee which, I remind honourable members, is to investigate medical fraud, funds lost from Commonwealth revenue. The terms of reference for the inquiry have the full support of the Government and have had the support of successive Ministers for Health.

Personal Explanation

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2269

The points which we are seeking to clarify from the subpoenaed documents do not relate to individual cases but rather to accusations which have been made about the conduct of the Crown Solicitor's Office in dealing with possible cases of fraud. Is the Acting Attorney-General, the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown), in refusing the Committee these documents, attempting to protect the Attorney-General's Department from the scrutiny of a committee of this Parliament? If these documents are not produced from the Crown Solicitor's Office the authority of committees of this Parliament and, ultimately the Parliament itself, could be undermined.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr SPEAKERThe honourable member for Fremantle has indicated to me that he wishes to make a personal explanation. Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr DawkinsYes, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed to a personal explanation.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-What I want to raise now arises from some interjections as recorded at page 1909 of the Hansard of 12 October where the honourable member for Griffith made certain allegations about me.
Mr Humphreys-The honourable member for Fadden.
Mr DAWKINS-I am sorry; I beg the pardon of the honourable member for Griffith. The honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) was the member for Griffith. We now have a much more distinguished member for Griffith. The honourable member for Fadden is reported in the Hansard of that date as saying:
What about the airline ticket when you cheated on the taxpayers?
Mr Speaker, I did not hear that interjection but you quite properly asked him to withdraw it. Before withdrawing he said:
Nobody claimed it was offensive because it was true.
He then withdrew it. After that incident I went to the honourable member for Fadden and asked him to provide me with the details, because I have absolutely no idea what he was talking about, and to tell me what on earth it was all about. He refused to do so. I said that I thought the proper thing to do, if he was not prepared to disclose to me what lay behind that accusation, would be for him to disclose it to the House. We now find that today the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) and the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) have taken up this cowardly

chant and have continued to make this accusation apparently that I have cheated on the taxpayers in relation to some airline ticket. Those honourable members keep asking the inane question: 'What about the airline ticket?' I am not quite sure what recourse I have to deal with this sort of scurrilous and disgraceful innuendo which has absolutely no basis in fact. If they are not prepared to come forward and disclose the basis of this allegation-I cannot get up every day and ask for withdrawals in relation to these sorts of interjections-then, Mr Speaker, I think it should be within your authority to deal with them.
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the honourable member for Fremantle that I have given him indulgence to make a personal explanation. In the event of interjections I can only deal with them as interjections; I have no overriding authority under the Standing Orders for any blanket prohibition.
BUDGET ESTIMATES
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's failure to base its 1982 Budget on correct estimates.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.1)-The matter which the Opposition brings before the Parliament this time is a very serious one. We are alleging that the 1982 Budget has been falsified by deliberately adopting figures which were unreal but which enabled the Government to produce a lower Budget deficit than would otherwise have been the case. The Government did this because of its desire to introduce a Budget with electorally attractive features. It hoped to be able to hold an early election and wanted an attractive Budget for that purpose. It wanted an early election because it saw 1983, and I guess still sees 1983, as a terrible year for Australia, a year in which the economy will bottom out much more than it is at present. It wanted an election before the full impact of that recession hits the Australian economy. In that situation the Budget goodies, the tax cuts and other measures which were announced in August of this year in the Budget, are not intended to last. The strategy was that the Government would

2270 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Budget Estimates

hold an early election and that those Budget goodies would be withdrawn after the election, just as they were in 1977 when exactly the same kind of strategy was undertaken by this Government, implemented and carried out, the tax cuts and other measures being taken away in the 1978 Budget.
Let us look at the evidence of the falsification of this Budget. Firstly, I acknowledge that there are always difficulties in estimating many items on both sides of the Budget. But that does not explain what has happened in respect of some key items in this year's Budget. Firstly, in regard to unemployment benefits, the amount of expenditure on this item in the Budget was quite patently false. The Budget forecast was for a marked increase in unemployment and yet the amount for unemployment benefits expenditure was based on an assumed average figure for unemployment benefit recipients in the year 1982-83. This was only 4,000 above the figure for such recipients in June of this year and 10,000 below the July figure. The Government was assuming that the average figure for this financial year would be less than the figure that it started off with in the first month of this year despite the fact that the Budget said that there would be some marked increase in unemployment. This clearly shows that this figure was a patently false figure. It was undoubtedly a deliberate understatement. It would not have been possible for the departments advising the Government realistically to provide the Government with the figure contained in the Budget.
We do not accept the argument of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) that this figure was provided by departments and it is, therefore, the departments' fault that it was a massive understatement. If the figure was provided by the departments, we can only say that it must have been a very early estimate way back in the Budget formulation process and not in any wayan up to date figure provided by the departments. It could not have been if they were in any way competent, as we believe they are. Therefore, it is a figure which has been adopted by the Government deliberately to understate the expenditure on unemployment benefits in this year's Budget and so reduce the level of the deficit which is shown in the Budget. The Treasurer's recent amendment to this figure gives weight to our argument. He apparently decided to come clean in this matter because he realised he could not get away with his earlier quite unealistic figure. As we saw last week, he added 65,000 to his original estimate of the average number of unemployment benefit recipients and $300m to the cost of this item. This in turn may well prove to be an underestimate. But

the basic point is that the earlier figure was patently untenable and, I think, quite undefendable. It could have been adopted only to reduce the deficit artificially.
The amount for pay-as-you-earn income tax receipts in the Budget is calculated on the assumption of no change in the level of employment of wage and salary earners. This assumption simply does not square with the estimate of economic growth nor does it square with the now acknowledged large rise in the level of unemployment. There is no doubt that the level of employment will fall and that pay-as-you-earn tax receipts will accordingly be less than the Government estimated in the Budget. It estimated those receipts on the assumption of no decline in the total number of wage and salary earners in employment. Last year, with a growth of non-farm gross product of 2.3 per cent, we had almost no rise in the level of employment.
In the year to July of this year there was a rise of 3,000-virtually no rise-in employment and a growth in the non-farm sector of the economy of 2.3 per cent. This year the Government is estimating no growth at all in output in the non-farm sector, but is still estimating that we will have much the same employment result as the previous year-that is, that there will simply be no change in the level of employment. That just simply does not hang together. If we have no growth in employment when we have a 2.3 per cent growth in output and then output falls to zero surely to God we must expect that the level of employment to fall considerably. That would be the logical assumption unless one is saying that we will have -no growth in productivity this year and that all of the fall in output will be reflected in the abolition of growth of productivity rather than reflected in the level of employment. I think that is just a totally untenable proposition and one which I would like to hear the Government argue. Now that there is an acceptance that there will be a large rise in the number of unemployment benefit recipients and a large rise in the level of unemployment generally, it simply does not hang together to say that we will have no decline in employment. We are expecting an increase now. The figures given by the Treasurer last week show a rise of 128,000 in the number of unemployment benefit recipients. In that situation we must expect that there will be some decline in employment. Otherwise, the Treasurer is saying that all of the potential new entrants to the work force will, in fact, join the work force and get unemployment benefit. That is just not a defendable argument. Quite clearly, there will be a decline in the level of employment. The Budget assumption

Budget Estimates

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2271

about that is false. It was quite clearly false at the time when the Budget was produced. This has only been made more obvious by the Treasurer's acknowledgement in respect of the large increase in the level of unemployment which he has now put forward. If we say that there is to be a decline in the level of employment of at least one per cent-that is probably an underestimate of what will happen in the course of this year-then the pay-as-you-earn tax receipts are overstated by some $210m.
The Government's estimate of non-pay-as-youearn tax receipts assumes that there will be no loss of revenue through tax avoidance. Last year there was a provision for a loss of $300m. The Treasurer has now declared that tax avoidance does not exist any more. He has abolished tax avoidance by fiat. He has declared that it does not exist any more; therefore, it does not exist any more. This exercise in self-delusion has been incorporated in the Budget. We simply do not accept this figure. The fact that some tax avoidance schemes have been stopped does not mean that others are not being devised and implemented; indeed, it is certain that they are. To make no allowance for this-inadequate as that allowance was in previous years-is simply unreal.
There has been an increase in the late payment penalty tax of 10 per cent to 20 per cent. The Budget estimate is that this will raise a further $615m. This is a very large amount and one which the Treasurer has utterly failed to justify in previous discussion in the House other than to say that it has been provided by his Department. That is not good enough. On what basis was this figure given by the Department? Was' it the top of the range of possible estimates? What were those other estimates? What assumptions were made in assessing that kind of figure? The Treasurer has given us no idea of the kinds of intructions that he gave in seeking that kind of figure. We need to know much more about that before we can accept a figure of $615m which gives all the appearances of virtually having been plucked out of the air. The Treasurer should be able to answer these questions if he really believes this figure to be justified and not the arbitrary amount it appears to be. The Budget estimate was that this recoupment tax measure would raise $255m this financial year. Again, we have been given no basis for that estimate. Given the amendments to it that are now occurring and the delay in its introduction, the amount gathered this year could be much less than the Budget estimate.
The next area is the drought package which was announced, as honourable members will recall, precisely two weeks after the Budget. That is

when the Government discovered the drought and introduced a very generous drought relief package, with no costing given at that stage. When legislation was brought before the House a couple of weeks later it was said to cost $356m, which is no small sum. Since then the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) has said that it might cost $400m. This is a very large addition indeed to government expenditures and to the deficit. Yet it was not allowed for in the Budget. Why was it not allowed for in the Budget? Does the Government really expect us to believe that when drawing up the Budget it was not aware of the drought which has been going on for ages and which has been described as the worst drought this century? Clearly an item of that size should have been in the Budget. To say that it was decided only two weeks after the Budget is an unreal assertion. The fact that it was not introduced until two weeks later indicates to us that the Government did not want it in the Budget because it would have added to the size of the deficit and increased criticism of the Government in areas which it regards as important.
The drought relief announcement two weeks later, with no costing, can only be seen as a deliberate policy to sneak in an expensive package without its budgetary impact being clear at a time when the Budget was being evaluated in the community. So it was undoubtedly a deceptive device of comiderable proportions. Also in regard to the drought, it seems-to us that the Government took little account of the impact of the decline in farm incomes on income tax receipts this year. Farm incomes will clearly fall considerably this year because of the drought and falling commodity prices. Tax receipts on farm incomes are likely to fall by $400m or more this year. But the Budget Papers make no mention of this when considering the amount of non-pay-as-you-earn tax that will be collected this year. They talk about an increase of 14.9 per cent and say that this is attributable to some tax avoidance measure-which. I have already gone over-but do not say anything about the reduction effects brought about by the decline in farm income which, in turn, is partly attributable to the drought.
I could mention other areas which are highly dubious such as company tax, health insurance rebates, Public Service salaries and so on, but enough has been said to indicate that this Budget was compiled on the basis of figures which not only are rubbery but also are dearly and demonstrably false. They collectively mean that the Budget deficit is understated by $1 billion to $1.5 billion, for the clear reason that the Government wanted as attractive a Budget as possible without

2272 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Budget Estimates

having to shift too far from its previous position that an increased deficit was bad. It wanted to keep that increase as low as possible whilst introducing an array of what it hoped would be electorally attractive measures, such as income tax cuts.
In this respect the 1982 Budget is, of course, a rerun of the 1977 Budget. Honourable members will recall that the day after the 1977 Budget was announced the then Treasurer said that the figures were rubbery. This has been widely reported as being so because the Department of the Treasury's figures had not been accepted in the Budget formulation process. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) wanted an early election and wanted to produce a Budget that provided tax cuts but did so without blowing out the Budget deficit. More optimistic figures, especially on the revenue side, were therefore adopted. The Cabinet simply adopted reworked figures produced by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. The result was that the deficit blew out in that year by about $1.1 billion because of the totally unreal figures which had been included in the 1977 Budget. What happened after 1977? Of course, the tax cuts which had been used in the 1977 election, the fistful of dollars which honourable members will recall, were taken away in the 1978 Budget by increases not only in income tax but also in other areas. The tax cuts introduced in February 1978 were taken away in the August 1978 Budget. They did not last very long.
This, of course, has great relevance to the matters we are considering now. This is the scenario which the Government set out to pursue in adopting this year's Budget. It set out to adopt a Budget which it hoped would be politically attractive and would offer various goodies to the electorate which it could use as the basis for and early election. It wanted an early election because it is dead scared of an election in 1983. It knows that will be a disastrous year for the Australian economy. It therefore adopted a Budget which is patently based on false figures. If the Government won an early election it would change the Budget by bringing in tax increases to take away the tax cuts which have been introduced for one purpose only, that is, to enable the Government to win an election. I am sure that the Government would not win an election even with those tax cuts. That is the strategy which has been adopted. It is a deceitful strategy for which this Government should be condemned.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong Treasurer) (3.16) - This matter of public importance goes far beyond simply disagreeing with the Governments Budget or with the economic strategy of the Budget. It alleges that the Government falsified the Budget and adopted deliberately misleading figures. That is the charge the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) has made today. It is a serious charge and I intend to deal with it very directly. It is a charge I do not take lightly because I accept responsibility for the Budget documentation. The documents are presented to the Parliament in my name and I therefore want to address quite directly the charge that has been made by the honourable member for Gellibrand. I hope that in making that charge the honourable member realises the implications of what he has said. I hope he realises that in making that charge he is endeavouring to establish to the Parliament that estimates given in good faith by this Government at the time of the Budget being altered is evidence that this Government has falsified the Budget and in effect has deliberately lied to the Parliament. That is what the honourable member for Gellibrand is alleging.
At the outset, I say to the Parliament that I reject completely the charges that have been made by the honourable member for Gellibrand. The Budget Estimates were presented in good faith. They were presented as my figures. The mischievous way in which the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) endeavoured to use some remarks made by the permanent head of my Department before a commitee in May of this year, in some way to distance the Treasury from me in the preparation of those figures, is really quite ludicrous. Of course Mr Stone was right when he said in a formal sense they are my documents. Of course they are. They are documents which are presented to the Parliament in a ministerial name, but that does not alter the fact that the process by which the estimates on unemployment benefit were arrived at was a process of consultation and advice, involving not only the Treasury Department but also the Department of Employment and Industrial Relations and the Department of Social Security.
The first thing we ought to do in this debate is to get into perspective what we are talking about. We are talking about outlays in the 1982-83 Budget of over $47,000m. We are talking about an adjustment in unemployment benefit payments, on the basis of more up-to-date information, of about $300m. Yet, principally on that basis the honourable member for Gellibrand chooses to brand this Government as dishonest in the presentation of its Budget documentation. He accuses

Budget Estimates

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2273

this Government of misleading the Parliament, of falsifying the figures.
Mr Robert BrowoFor the second time.
Mr HOWARD-That is right. It was not done inadvertently. The Opposition cannot duck away from the import of those words. I wish, therefore, to take the honourable member for Gellibrand back to 1975. Let me take him back to the one and only Budget that was presented by his present leader. Let me take him back to 8 October 1975, when in answer to a question from one of his own colleagues the then Tr.easurer, now the Leader of the Opposition, said:
. . . the rate of increase in average weekly earnings is faIling back at this stage to a much lower level than we had projected when we prepared the Budget. We prepared the Budget on projections of a 22 per cent increase in average weekly earnings. In fact average weekly earnings are now increasing at the rate of 17 per cent a year . . . because the increase in average weekly earnings is falling. receipts too will be falling . . . if that projection continues . . . the deficit will be larger than we had anticipated when we put the Budget together.
That was said on 8 October 1975, not two months after the Leader of the Opposition presented his Budget.
Mr Willis-What does that prove?
Mr HOWARD-It proved then, as is the case now, that estimates presented in good faith at the time of the Budget can turn out to be wrong. In fact, if that fall in AWE had been projected through into pay-as-you-earn receipts it would have implied an enlargement of the deficit and a reduction of receipts of the order of $700m. Is the honourable member for Gellibrand admitting that his own leader falsified that Budget? Is he admitting that his own leader came into the Parliament in 1975 and falsified those figures? Is he suggesting that that action amounted to a misleading of the Parliament? Of course he is not. The evidence is even greater than that. Over the last 10 years there has been only one occasion-that 10 year period embraces the McMahon Government, the Whitlam Government and the Fraser Government-on which the payment of unemployment benefits in the final outcome has been lower than the estimate presented at the time of the Budget. In 1972 the outcome was 34.5 per cent higher than the Budget estimate, in 1973 it was 39 per cent higher, in 1974 it was 68.9 per cent higher, in 1975 it was 40 per cent higher, in 1976 it was 28 per cent higher, in 1977 it was 19 per cent higher, in 1978 it was II per cent higher, in 1979-80 it was 7.3 per cent lower, in 1980-81 it was 3.9 per cent higher. Last year it was 12.3 per cent above the estimate. On the basis of the revised estimate, we are talking about a figure that is about 16 per cent above the Budget estimate.

What those figures demonstrate is not that this Government has misled the Parliament but, more than anything else, the notorious variability and
volatility of that estimate. I am not standing here today saying that the Crean Budgets were falsified or that the Hayden Budget was falsified, nor has the honourable member for Gellibrand the right to come into the Parliament and say that this year's Budget was falsified. The truth is that we are dealing with a figure which is notoriously difficult to estimate. We are dealing with a notoriously volatile area of economic estimates. It does not really enhance the status of the honourable member for Gellibrand in this place to make wild allegations about Ministers having misled the Parliament. Those figures were presented in good faith. They did not represent, as he has falsely claimed to the Parliament, an act of misleading, deceit or dishonesty on the part of this Government.
Budget estimates are meant to be the best estimates that can be put together on the basis of official advice at the time a Budget is presented. Many circumstances throughout the year can alter the original basis on which the estimates are put together. Those changes can operate in both directions. I have already indicated, for example, that if the existing parity between the Australian dollar and the United States dollar is maintained throughout the rest of this financial year and if the pattern of industrial disputation in Bass Strait is about the same as it was last financial year, we will collect about $200m more in crude oil receipts than we estimated at the time of the Budget. That may not happen. It will depend upon what happens to the exchange rate and to the industrial disputation. If that happens, will the Opposition members say that I fudged that figure as well? Will they say that that figure was falsified? What will happen if interest rates continue to fall?
Mr Robert BrowoYou will make sure they do not.
Mr HOWARD-The honourable member may well sneer. He sneered two months ago too. Over the past couple of months there has been a quite significant fall in interest rates. There could well be changes to the composition of the cost of our public debt charges because they were calculated on the basis of certain rates prevailing at the time the Budget was put together. I am not predicting that that win occur because some of the gains in that area may well be cancelled out if there is an enlargement of the deficit in another area. We can have swings and roundabouts on both sides. The fact that swings and roundabouts occur on both sides does not in any way mean that

2274 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Budget Estimates

this Government, or indeed any other government that presides over those kinds of swings and roundabouts, is misleading the Parliament.
The honourable member for Gellibrand had a go at me over the figure of $615m that was included in the Budget on account of additional tax to be collected through the increase in the late payment penalty. I remind him that we are increasing the penalty from 10 per cent to 20 per cent. I think that that increase is long overdue and I hope it will be strongly supported on both sides of the House. It might be of interest for me to say that it was introduced in 1922 and set at 10 per cent when the long term bond rate was about 5.5 per cent so we have done no more than partially catch up with changes that have occurred since.
The Commissioner of Taxation estimates that at 30 June 1983-that is, the end of the current financial year-about $1 ,925m of outstanding tax will be overdue. Of that total $830m is not the subject of any dispute between the taxpayer and the Commissioner. The assumption has been made-the $615m assumption, the one that the honourable member for Gellibrand tested me to justify-that half of the $830m which is not in dispute, mark you, between the Commissioner and the taxpayer will be paid during 1982-83. I do not think that that is an unreasonable assumption; I do not think that is a top of the head assumption, a false assumption, a misleading assumption or a deceptive assumption. I think it is an eminently reasonable assumption. Of the remainder, the $ 1,095m which is outstanding in respect of disputed assessments, one needs only $270m to be collected to get to the figure of $615m.
One should bear in mind that the great bulk of that money is outstanding under tax avoidance arrangements that have been in dispute with the Commissioner of Taxation and that one of the reasons that a lot of that money has been withheld from the Commissioner of Taxation is that the taxpayer is on to a good bet under the 50-50 arrangement under which he pays 50 per cent down and if at the end of the day he has to pay the other 50 per cent he does not have to pay any late payment penalty on that 50 per cent. That is the arrangement that we are now putting to one side. I think it is a reasonable and proper assumption-it is an assumption that is based on the advice of the Commissioner of Taxation; advice that is not plucked out of the air and not generated for the purposes of putting the Budget together-that at least $270m of the amount outstanding of $ 1,095m will, as a result of the increase in the late payment penalty, indeed be paid. Not only will the increase in the late payment penalty be paid but also it will abolish the 50-50 practice under

which one pays 50 per cent down and the other 50 per cent does not attract any late payment penalty if it is found to be due. I believe that the combination of the new arrangements will result in a large amount of that $1,095m of taxation bt:ing collected. I do not think that is a false figure. That is the basis on which it is put together. I put the explanation on the table. It is for the Parliament to judge whether that is an unreasonable assumption. I do not believe it is and I do not believe for a moment that the charge made by the honourable member for Gellibrand gets to first base so far as that estimate is concerned.

We have the spectacle of the honourable

member coming into this House, making declar-

ations of policy that are different from those of

the Government-I could respect that and dis-

agree with it-but saying that we have fudged the

Budget figuring. He does not produce any real evi-

dence to substantiate that claim. The experience

of his leader, in respect of the one Budget that he

presented, demonstrates how quickly the ground

can shift after a Budget has been brought down.

Apparently it is all right for his leader to come

into this chamber less than two months after

presenting his Budget and say: 'Oh, the average

weekly earnings increase is down from 22 per cent

to 17 per cent-that is $700m. But it is all okay;

there is a reason for it'. But when I come into the

House and say that we have had to revise our

figures on the basis of subsequent information and

on the basis of an assessment given to me within a

couple of weeks before I made that statement in

the House, that amounts heinous crime on my part

to some and on

tshheocpka~thoofrrtohr~

Government, and it constitutes an attempt by the

Government to mislead this Parliament so far as

the Budget is concerned. I reject the charge made

by the honourable member for Gellibrand. It is a

pathetic charge and this is the great onslaught of

the Opposition so far as our Budget is concerned.

The other thing that I find singularly amazing is that the Opposition which has run around since
the Budget calling for a higher deficit is now wringing its hands because it believes that there
will be a higher deficit. Not only is the Opposition falsifying its charges against the Budget but it is
acting in a totally contradictory and disreputable fashion.

Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (3.31)-We
want a more convincing explanation of the figures that have been arrived at for the purpose of the Budget than the explanations that have just been
given to us by the Treasurer (Mr Howard). The claim that has been made by the Opposition concerning the gross inadequacy of the figures upon
which the Budget is based is not without

Budget Estimates

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2275

precedent. The present Treasurer may well express personal concern that his integrity, as Treasurer, is being impugned by some of the claims that are being made by the Opposition. As I say, this situation is not without precedent. It happened in 1977 and the Treasurer of this Government knows that it happened in 1977. The scenario in 1977 was precisely the same as the one we are witnessing at present. The Budget that this Government and this Treasurer introduced makes no sense at all outside the context of an early election. If an early election is not held this Government and this Treasurer will be judged against the adequacy of the Budget which the Treasurer, the Parliament and certainly the Opposition know will fall to pieces as the fiscal year proceeds. It will not stand up and it cannot stand up.
We have made the claim that the Budget was based at least on incorrect estimates. I would go further than that, despite the Treasurer's concern about his integrity being impugned and say that the Budget is deliberately shonky. The Government set out from the start to make it shonky because it was going to create the same sort of scenario that existed in 1977. There was going to be an early election. Everyone knows that that was to be so. A fistful of dollars was to be flaunted again before the Australian people as happened in 1977. On that occasion the then Treasurer, the right honourable member for Flinders (Sir Phillip Lynch), within a matter of days after the Budget had been introduced admitted at the National Press Club that the figures in his Budget were rubbery. They were not just rubbery; we all know that they were crook, and we all know why they were crook. I am suggesting quite firmly-because the situation is essentially the same-that the same position prevails now. This Budget is crook and we have not heard yet an adequate defence from the Treasurer concerning the figures that he, and he alone, is finally responsible for.
I am glad that he referred to the evidence that Mr John Stone gave before the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure. I was at the meeting when Mr Stone gave evidence in response to questioning by the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris). Mr Stone's responses indicate that the Secretary to the Department of the Treasury wanted to distance himself from the Budget, in May of this year, when preliminary consideration was being given to the Budget and shortly after that infamous occasion when a leading Opposition front bencher was expelled from this chamber because he tried to expose what happened in 1977. John Stone said two particular things. First of all he said:

. . . the content of the Budget Papers is the responsibility of the Treasurer, and it is his decision as to what those papers contain.
The second thing he said was:
I am simply making a flat and simple statement that the Budget papers tendered to the Parliament are tendered by the Treasurer. They are his responsibility; they are his papers. He has officials prepare them under his direction. Therefore the content of those papers is his decision.
That was said in May this year. Obviously, John Stone was distancing himself from what the Budget was going to contain. Not only one of the bureaucrats but also members of this Government have distanced themselves from some of the estimates that have been made. We remember the occasion in this House when the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, shortly after the Treasurer said at the National Press Clubinteresting disclosures are made at those National Press Club functions-that he believed Australia's unemployment would 'probably approach about 8 per cent during the early part of next year', stated that his Department believed that unemployment early next year would be slightly over 8 per cent. We know it is going to be a damn sight closer to 10 per cent. However, leaving that aside, the Minister said that unemployment might be slightly over 8 per cent.
When the Minister was challenged to the effect that he was in conflict with the Treasurer, how did he respond? He said: 'I am not responsible for Treasury figures'. Indeed he is not. The Treasurer is responsible for the figures that have been given. I will go through some of them and then come to a total at the end. First of all, in connection with tax avoidance losses, the Treasurer said that overnight tax avoidance had ceased to exist in Australia. We know that tax avoidance has exploded in Australia. Last financial year the total provision in the Budget for this was $300m. I think that involved $220m in individual tax and another $80m in company tax. On the word of the Treasurer, tax avoidance overnight had ceased to exist! Therefore, that provision of $300m was no longer necessary. That was eliminated from the Budget. Not one cent was provided for tax avoidance. How dare this Government suggest such a thing! How dare the Treasurer suggest such a thing! We know the contrary is true. We know there does need to be some provision for tax avoidance. How dare the Treasurer tell the nation that suddenly overnight tax avoidance is dead when the contrary is well know and well understood.
We then had figures, for example, a figure of $870m, plucked out of the air. The Treasurer has not sufficiently answered the question about the

2276 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Budget Estimates

$615m relating to higher penalties for late payments of tax. That provision has not been introduced yet. It has been delayed. The amount that will be collected will be considerably less. That amount together with the estimated $225m from the recovery of company tax in relation to bottom-of-the-harbour cases and $30m from Division 7 taxes from the bottom-of-the-harbour cases comes to $870m. Possibly the figure has been overstated to the extent of about $400m. Of course, I have no firmer ground on which to base my guess that does the Treasurer for the figure he plucked out of the air or for the figure which Treasury officials plucked out of the air on the instructions of the Treasurer. But I tell the Treasurer that my figure will be just as close at the end of this financial year as is his or those of the Treasury advisers.
I now come to the matter of unemployment benefits. The Budget estimates allow for the number of unemployment benefit recipients to rise from an average of 332,000 in 1981-82 to an average of 395,000 in 1982-83. In June this year the total was over 390,000. I do not know when the Budget was finally printed but surely there was opportunity for some provision to have been made and for the adjustments to have been made. In June of this year the number was 390,000. In July of this year it was over 404,000. On 22 August this year the number was 421,000 and on I October this year the figure was over 446,000. The provision in the Budget for the average number of unemployment benefit recipients in this financial year was 395,000. Of course, that figure was crook.
It is likely that the health rebate scheme will cost an additional $50m. I do not have time to go through all the various estimates given in the Budget Papers in connection with that. I instance also the revenue from the tobacco excise which is likely to have been overestimated to the extent of $64m to $70m. It was estimated that the tax on bank transactions would gain $80m during this current year and $200m in a full year. However, there is a possible breach of the Constitution if the Treasurer is expecting to pick up some tax from State government cheque transactions because, of course, the Commonwealth cannot tax State property. I do not know whether the possibility of that tax being imposed on State government cheque transactions is part of the estimate but if it is there will have to be another significant adjustment. Sufficient has been said about the drought fodder subsidy.
Just in the time that is available I draw attention to the inadequacy of the consideration given to those Budget estimates. Consider the Budget

deficit as a percentage of gross domestic product. The estimated gross domestic product for this year comes to $167,400m. If we take the revenue from the crude oil levy-I have other examples too-and liquefied petroleum gas levy as a percentage of GOP, the estimated GOP for this year comes out as $150,619m. That is a difference of $17,000m.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (3.42)-The Opposition is accusing the Government not of adopting a wrong Budget strategy but of deliberately adopting figures that are unreal. I put it to the House that the arguments the Opposition is using are of the sort commonly found in a cow yard after a bull sale. It is very easy, using hypothetical arguments, to prove anything from a Budget. By choice and selective use of items that one takes from a Budget-particularly a Budget of many items and a Budget as large as the national Budget-it is easy to show anything at all. Have honourable gentlemen opposite had no experience even in drawing up a household budget? Have they never noticed that if one deliberately puts in the most conservative likely estimate for every single item in the Budget one ends up with a bottom line that is quite unreal?
In any budget any person or business ends up adopting most likely estimates because to do otherwise would be to end up with a bottom line for the budget that would not be of any help at all. The same applies to national budgeting. When the outcome at the end of the Budget period is reached-a year or whatever-the person who is interested in that budget will find that some figures were overestimates and some were underestimates. That is inevitable. That is something that is inherrent to the process of budgeting. Therefore, if the Opposition were selectively to go through a Budget statement and quarrel selectively about some items it could prove or demonstrate-not very well-that the Budget is a gross overestimate or a gross underestimate. It is quite easy to make a case for either and either case in completely unconvincing.
The suggestion that Treasury officials were somehow or other induced to put up figures that were shonky-I put it to the House that that is a slanderous suggestion-does not stand up. I will look at unemployment benefits. Incidentally, the unemployment benefits error claimed by the Opposition and in this case conceded by the Government is something less than 0.008 per cent of the Budget outlays. It is not significant. There will be

Budget Estimates

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2277

any number of errors, pluses and minuses, of that size in a Budget of that size.
Mr McLean-Are you suggesting they are being political?
Mr HYDEI think they are being very political. I think the Opposition is trying to make a political argument out of something that cannot be argued in budgetary terms. It will just not stand up. The expenditure estimate depends on both the number of unemployed and the number of those unemployed who later apply for the unemployment benefit. It therefore depends on the structure of unemployment itself. As the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has already pointed out, this figure has been a wild item in every Budget, including Australian Labor Party Budgets, and it is not surprising that it is a relatively wild item in this Budget. There is a degree of precision, looking into the future, that just cannot be achieved. It could not be achieved by any member of this House. Honourable members opposite could certainly not get any estimate that was better than that which was achieved by the relevant officials of all three relevant departments.
The Budget forecast assumed that there would be a steady rise in seasonally adjusted unemployment over 1982-83. The forecast assumed that the slow upward trend towards the higher proportion of the unemployed seeking the unemployment benefit would continue in the same manner as in the past few years. Both those forecasts need to be reviewed in the light of events. That is not unusual. The unemployment situation has deteriorated more quickly than was expected. The increase in unemployment has been greater for adult mi\les and therefore the number of those seeking the unemployment benefit has increased faster than unemployment itself has increased.
The spokesman for the Opposition, the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), suggested that the Treasurer had, to use the honourable member's expression, come clean. The truth of the matter is that the Treasurer comes clean on each matter that is of relevance to this House and that it is his responsibility to report to this House. That is the normal course of events. He was frank. He advised the House of the circumstances as they changed. I would not be at all surprised if as the year goes on there are other changes in the Budget-in both directions. Again, I suspect that the House will be told. It is the normal course of events and it ought to surprise no one. The next claim concerned the drought. It was claimed that the drought had been going on for ages.
Mr Robert Brown--Hadn't it?

Mr HYDE-No, not to an extent that affected the Budget. Sure, on a portion of the east coast and close to Canberra the drought goes back to previous years but at the time these Budget estimates were drawn up no one could have predicted the wheat harvest or what would be needed for drought aid. That was unpredictable at that time. That situation has changed and is stili changing. Until the last of the spring rains are through the drought will not be predictable for the winter rainfall areas and even then it will not be predictable for the summer rainfall areas. Frankly, one does not have to know much about droughts to work that out. The-rains have been exceptionally poor except in my State. Neither the good rains in my State nor the very bad rains in the eastern States were predictable at the time these Budget Estimates were drawn up. If anyone can find a way of predicting the weather three or four months into the future I ask him to tell me because there is money in it.
Tax avoidance is essentially dead. If honourable members doubt that tax avoidance is dead they should ask their accountants whether or not they are getting artificial schemes put up to them all the time. The truth of the matter is that the tax avoidance schemes are behind us and that we are in the process of collecting some of the revenues that were lost through earlier avoidance schemes. There was a delightful interjection from the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown). He suggested that the increase in the Budget deficit would drive up interest rates or would mean that interest rates did not fall. I thank him for that. That is a very important concession from the Opposition. He conceded that Budget deficits cause higher interest rates. Indeed, they do. That is a real breakthrough for the Opposition. I remind the honourable member for Hunter that the Opposition was advocating an even bigger Budget deficit. I can quarrel with the Government because the deficit is too large, and I do so. However, I do not see how the Opposition can quarrel with the Government because the deficit is too large and too low at the same time. It had better make up its mind which camp it is in.
Finally, I wish to quote from the editorial in this morning's Canberra Times. It states:
The sudden break in the labour market in the middle of the year caught everyone, including the Treasury--
I emphasise that it refers to the Treasury and not to the Treasurer-
apparently, by surprise. Last Thursday the Treasurer, Mr Howard, announced the revised figure for recipients of unemployment benefits to the Parliament and said that the new estimate, 460,000, compared with the original estimate of 395,000, would add an estimated $300m to Budget outlays during the year.

2278 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Petitions

The Opposition's suggestion that the original estimate was 'rigged' is calumny, and should be recognised as such. Even so, the revised estimate should be treated very cautiously because it is difficult to get from 'unemployed', as defined by the Bureau of Statistics .
It is very difficult to estimate many of these figures, I suggest that it is singularly uncharitable to suggest that when they are out marginally there has been a deliberate attempt to deceive,
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired, The discussion has concluded,
PETITIONS
The Acting Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to t he appropriate Ministers:
Vietnam Veterans
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) that US, Australian and allied forces used huge amounts of toxic chemicals for military purposes, such as Agents Orange, Blue and White, in Vietnam during the war there;
(2) many of these chemicals were, and are, known to be highly dangerous to human health;
(3) Australia's Vietnam veterans and their families are suffering many severe problems which may be due to their exposure to those chemicals; and
(4) the Vietnam Veterans' Association of Australia has been seeking a Royal Commission for well over two years to ensure an independent investigation of these matters.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Parliament of Australia will:
(a) express its support for the Royal Commission; and
(b) urge the Federal Government to establish the Royal Commission immediately.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Dr Blewett, Mr Robert Brown, Mrs Child, Mr Free, Mr Holding, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Kerin, Mr Milton, Mr Mountford, Mr Scott and Mr Wallis.
Petitions received.
Australian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of certain citizens of Australia shows:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian postal service meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any reduction in Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward will destroy the concept of the national postal service and result in:
Increased rates for mail carried outside the capital cities;

A reduction in mail delivery and collection frequencies in non-profitable areas;
The Closure of post offices.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
Australian P('stal Commission
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the house of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens undersigned respectfully showeth:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian postal service truly meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any proposal that Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward be diminished will destroy the concept of the national postal service.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Phillip respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Birney.
Petition received.

Petitions

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2279

Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Indi respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin.
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service.
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery stalf.
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise. deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency. and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, elfective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially. publicly. commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Mallee respectfully showeth:
That the plan by ihe Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the serVice,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery stalf.
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise. deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency. and civil' or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, elfective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Fraser respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices.
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery stalf,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, elfective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fry.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Moore respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the service,
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery stalf,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, elfective public telegram service to mee'tthe needs of

2280 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Petitions

the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disasters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHyde.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the electorate of Newcastle respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to withdraw public telegram facilities and downgrade telegram standards by:
(I) planning to withdraw the 24 hour telegraph service at the Chief Telegraph Office in each capital city and in Canberra and Darwin,
(2) closing country telegraph offices,
(3) increasing telegram charges whilst downgrading the servIce.
(4) withdrawing telegram operating facilities from a large number of suburban and country post offices,
(5) generating serious delays in telegram delivery by reducing standards of service through centralisation of the network and reduction of operating and delivery staff,
will reduce an available means of communications in commercial enterprise, deny the opportunity for people of Australia to make contact with family and friends in times of emergency, and civil or natural disasters, particularly for the 30 per cent of Australians who are not telephone subscribers.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will take measures to ensure the maintenance of an efficient, effective public telegram service to meet the needs of the Australian people socially, publicly, commercially and in times of emergencies and civil or natural disaf,ters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles Jones.
Petition received.
Retirement Benefits: Private Enterprise
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth our concern that:
I. The Income Tax Assessment Act (the Act) and its administration is inadequate in providing retirement benefits for employees in private enterprise.
2. The Commissioner of Taxation (Commissioner) denies deductions necessary to index retirement pensions.
3. Deductions for the self-employed and employed are inadequate.
4. The Commissioner has exercised his discretion improperly by negating a choice the Act allows on investment in Government Securities.
5. The Commissioner's constant alterations to guidelines and lack of communication has created great uncertainty.
6. The Commissioner is acting arbitrarily, and without proper notice in restricting trustee's investments with employers.
7. The Commissioner seeks to apply new actuarial guidelines retrospectively to July 1981.

Your petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, take action to remedy these inadequacies and in particular we pray that action be taken:
(i) To ensure that the Commissioner exercise his discretion only with proper regard to legal principles;
(ii) To ensure that the Commissioner does not delegate to auditors part of his function of administering the Act;
(iii) To enact legislation allowing proper levels of retirement benefits to be provided;
(iv) To ensure that retirement benefits are regulated by a Department with a primarily social welfare function.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received. Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Member of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sand mining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975. take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Enquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received. Slaughter of Marine Mammals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. Since the Australian Whale Protection Act 1980 provides for the banning of importation into Australia of all whale by-products.
2. The Prime Minister has stated that he and his Government support the international banning of whaling.
3. Then consistent with (I) and (2), this Government should immediately legislate to ban the importation of all marine mammal by-products, including the Harp Seal of Canada.
4. Through the Australian delegate in the United Nations General Assembly the Prime Minister should state his Government's support for an international ban on the slaughter of any marine mammal for commercial reasons.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that consistent with legislation on whaling, the Government should ban the importation of marine mammal by-products and support an international ban on slaughter of any marine mammal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.

Petitions

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2281

Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose; and
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders are angry. The Queensland Government plans to abolish reserves and give 50 year leases of land to the Aboriginal Communities instead. The Communities do not want this to happen. They want proper ownership of the land so that it cannot be taken away. This means freehold title.
With regard to the Aborigines Act. Even with the Act abolished, the people still want special legislation to allow community touncils. elected by the people, to be in control of the management of communities. This can be done without any complications. and at no disadvantage to any Queenslanders.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government use their constitutional power to ensure that Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders are given freehold title to the reserves on which they live, and that they pass special legislation to give self-management to the people.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
Advertising of Alcohol
To the Honounible the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Queensland respectfully showeth:
Last year, over 3,300 people died on Australian roads;
Alcohol is a factor in 50 per cent of road deaths;
Alcohol advertisements do not show the perils of driving after drinking alcohol;

Alcohol advertisements are glamorous and increase their effect on teenagers, indicating drinking alcohol as the social pastime;
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament will legislate to ban the advertising of alcohol from commercial television and radio.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite.
Petition received.
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES CENTRE AND CONTROL TOWER, PERTH AIRPORT
Report of Public Works Committee
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, I present the final report relating to the following proposed work:
New Air Traffic Services Centre and Control Tower, Perth Airport, Western Australia.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr BUNGEY-by leave-The report just presented is the final report relating to a new air traffic services centre and control tower at Perth Airport, Western Australia. The initial report which recommended the construction of all works contained in the reference, except the control tower, was presented on 27 October 1981. The Committee recommended deferment of the control tower because at that stage a master plan for Perth Airport had not been completed, and the Committee felt that both the siting and size of the control tower could pre-empt certain options for the ultimate development of the airport.
This report and the public hearings in relation to the control tower have been completed with the Committee and public fully aware of the four development strategies and of the announced preference of the Department of Aviation for what is termed Strategy I-in short, retention of the current runway system with all terminal development centred on the current terminal locations. The Committee thought it necessary to canvass fully the development options and to make a recommendation on a preferred development strategy for Perth Airport, before examining the narrower question of the control tower. Most witnesses giving evidence to the Committee chose to comment on the development strategies and, additionally, the Committee received from the Department of Aviation copies of all submissions it received from organisations and individuals commenting on the four development strategies proposed by the Department of Aviation.

2282 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Construction ofControl Tower

In making its recommendation on a preferred strategy, the Committee acknowledges two constraints: Firstly, that the final environmental impact statement will not be completed until November 1982; and, secondly, that the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation has just commenced its inquiry into aircraft noise at airports in and adjacent to major cities. The Committee, based on its study of the initial environmental impact statement, does not anticipate that significant environmental problems will arise.
However, in relation to the inquiry into airport noise, the Committee has taken pains to ensure that any recommendations that that Committee may make in relation to Perth Airport are not preempted. The Committee acknowledges that an aircraft noise nuisance problem exists in relation to Perth Airport, and has given this aspect considerable weight in recommending a strategy. A number of aspects of the aircraft noise nuisance have arisen at my Committee's inquiry into Perth Airport. These include: Firstly, the night flight weighting formula used for preparation of noise exposure forecasts recommended for change by the recent National Acoustic Laboratories report; secondly, claims that noise exposure forecast patterns are inaccurate because planes are not following the defined flight paths in and out of Perth Airport; thirdly, conflict in information given by the Department of Aviation in relation to areas likely to be affected by aircraft noise should a wide-spaced parallel runway be provided. It is necessary that definite information be gathered on this point, particularly as it affects suburbs such as Forrestfield and Gosnells. It would be a futile exercise if the noise problem is merely transferred from one residential area to another. Fourthly, some housing development still appears to be taking place in areas likely to be exposed to some aircraft noise nuisance. In its initial report, the Committee recommended the re-forming of the Western Australia. Airports Committee, and sees the co-operation of all levels of government as necessary to reduce the likelihood of such problems arising.
These matters will be passed on to the House of Representatives Committee on Environment and Conservation for its detailed examination. The strategy recommended by the Committee is basically Strategy 4, with deferred provision of a wide-spaced parallel runway. The Committee recommends the provision of the wide-spaced parallel runway when traffic demands it or earlier if recommended by the House of Representatives

Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation. Very simply, Strategy 4 provides for development of a wide-spaced parallel runway, and terminal developments to take place east of the current main runway. The Committee has therefore recommended a 60 to 65 metre high control tower consistent with its recommended development strategy.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan)-by leave-I want to start by thanking the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for the work it put into this report and in particular for the way in which the examination of the various submissions put forward by local government authorities and individuals in my area was conducted when the Committee visited Perth. The Committee members gave us all a very fair hearing and were treated with a considerable degree of confidence by the locals. That confidence, judging by this report, has not entirely been misplaced. There is one area in which I have a disagreement with the Committee's emphasis, but on the whole I think that what has been put forward by the Committee has been a very sensible set of recommendations, particularly in regard to the matter on which the Committee was specifically required to report; that is, the air traffic control tower. The Committee has at least left options open in that regard. The tactics that the Committee pursued are the sorts of tactics that ought to be encouraged in parliamentary committees in general. The way in which Committee members conducted themselves bespeaks very well of a parliamentary committee system.
Effectively, the initial recommendations brought forward by the Committee at the end of last year placed pressure on the then Department of Transport, now the Department of Aviation, to come up with a master plan before any further airport developments were pursued. The pressures placed upon the Department by the Committee, I think, obliged the Department of Transport and Construction to justify certain assumptions were clearly false and were shown to be false by the procedures of the Committee's investigation. Those of us who represent the area owe a considerable debt of gratitude to the Committee in that regard. It provided a forum for local authorities to challenge positions forward by one of the Commonwealth departments, and the Committee, as I said earlier, joined in that challenge in a number of critical areas.
The Chairman's remarks-I have not read his report-indicate that whilst the Committee is fully convinced of the necessity to build facilities, including the control tower, at the airport in a way that is compatible with all development

Australian Parliamentary Delegation

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2283

options being considered by the Government, including Strategy 4, it has not firmly come down with a recommendation immediately to proceed to Strategy 4. The Committee nevertheless, judging from the Chairman's remarks, pointed to inadequacies in the case put forward by the Department of Aviation in opposing Strategy 4. Unfortunately it also suggested that it is not completely satisfied with the propositions put forward by people in local authorities around the airport who take an alternative point of view and advocate Strategy 4.
I hope that in fact the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) will not necessarily pursue to the letter the advice given to him by the Committee to wait for the reports that will come forth from the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation or the environmental review. I believe that there is a case that, whilst substantially founded on environmental concerns, goes beyond that case for the creation of a parallel runway. ] think the argument-] have mentioned it before in this House so ] will not refer to it again-for a parallel runway both for environmental concerns and for fair dealing between local authorities and the Commonwealth Government has already been well established. ] hope therefore that the Government will not necessarily accept the Committee's caution in this regard. I hope that the Minister's announcement-I understand he is to make it on Friday-will contemplate rapidly proceeding to the construction of a wide-spaced north-south parallel runway at Perth. In so doing he will offer considerable relief to my constituents.
In conclusion I reiterate what I said at the outset: I appreciate the very thorough job the Committee has done. I appreciate the opportunities which ther Committee presented to me, other parliamentary representatives and local authorities in my area to offer critical comment upon some very important planning assumptions associated with Perth Airport that in fact went well beyond the Committee's terms of reference. The Committee members acted in a way in which all parliamentary committee members ought to act and in so doing reflected very great credit on this House as well as on themselves.
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO SAUDI ARABIA, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES AND OMAN
Report
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah)-by leave-] present the official report of the Australian parliamentary delegation to the Kingdom of Saudi

Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and the Sultanate of Oman. ] seek leave to make a short statement in connection with the report.
Leave granted.
Mr MacKELLAR-it was a privilege to join with the honourable members for Swan (Mr Beazley), Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding), Paterson (Mr O'Keefe) and Eden-Monaro (Mr Sainsbury) and Senators Kilgariff and Sibraa on a visit to the Middle East from 10 to 21 January of this year. This was the first Australian parliamentary delegation to visit the area, and] sincerely hope not the last, for it is an area where increased contact can but benefit the three countries visited and Australia. It is an area of great wealth and progress where Australian industry can play a most important part.
One of the purposes of the delegation was to confirm and expand the goodwill of the Australian Parliament and people towards Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Oman. ]n this regard] would like to acknowledge the work done by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) on his visits to the region. His high standing in the Middle East certainly assisted the delegation in its task.
The delegation's prime purpose was to gather information on the three countries visited, with a view to making recommendations to aid the formulation of Australia's policies on developments in those countries and the region generally. The delegation came away from the Middle East realising the vast potential for additional Australian trade in the area. The amount of development going on in the region at present gives us the perfect opportunity. The delegation saw cities and ports being created from scratch, with most building materials, expertise and labour being imported.
It is to be hoped that Australian industry, through our trade commissioners, will grasp this opportunity to expand trade with the Middle East. As the Middle East learns more about Australia, and vice versa, ] am sure Australia's relations with these countries go from strength to strength. Every country we visited expressed interest in sending students to Australia for higher education-] believe some students are already here-and hopefully the knowledge they obtain about Australia will greatly assist our future relations with the Middle East.
]n the report the delegation has recommended a number of areas where Australia's knowledge in agriculture can be utilised. The delegation has also recommended that cultural exchanges between Oman and Australia, particular youth

2284 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Australian Parliamentary Delegation

exchanges, take place. The Omanis are particularly interested in having an Australian youth soccer team visit their country.
By visiting this area of the world we were able to dispel many myths, and that is why I see it as a high priority that members of this Parliament and Australian businessmen continue to visit the area in order to learn the history and the customs, so that our relations and trade with the Middle East can increase. I would like to thank the Australian Ambassador in Jeddah, the Senior Trade Commissioner in Abu Dhabi, and their staffs, for the great assistance given to the delegation during our visit.
AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO NEW ZEALAND
Report Mr HARRIS (Chisholm)-by leave-I present the report on the parliamentary delegation to New Zealand. I seek leave to make a short statement in connection with the report.
Leave granted.
Mr HARRIS-The Australian parliamentary delegation to New Zealand which comprised the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins), the honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford), the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron), Senator Watson, Senator Walsh and myself visited New Zealand in March and April. We were provided with an itinerary which enabled us to see much of New Zealand and gave us the opportunity to meet many people in government, business and the community generally. Naturally, while we were in New Zealand, our discussions included the question of the proposed closer economic relationship agreement. We found that it was not just in political and business circles that there was a very high level of awareness of the CER. The CER was generally well known, if not always well understood, by the New Zealand pUblic. This level of awareness and interest in the CER was reflected in the amount of discussion in the media, both print and electronic. There can be little doubt that there is a general desire in New Zealand for the CER agreement to be consummated. There are concerns about particular industries, or employment in them, but there remains firm support. The question of the commencement date of I January 1983 still remains open.
There is, I know, legitimate concern on this side of the Tasman regarding New Zealand export incentives. It is to be hoped that both governments and industries on either side of the Tasman will continue to consult to iron out remaining

differences. Some notable steps forward have already been taken as a result of industry to industry consultation. The CER negotiations should be seen in the broader context of a desire, generally expressed in New Zealand, for a closer relationship with Australia, both economic and otherwise. It is a theme which we met constantly during our trip. Examples of the kinds of developments put to me by New Zealanders which, while having economic consequences, clearly had broader implications, included the extension of the Australian domestic airline network to and through New Zealand and a similar extension to and through New Zealand of Australian commercial television networks. I use these examples merely as illustrative of the kinds of links which many New Zealanders plainly wish to forge.
There can be little doubt that New Zealanders see their future as very much involved with Australia. It must be said that in New Zealand there is far more interest in and knowledge of Australia than the other way about. The passport requirement, although understood in New Zealand, certainly is not welcomed. In view of the difference in size of the two countries, the difference in the levels of awareness may not be a surprise, but a better knowledge of New Zealand, particularly by Australians in business or in government, is to be encouraged. I believe that the Australian parliamentary delegation assisted in this necessary process.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks)-by leave~I wish very briefly to endorse the remarks made by my colleague the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris) and to thank the Parliament for giving me the opportunity to join that parliamentary delegation to New Zealand. It was my first trip to New Zealand. The honourable member for Chisholm is certainly correct when he says that people in New Zealand have a great awareness of people in Australia and of closer economic relations with our country. I believe it is unfortunate that people in Australia do not have that same awareness. New Zealand is our closest neighbour, and I believe that we could become more closely united with New Zealand than we are at the present time. It is a pity that more members of this Parliament are not given the opportunity to visit New Zealand, to meet the people there, and to see the problems they have. Obviously, trade between Australia and New Zealand will increase as the years go by.
Australia and New Zealand are being pinched out more and more by the European Economic Community, and I believe that future trade prospects for Australia and New Zealand lie with each other and with other countries in the -Pacific

Health Legislation Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2285

basin. I suggest that it would be good economicsto send more members of this Parliament to New Zealand. I understand that it is a lot easier for members of the New Zealand Parliament to travel to Australia than it is for members of this Parliament to travel to New Zealand. I think the matter could be looked at to make it easier for members of parliament to travel to New Zealand. It would be quite easy because there are now direct flights from Tasmania to the South Island of New Zealand. In conclusion, I endorse all the remarks made by the leader of the delegation, the honourable member for Chisholm. I congratulate him on the manner in which he led that delegation.
HEALTH LEGISLATION AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 October, on motion by MrCarIton:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (4.13)-The Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1982 is the omnibus Bill which comes down each year as a result of Budget decisions. This legislation relates to a number of measures foreshadowed in this year's Budget. The Labor Opposition has no quarrel with many of these proposals. For example, the pensioner health benefit eligibility for sickness beneficiaries is now no longer to be subject to an income test. Nowhere in the speech of the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton) or in the speech of the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) is there any explanation as to why this has been introduced. I presume it is because the very nature of the definition of a sickness benefit makes it quite sensible to provide health benefit cards to these people without any income test. It has never been the policy of the Australian Labor Party to reject amendments which the Government never explains. Secondly, there is the extension of the pensioner health benefit eligibility to those recipients of the new rehabilitation allowance. As this allowance in many cases is a substitute for an invalid pension, this is really a machinery decision arising out of social security legislation. Thirdly, there is the plan to extend the health card cover for 12 months to those invalid pensioners and recipients of the sheltered employment allowance who lose their pension or allowance because of employment. Again, this is a very desirable decision because it does not disadvantage these persons in the initial stages of their re-entry into the work force. Instead of having the card for six months, the 12-months period makes it easier for these people to transfer

from sheltered employment into the work force. Fourthly, the Bill ensures that the mobility allowance and the family income supplement do not
count as income for the purpose of establishing entitlement for disadvantaged persons to the health care card. That is again an obviously necessary decision otherwise the efficacy of these new benefits would be rapidly undermined.
With the two major features of the Bill, that is, the new three-tiered pharmaceutical benefits scheme and the disallowance of the Victorian outpatient levy, the Opposition has serious disagreements. First of all let me take the new pharmaceutical benefits scheme. The Government has introduced a three-tiered scheme to replace the present two-tiered scheme. At the moment we have a scheme whereby pensioner health 'benefits card holders get access to free pharmaceuticals and all others pay $3.20 per prescription for pharmaceuticals. What the Government has done is to leave the pensioner scheme very much as it is and to introduce a new concessional level scheme for disadvantaged persons, for the unemployed and for all other social security pensioners who do not have the pensioner health benefits card. They get concessional pharmaceutical benefits at $2 per item and the remainder of the community have their charge raised from $3.20 per item to $4 per
item.
We have four major objections to this new three-tiered scheme which I have just outlined. First of all it adds one further level of complexity to the jungle of administration designed to protect the poor from the growing privatisation of health provision in this country. Secondly, the new three tiered scheme continues to provide differential protection to groups in similar income situations. Thirdly, and related to that, coverage only by the concessional scheme for the unemployed maintains the discrimination against the unemployed compared with other social security beneficiaries apparent throughout the present Government's social security legislation. Fourthly, we believe there is no justification for any further increase in the general rate for pharmaceutical benefits from the present $3.20 per item to $4 per item as proposed in this Bill.
Let me take each of those points in turn. First of all, the new pharmaceutical scheme adds one further level of complexity, one further level of stratification of individuals-Liberals love stratifying the poor though they are not overkeen once one starts working on the rich-one further level of bureaucracy, to the burgeoning complexity and bureaucracy of the fringe health area. For example, we already have three health cards-not a bad achievement! These include the pensioner

2286 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Health Legislation Amendment Bill

health benefits card, the health benefits card and the health care card. We will now need a fourth health card, a fourth piece of identification, for pensioners who are not entitled to fringe benefits but who are granted pharmaceutical concessions. I presume the Government will call this-I will suggest the name and it might even get a little plaque--the pensioner health concession card to identify this fourth type of card that will now be necessary.
For a government allegedly dedicated to small government-it proclaims it sufficiently-this proliferating stratification of people into so many different categories of entitlement within the welfare system simply spawns bureaucracy while the maze through which people must pass to secure their correct entitlement becomes more complex and confusing. For instance, now we have the have-nots, the have-a-little-but-not-enoughs and those with a fair bit but old enough. All of these groups will now get cards identifying them. One of the objectives of the new Labor health plan which relates health payments to income through the health levy is to eliminate much of this unnecessary categorisation.
Moreover, much of this categorisation for concessional benefits does seem to be unnecessary. The two-tiered system for the poor-that is, taking the bottom two tiers of the new threetiered scheme-free pharmaceuticals for some and concessional pharmaceuticals for others does little to resolve the anomaly I drew attention to in the pharmaceutical debates last year. Why should groups of the poor be differently treated in the provision of pharmaceuticals when their income situations are similar? Why are the holders of pensioner health benefits cards entitled to free pharmaceuticals and yet the holders of health care cards are entitled only to concessional pharmaceuticals? The income levels for health care cards are approximately the same as for pensioner health benefits cards. They are not identical-I admit that-but the income levels to secure entitlement closely overlap. Yet the similar income levels do not secure similarity of treatment in the pharmaceutical field. As I say, there are free pharmaceuticals for those who hold pensioner health benefits cards. There are only concessional pharmaceuticals for those who hold health care cards. Why this discrimination? Would it not have been fairer, as well as much simpler, to provide free phaflllaceuticals for this group?
This is particularly so when we consider the unemployed. The bulk of the unemployed are worse off than pensioners who are entitled to pensioner

health benefits cards-that is, the bulk of the unemployed are worse off than the bulk of pensioners entitled to pensioner health benefits cards. Yet the unemployed are entitled, under these provisions, only to concessional pharmaceuticals, not to free pharmaceuticals. How can the Government justify this clear discriminatory treatment of the unemployed? It is true that it is part of the total pattern of discrimination against the unemployed that characterises this Government's social security provision. For instance, there is the non-indexation of most unemployment benefits compared with the rest of pensioner benefits; there is the fact that no supplementary assistance is available to the unemployed; there are the limits on extra earnings for the unemployed compared with the more generous-though still quite strict-limits placed on pensioners and there is the differential tax treatment of spouse and children allowances of the unemployed compared with the allowances of pensioners. There is this whole pattern of discrimination against the unemployed. It is a pity that the Minister for Health (Mr Carlton), who is at the table, has decided to add one further element to this pattern of discrimination in the decisions made in this measure. In justice and in equity the unemployed at least should be included in the first tier, not the second tier, of the pharmaceutical benefits scheme-that is, they should be provided with free pharmaceuticals as are all other social security beneficiaries subject, of course, to income tests, rather than being required to pay the $2 concessional contribution rate per item.
The Government's largesse involved in this new scheme is more than financed by a flat 80c increase in the general contribution rate from the present $3.20 to $4 per item for the rest of the community-that is, this apparent largesse in introducing the concessional scheme is more than financed by the extra charge imposed on all other members of the community. Despite some fudging in the Budget papers and in the ministerial speech itself, the increase in the general contribution rate more than covers the additional cost of the concessional scheme.
One result of such flat rate increases in the general rate is that it immediately penalises those who just miss out on the concessional scheme. The fact that all of those who just miss out on the concessional scheme will from I January be facing $4 per item means that those who just miss out on the concessional scheme suffer even more heavily. One of the most tragic aspects of this Government's whole approach to health payments is the wilderness it has created for those who narrowly miss out on the arbitrarily demarcated, free and

Health Legislation Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2287

concessional areas and are required to survive in the high flat rate user pay areas. The new $4 charge will undoubtedly create more difficulties for less well-off families, particularly when they are faced with multiple prescriptions for a single medical incident or prescriptions for various members of the family at the same time.
Moreover, we believe that the increase from $3.20 to $4 per item in the general rate is totally unwarranted. In last year's Budget there was a rise of 45c per item in the general contribution ratethat is, a rise of 16 per cent. Now in this year's Budget we have an 80c rise-that is, a rise of 25 per cent. When Labor was driven from office in 1975 the general contribution rate was $1.50 per item. From I January 1983 it will be $4 per item. This is a 167 per cent increase in just over seven years which runs well in advance of an inflation

rate of just on 100 per cent in the same period. Again, when Labor left office in 1975 the Commonwealth Government was funding 60 per cent of the average cost of a prescription and the patient was paying the other 40 per cent. Seven years of Fraser's user pays philosophy has meant that the Government now pays only 30 per cent of the cost of a prescription; the patient pays 70 per cent. Let it be said that the Government has been extraordinarily successful in holding down the cost to itself of pharmaceuticals. But the benefits of that cost containment have not flowed to ordinary Australians in need of pharmaceuticals. I ask leave of the House to have incorporated in Hansard a table indicating in detail the various points I have just made.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

OPERATIONS OF THE PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFIT SCHEME 1975-6-1982-3

Financial year

Cost of Number of prescriptions prescriptions

Average cost per prescription

Commonwealth

contribution

Patient Commonwealth as percentage

contribution contribution

of cost

1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 Projected 1982-83

$m

m.

$

$

$

379.1

101.1

3.74

1.50 1.9.75

2.24

60

2.00 1.3.76

1.74

47

346.6

89.7

3.86

1.86

48

371.1

93.2

3.98

1.98

50

400.9

93.0

4.31

2.50 1.7.78

1.81

42

398.1

89.8

4.43

2.75 1.9.79

1.68

38

439.1

94.7

4.64

1.89

41

548.8

103.6

5.29

3.20 1.12.81

2.09

40

664.3

115.8

5.74

4.00 1.1.83

1.74

30

Increase in Patient Contribution 1.9.75 to 1.1.83= 167% Increase in Consumer Price Index 1.7.75 to 30.6.82= 103%
Dr BLEWETT-I now turn to the second aspect of this Bill with which the Australian Labor Party strongly disagrees; that is, the proposals to disallow the health levy imposed for outpatient services by the Victorian Government on the private health funds. Since July the Victorian Government has imposed a levy on the Victorian health funds to cover the cost of outpatient services rendered to insured patients in Victorian public hospitals. Instead of insured patients in receipt of outpatient services having individually to go through what the Age calls 'the charade of paying for services which had actually been a charge on their health funds', the health funds will simply pay a levy direct to the Department of the Treasury, a levy computed on the basis of the membership of the funds.
It must be confessed, even by the blinkered Ministers in this place, that this is a cost efficient system. It greatly reduces the transaction costs to

both the health insurance funds and the hospitals. Firstly, it eliminates at one step mostly formal in-
dividual accounts for some 2+ million out-patient
services for insured patients. This will produce a
great saving in administrative costs for public
hospitals. The visible cost of that collection-we
leave the invisible items alone-each year is $2m.
That $2m should be put into collecting this rev-
enue is an enormous waste of hospital resources.
This could be done in a far more efficient way. It would also be a great simplification of the task of the health funds, despite their complaints, if they
paid through a levy rather than paid on each individual item. Secondly, the system would be cost
efficient in that it would eliminate the payment lags that have been developing in the public hospital system. Such lags, of course, originate with both the patients and the funds. All of the public
hospital systems in all the States have found problems because of the lag which has been produced. It would also eliminate certain payment gaps. I

2288 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Health Legislation Amendment Bill

have no doubt that this is one of the reasons why the health funds are making so much noise about it. There are payments which the insurance companies never meet because of the conditions under which patients arrive in out-patient or casualty departments and because of the inability of hospitals to expand resources on the follow-up required. Simply because of the way out-patient departments work there will be a gap because the hospitals will not have the resources--sometimes because of the conditions that people are in they will not have the informationto be able to follow through and collect from the health funds what they are legally liable for. So, there is a gap through this individual payment system. Finally-I regard this as the most important aspect of the argument for cost efficiency--the system will release funds at present used to employ collection staff and replace the collection staff with health staff. We could get rid of a whole range of people in our public hospitals who are simply there to collect and supervise all these individual forms---not that they do much actual collection because that is all done through the insurance system but they still have to collect the forms and fill them all in. We could save and replace that collection staff with nurses and paramedical staff.
The argument for this levy in cost. efficiency terms is overwhelming. It ensures the efficient collection of due revenue and frees health resources for more socially worthwhile health related activities. What has been the response of this Government? This Government has abdicated to date responsibility for the public hospitals of this country. It has washed its hands of the difficulties in the public hospital sector. We have often heard this Minister and his predecessor say in this House when we ask them questions about the problems of public hospitals in Victoria and in New South Wales: 'Oh, they are not our responsibility any longer. We have given them back to the States. We have washed our hands of those responsibilities.' Yet, when a State government establishes a perfectly responsible and legitimate method for reducing costs and raising revenues in its public hospitals we get this complete volte-face and the Federal Government is suddenly back into the hospital act. Secondly, this Government, this Minister and his predecessor have regularly boasted that their passing of hospital responsibility back to the States was part of their new federalism. What a wonderful thing they have done! They have achieved one of their new federalist objectives-passing hospitals back to the States. Yet, as soon as one State takes a step that is

ideologically repugnant to this Federal Government, the Federal Government immediately intervenes.
What are the reasons advanced for this complete turnabout in policy which completely contradicts the Government's rhetoric of the past 18 months? I had a certain respect for the present Minister-I suppose I still have despite the speech he delivered on this subject--but I must say that when I looked in his second reading speech at his reasons given to this House for this major turnaround I was disappointed. Those reasons can only be described as thin, ingenuous and fatuous. Given the significance of the issue it is amazing that the Minister in his second reading speech produced no argument to justify this allowance. It is true that in two sentences he made two assertions against the levy but in those two sentences he made no effort to argue the case. The House is, therefore, compelled to turn to the Minister's Press releases for enlightenment, if that is the appropriate word. In the Press releases and in a bit of the second reading speech we find two major arguments advanced. One argument is that something has to be done about this Victorian scheme because of the Government's commitment to the user pays principle. The second argument is something to do with cost. Let me deal with each of those arguments in turn.
First of all I refer to the user pays argument. The first of the Minister's arguments concerns the cliche 'the user pays'. When one looks at his Press release and his speech one sees that his argument on this point consists of one piece of hypocrisy, one piece of palpable nonsense and two pieces of fantasy. Let me deal with each one in turn. First of all, in what I can only describe as hypocrisy, the Minister says that the levy must be disallowed because 'the Victorian Government's action cuts directly across the Federal Government's 'user pays' policy for health services'. I simply ask the Minister what legislative sanctions he plans against the Queensland Government's actions which cut even more directly across the Federal Government's user pays policy for health services. Or is this simply one more partisan motivated action against the Cain Labor Government in Victoria?
Let me refer now to the piece of nonsense. The Minister objects to the levy on the grounds that no longer will charges be collected for out-patient services at the point of service. But, in fact, insured out-patients throughout Australia rarely pay charges at the point of service. In Victoria, before the levy-as elsewhere now-the standard practice was to have the patient sign a form and for the hospital to recoup from the fund. In other

Health Legislation Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2289

cases the patient got a bill some weeks after from the hospital and then forwarded to the hospital a cheque received from the fund. Indeed, in South Australia direct billing between hospital and fund applies to in-patients. Thus it is nonsense to say that the levy threatens the collection of charges at the out-patient point of service. Charges are increa.singly not collected under the prevailing system at the point of service. Let me deal with the two fantasies. With regard to the first fantasy I quote the Minister. The Minister said that as a result of the out-patient levy:
Out-patient departments in public hospitals would once again become crowded with people who really ought to be attending private doctors.
That is a fantasy. The reason it is a fantasy is that the levy will in no way affect either the behaviour of the insured or the uninsured. Let us look at the reason for that. The behaviour of the insured will, as I have indicated, be in no way affected. Those insured mostly have had no direct charge in the past for an out-patient service. They simply pay through their insurance contributions. Under the levy they have no direct charge for an out-patient service. They pay through their insurance contributions. There is no reason whatsoever why their behaviour should change and produce a shift from a private doctor to an out-patient department. Secondly, the uninsured who are not covered by the pensioner or disadvantaged persons schemes will still have to pay the full cost of the outpatient service. So, the levy will not affect their behaviour. The levy will not affect the behaviour of these groups and therefore the pattern of use of out-patient services will not be changed. The second fantasy which is the final part of the Minister's argument, is one that I must say I liked. He said:
It would even be possible for State governments to introduce general levies on funds for in-patients' services, thus introducing an ALP-type nationalised health scheme through the back door.
We certainly intend to introduce an ALP incomerelated health scheme through the front door. But I suppose we should examine the possibilities of this fantasy that the Minister has conjured up. Let me take what is perhaps the Minister's more serious argument; that is, the cost argument. The Minister stated:
The levy is estimated to produce revenue in excess of that indicated by utilisation of out-patient facilities and thus contributors to Victorian health funds are paying more than they need for health insurance.
The Minister's argument, in simple terms, is somehow that the way the Victorian Government has calculated this levy means that the insured will be paying more than they should under this system. The politest thing I can say about that statement

is that it is ingenuous. The Minister knows that the amount to be raised by the levy is directly based on the Commonwealth assessment of what the State of Victoria should raise with a $20 outpatient fee from insured persons. The levy will generate in a full year a revenue of $38.4m which, with a $20 per service charge, is the amount the Commonwealth believes the State of Victoria should raise from insured out-patient services.
I can see two reasons why the health funds might be concerned by that aggregate figure. The first reason is that it would certainly be higher than they might anticipate because of the gap effect that I have already talked about. I mentioned that there are difficulties for hospitals in following up all their out-patients and, therefore, the funds escape paying benefits which they are legally liable to pay. Of course, that problem is overcome by operating the levy in this way. The second reason why the funds might be concerned about the aggregate is that, as with so many of its estimates, the Commonwealth's assessment of how much Victoria could raise from out-patient services to insured persons may be too high. But the responsibility for that estimate rests here. It is a Commonwealth assessment. The Victorian Government has no other course but to base its levy on the Commonwealth assessment, for its funds from the Commonwealth are determined by that assessment.
As the Minister knows the Victorian Government has publicly made it clear that if there were a more realistic assessment by the Commonwealth of its out-patient revenue raising capacity from insured persons, it would adjust the levy accordingly. But the Commonwealth cannot have it both ways. It cannot assess the out-patient revenue raising capacity at a certain level and then complain that a levy designed to realise it is too high. It is the view of the Labor Party that ideological cliches, futuristic fantasies and this disingenuous argument about cost provide no reason for disallowing the cost efficient Victorian outpatient levy. I move the following amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House is of the opinion that-
(I) the provisions disallowing the cost efficient Victorian out-patient levy should be excised from the Bill,
(2) a simpler pharmaceutical benefits scheme should be constructed which does not discriminate between groups in similar income situations, and
(3) any further increase in the general contribution rate for pharmaceutical benefits is unwarranted given the significant increase in the last budget, and the fact that over the past seven years, the increase in the general contribution rate has run far in advance of in fiat ion'.

2290 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Health Legislation Amendment Bill

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (4.39)-1 have great pleasure in seconding the amendment moved by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) to the motion for the second reading of the Health Legislation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 1982. In his speech to the Parliament he pointed out a number of deficiencies in the Bill. The Opposition believes that by adopting this amendment some of those deficiencies could be met. There is no doubt that the Victorian Government's provision for a levy on those who contribute to hospital funds to pay for out-patient treatment is a most sensible proposition. The Federal Government, rather than taking legislative action to outlaw that proposal, should be encouraging other States to take it up.
I find it rather interesting that the present Minister for Health (Mr Carlton), who is at the table, has talked in this Parliament for some time about cost efficiency, but his first ministerial action in bringing legislation into the Parliament is to do away with a very efficient collection process. The Government asks whether there is equity in that system. But the few people who are not insured in the various States do not need to worry; they will still have access to out-patient care under the proposals of the Victorian Government. I would have thought that the Minister would have seen that as a very sensible way of collecting sufficient funds to run out-patient departments in hospitals. The Victorian Government should be commended.
More importantly however, I wish to speak for a few short moments on the provisions of the Bill that relate to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. I pointed out in the Parliament some time ago the great problem that many people in my electorate have with the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. It has been quite a bone of contention in Australia in recent years. While governments have brought in provisions for people who are in needy circumstances to receive free medical treatment, those people are put in an iniquituous situation where they receive free medical treatment and the doctor gives them a prescription for a number of items of medicine but they cannot afford to purchase those prescription items. Indeed, under this proposal they still will not be able to afford to purchase those prescription items. While the Government says that it is bringing in a third tier of people who are entitled to the health card and who thus will be entitled to 50 per cent of the cost of pharmaceutical items, I see no reason why the Government should discriminate between various levels of people in need. I see no

difference between a person who is on unemployment benefit and who has a sick child and a pensioner who has a sick child. Unfortunately, the Government seems to see a difference. I see no difference between a family on a marginal income with illness in the family and a supporting parent on the supporting parent's benefit who has illness in the family. This Government makes a distinction between those people. This Government says that the child of a pensioner who has to go to a doctor will receive free medication, but that the child of a person on unemployment benefit who has to go to a doctor and receive medication will have to pay 50 per cent of the fee. I consider that to be extremely iniquituous, considering the various differences between people on pensions and people on unemployment and sickness benefits in Australia. It is absurd that people receiving sickness benefit have to pay for medication.
It is very interesting to look at the cost of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme in the last six years. The number of prescriptions dispensed has not increased by much-from 101.1 million in 1975-76 to 115.8 million, which is the projected figure for 1982-83. But the important thing to note in that provision is that in 1975-76, the last financial year of the previous Labor Government, 60 per cent of the cost of that scheme was met by the Commonwealth. Under the proposals introduced by the Minister for Health only 30 per cent of the contribution will be paid for by the Commonwealth. Ordinary people are being expected to pay more and more for health costs. It is interesting to look at some of the editorials in newspapers in the past about the present Government's health care provisions. On 14 May 1981 the Age had a editorial headline which stated: 'Fraser's fair go is humbug'. That is probably the fairest description of any of the health proposals that this Government introduces. The Minister, in his second reading speech, said:
These measures will further demonstrate the Government's concern for those persons and families in our community who are in special need.
This probably falls into the same category as the description in the Age. That, indeed, is pure humbug as well. Although it is fit and proper that the Government should have extended the eligibility of people for pharmaceutical benefits, it should not have bothered at all to bring in this third tier provision. It should not have made a distinction between a group of people who are sick and do not have money and another group of people who are sick and do not have money. I have no doubt that the incoming Labor Government will do away with that distinction and that all of those people in Australia who, for various

Health Legislation Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2291

reasons, are unable to earn a living will receive fairness from the incoming Governmentfairness that is not achieved under the present Government's provisions. The Government's suggestion that there should be a right of appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal against sections of this legislation is a rather poor way of doing things. The delays in appeals to that Tribunal are notorious. I will not pursue that matter further this afternoon except to say to the House that I hope that the Parliament will adopt the Opposition's amendment which will provide for the disallowance of the Government's proposals on the Victorian Government's very cost efficient out-patient levy.
The Opposition suggests that a pharmaceutical benefits scheme simpler than the one the Minister has brought in should be constructed. It believes that any further increase in prescription costs under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme is not necessary. To increase the cost of medicine under the so-called free medical scheme from $3.20 to $4 per prescription means that once again people who have sick children and people who have extensive illness in heir families will be able to afford the doctor but not the medication. Last year in my electorate a survey was done by the local community health organisation which showed that a vast number of persons going to the doctor in that area could not afford to purchase pharmaceuticals. Today the Government is ensuring that even fewer Australians will be able to purchase the pharmaceuticals they need to recover their health. This is iniquitous legislation which should be condemned. It should be amended in the fashion that the Opposition spokesman has suggested.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
In Committee
Clauses I to 22-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 23 (Registered organizations not subject to certain taxes).
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (4.49)-The Opposition opposes clause 23 which disallows the Victorian out-patient health levy. I have given fully in my speech at the second reading stage of the Bill the reasons for our taking this action. Therefore, I do not intend to repeat those arguments.

Question put:

That clause 23 be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Chairman-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

63

Noes

41

Majority

22

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony. J. D. Baume. M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier.J. W. Bradfield, J. M.
Brown. N. A. Bungey, M. H. Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean. A.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles.G.O-H. Good luck. B. J. Groom.R.J. Hall, Steele Harris.G. McD. Hicks.N.J. Hodges. J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Hyde.J. M. Jarman, A. W. JulL D. F.
Kaller. R. C. Killen. Sir James Lloyd, B.
Lusher. S. A. MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean. R. M. (Teller)
Macphee. I. M. Moore,J. C. Newman, K. E. Nixon. P. J. O-Keefe. F. L. Peacock, A. S.
Robinson. Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair. I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.1. White. P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Beazley. K. C. Blewett. N. Bowen. Lionel Brown. John Brown. Robert Cass.M.H. Cohen. B. Cross. M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins. J. S. Duffy.M.J. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Holding. A. C. Howe. B. L. Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Innes. U. E. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson. Les (Teller)

Jones. Barry Jones. Charles Keating. P. J. Kelly. R.J. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay. Leo McMahon. Les Maher. M. J. Mildren. J. B. Milton. P. Morris,P.F. Mountford. J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott. J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis. L.G. West,S.J. Willis.R.

PAIRS

Braithwaite, R. A. Chapman. H. G. P. Dobie,J. D. M. Porter,J. R.

Campbell.G. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi, R. Young. M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

2292 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

Clauses 24 to 42-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 43 (Liability of Commission to pay rates, taxes and charges).
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (4.57)-The Opposition opposes clause 43, but as it is consequential on the clause which the Committee has just upheld we will leave it there.
Clause agreed to.
Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole, and agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Carlton)-by leaveread a third time.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL (No.5) 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill, the Income Tax (Rates) Bill 1982, the Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Bill 1982, the Income Tax (Indiviuals) Bill 1982, the Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Bill 1982, and the Income Tax (Mining Witholding Tax) Amendment Bill 1982, as they are all associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these measures? There being no objection, that course will be adopted.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (4.59)-The package of Bills which is now before the House gives effect to the Government's carrot for an early 1982 election. They are superficially attractive

but they' have some deficiencies which we will be pointing to in the course of this debate. Because of the limited time which has been allowed for this debate some of my colleagues will be covering some of the points I would have made in a more lengthy discussion of this legislation. Three of these Bills are purely machinery and I do not intend to spend any time discussing them. However, two others-the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.5) and the Income Tax (Rates) Bill I982-are of much more substance.
The effect of the Income Tax (Rates) Bill is to introduce the new tax scales which will apply from I November and also to give effect to the composite tax rates which will apply for the whole of this financial year. In effect, it will be a shandy of the new schedule which will apply from I November and the schedule which will apply until that time. It gives effect to tax cuts this year and it is our earnest hope that those tax cuts will be maintained. As I have already mentioned in a previous debate, we are very suspicious about the Government's intentions in regard to these tax cuts and see them as likely to be of short duration if there were an early election which the Government was so fortunate as to win. Indeed, we see the whole strategy involving these tax cuts as being a prime part of the Government's plans for an early election. If it were to win an early election these tax cuts would be withdrawn by subsequent action, as was the case in 1978 following the fistful-of-dollars tax cuts granted in 1977.
The impact of these tax cuts is significant, but I think they need to be put in context by comparison with the situation in 1975. If one does that one sees that there is still an increase in the tax burden for the vast array of taxpayers in this country. In 1982-83 all taxpayers but those on very high incomes will pay a higher proportion of their incomes in tax than they paid in 1975-76. To prove that point, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables which demonstrate the situation for a single taxpayer and also for a taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two children at varying income levels in 1975-76 and 1982-83.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

SINGLE TAXPAYER-7 YEAR COMPARISON

Income 1975-76

1982-83

Tax 1975-76

1982-83

Proportion of income paid in tax
1975-76 1982-83

Increase in money tax

Tax change due to effect
of Fraser tax policies

($ p.a.) 2.626

($p.a.)

($ p.a.)

($p.a.)

(%)

(%)

5.600

29

349

1.1

6.2

(%) +1,110.3

($ per week) +5.49

4,202

8.960

455

1,380

10.8

15.4

+203.3

+7.93

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2293

Income 1975-76

1982-83

Tax 1975-76

1982-83

Proportion of income paid in tax
1975-76 1982-83

Increase in money tax

Tax change
due to effect of Fraser
tax policies

($ p.a.)

($ p.a.)

($ p.a.)

($ p.a.)

(%)

(%)

(%)

(IAWE)

5.252

11.200

758

2.067

14.4

18.5

+172.7

6.303

13,440

1.126

2,754

17.9

20.5

+144.6

(75% AWE)

7.878

16.800

1.677

3,784

21.3

22.5

+ 125.6

8,403

17.920

1.861

4.129

22.1

23.0

+ 121.9

(AWE)

10.504

22,400

2.647

6.021

25.2

26.9

+ 127.5

13.130

28.000

3.829

8.597

29.2

30.7

+124.5

15.756

33.600

5.086

11.173

32.3

33.3

+119.7

16.807

35.840

5.664

12.211

33.7

34.1

+115.6

(2xAWE)

25.210

53.760

10.557

22,963

41.9

42.7

+117.5

(3xAWE)

52.521

112.000

38.309

57,907

53.9

51.7

+104.6

compared to growth

in income of 113%

($ per week)
+8.83 +6.72
+3.88 +3.10
+7.32 +8.08 +6.46 +2.76
+8.27
-47.38

TAXPAYER WITH DEPENDENT SPOUSE AND 2 CHILDREN-SEVEN YEAR COMPARISON

Income 1975-76

1982-83

Tax' 1975-76

1982-83

Proportion of income paid in tax
1975-76 1982-83

Increase in money tax

Tax change
due to effect of Fraser
tax policies

($ p.a.)

($ p.a.)

($ p.a.)

($ p.a.)

(%)

(%)

(%)

2.626

5.600

4.202

8.960

(IAWE)

5.252

11.200

592

5.3

6.303

13,440

326

1.279

5.2

9.5

+292.3

(75% AWE)

7.878

16.800

877

2,309

11.1

13.7

+163.3

8,403

17.920

1,061

2,654

12.6

14.8

+150.1

(AWE)

10.504

22,400

1,847

4,546

17.6

20.3

+146.1

13.130

28,000

3,029

7,122

23.1

25.4

+135.1

15.756

33,600

4,286

9,698

27.2

28.9

+126.3

16.807

35,840

4,864

10,736

28.9

30.0

+ 120.7

(2xAWE)

25.210

53,760

9,757

21,488

38.7

40.0

+120.2

(3xAWE)

52,521

112,000

27,509

56,432

52.4

50.4

+105.1

compared to growth

in income of I I 3%

($ per week)
+ 11.42 + 11.11
+8.40 +7.58
+ 11.63 +12.38 +10.98
+7.58
+13.44 -43.08

- Includes difference between child endowment and family allowance as negative tax in 1982-83 to account for the change from a tax deduction for dependent children in 1976.

Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. I will not go into the details of these tables. As I have said, they show that all taxpayers, except those on very high incomes, will have to pay increased tax. Something of the order of 98 per cent of taxpayers will pay a higher proportion of their income in tax in 1982-83, despite the tax cuts incorporated in these Bills, than was the case in 1975-76.
The Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.5) incorporates various proposals which were mentioned in the Budget, and I should like to refer briefly to some of those items. One of them

which will be looked at in more detail by my colleague the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) is the home loan interest rebate. This rebate, of course, is an alternative, an addition, to what the Government introduced in March of this year. That was a rather limited rebate which applied only to owner occupiers in the first five years of their owner occupancy. This later rebate is rather more extensive, applying to interest rates over 10 per cent, and to the first $60,000 of home loans and to owner occupiers for their sole or principal residence. This rebate seems to us to

2294 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

suffer from a couple of deficiencies, but obviously it has some advantages. For most home buyers this is something which is very welcome, something which reduces the crushing burden of mortgage interest payments, which has increased markedly in the last few years. We have 'had an in-
crease of 4 per cent in bank mortgage interest rates over the last couple of years, and that increase has added something in the order of $90 a month to the repayments of a typical home buyer with a home loan of $30,000. That is a crushing additional burden to home buyers and one from which they have been desperately seeking alleviation. This Bill goes some way towards significantly alleviating that burden by providing a rebate at the standard rate for interest rates in excess of 10 per cent. We acknowledge that fact and support it for that reason.
However, I think it is worth pointing out that the way. in wliich this legislation has been drawn means that assistance is being given to people who are in circumstances which can hardly be described as needy. These are people who are buying expensive housing. It is questionable, to say the least, whether taxpayers as a whole should be giving assistance to persons who are buying very expensive housing. One would have thought that an assistance scheme such as this would have been more properly confined to taxpayers buying ordinary, or a little above ordinary, housing but not to those buying very expensive or wealthy housing. That is.the situation.
Although there is a limit of $60,000 on the amount of loan which qualifies for the rebate those who have loans in excess of $60,000 still qualify for the rebate in regard to that first $60,000 of their loan, whether the loan be for $70,000, $100,000, $200,000 or $500,000. We find it difficult to perceive why the Government has allowed the rebate to apply to people who are buying extraordinarily expensive housing. We believe that it would have been more proper to limit that rebate in such a way that those with home loans over $60,000 would have had that rebate gradually taken away from them and the rebate phased out at around $80,000. That would seem to us to be a very reasonable proposal, one which would provide full benefit to the overwhelming majority of home buyers and would not provide any assistance to people whose need for it is, to say the least, highly questionable.
We also think that this measure has a deficiency in that it applies to multiple home owners. As we read the legislation it is quite open to a home buyer, who has two or more homes still to qualify for the rebate so long as he arranges for his mortgage to be on his principal residence-that is, the

home in which he principally resides. In that situation the taxpayer may have several homes but he is still able to qualify for the rebate because his mortgage is on the principal residence. Surely that is a very strange kind of measure to bring into this House. Surely it is strange to provide multiple home owners with the ability to have tax concessions in respect of their home loans on principal residences. Any person with any brains who is a multiple home owner will arrange his affairs so that his maximum mortgage, at least up to $60,000, applies to his principal residence and he
will diminish the mortgage on any other residences he has or may obtain.
This strikes us as being a quite extraordinary measure, one which one can only wonder at the
Government's motives in implementing. Was it something foisted on the Government by back benchers concerned to be able to qualify for mortgage interest deductions on their principal residence while still having a house in Canberra? One wonders whether this has been part of the thinking of honourable members on the Government side. That is what the Government is doing. The Government is saying in effect that people such as us, members on both sides of the House, who have homes in our electorates and who are buying homes in Canberra are able to get the interest deduction in respect of one of those homes, as long as it is our principal residence. I think that is highly questionable. I think that people who can afford two homes are not deserving of government assistance in respect of home loan rebates. The rebate is something that should properly be confined to people clearly in necessitous circumstances-the overwhelming majority of home buyers. We clearly acknowledge that we do not see why the rebate should apply to people with large loans way in excess of $60,000, or to multiple home owners. But that is the way in which the Government has implemented the measure.
I guess the measure also leaves out, in the way in which it has been drawn as a tax rebate, assistance to people who might be trying to buy a home but who do not have a taxable income. People who might have very low incomes for some reason or other and who are trying to buy a home will be denied assistance. Presumably this would apply to a very small percentage of home buyers indeed because people with low incomes would have difficulty in paying off a home. However, there could be people in those circumstances. Such people would not receive any assistance. The Opposition generally supports the home loan rebate but has concern about the way in which it has been drawn.

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2295

The retention allowance extension from 70 per cent to 80 per cent also causes us concern. In this regard I say that we fully appreciate the need to assist small business in the maximum possible way. We are very much in support of measures which will promote small business in this country and make it possible for small business to employ more people so that those small businesses thrive. In making that statement. I note that it is also the case that a sheer increase in the retention allowance is a rather rough way in which to provide that kind of assistance. What it is doing, of course, is undermining the whole concept of Division 7,
which is to ensure that there is not considerable tax avoidance through the use of private companies.
Honourable members opposite know that that is the case. They know that what they are doing in this extension is creating greater possibilities for the avoidance of income tax through private companies simply being able to keep most of the profits in the business and not being forced to make a substantial distribution of profits. Therefore, these companies would not pay tax on dividends because the profits are not distributed as dividends but rather are stored up in the company and can eventually be realised in the form of a tax-free capital gain. That is what is being given greater leeway by this kind of proposal to increase the retention allowance from 70 per cent to 80 per cent. That is what the impact of this measure will be although I concede that the measure will also be of assistance to small businesses which have a genuine business reason for wanting to keep a high proportion of their profits in the business.
The way out of this dilemma-and still be able to help small businesses in the genuine business
sense but not open up avenues for tax avoidance-is to do what other countries such as the United Kingdom and the United States do, which is to have a flexible retention allowance. That meanS that there is a basic retention allowance but with flexibility allowed whereby the company involved can show a genuine business requirement for keeping a higher proportion of the profits in the business than is allowed for under the basic retention allowance. That is the kind of measure which should be implemented in this country, not a broad brush measure such as that in the Bill, which simply opens up avenues for tax avoidance in a way which is thoroughly inappropriate and undesirable.
I would have thought that given all the publicity about tax avoidance in this country this Government would not be wanting to adopt openly measures which would make that more possible. But that is what will happen with the

straight out increase in the retention allowance. The Labor Party would have very much preferred the Government to introduce a measure which simply would have allowed for a flexible element such as that applying in some other countries so that where there was a genuine business need for a higher retention in the business that could have been applied. That is certainly part of the policy which the Labor Party will promote at the next election. For the reasons I have given we do not believe that this kind of measure is one that presents the best solution to the needs of small business.
We also have some concern about the dividend rebate, which also is part of this package of measures. The dividend rebate applies at the standard rate to the first $1,000 of dividend income received by resident individuals from resident companies and from foreign companies listed on Australian stock exchanges. This will give a maximum benefit this year of $306.70 to a dividend recipient. In subsequent years it will be $300. The sole justification for this measure, that will cost $36m this year and $75m in a full year, was given by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his second reading speech on the Bill when he said that the measure 'will provide some relief from what some see as the double taxation of dividend income, while at the same time giving encouragement to small investors'. That is the end of the justification for giving away $75m. One would have thought that the dispensing of $75m would have required a somewhat larger degree of justification than one sentence in which the Treasurer indicates his own doubts about the reasoning behind the measure. From that sentence it is quite clear that the Treasurer has doubts about the authenticity of the argument that there is double taxation applying to dividends. Let me just go over the argument which supposedly applies in ,this area. It is alleged that because we have a syste~ of company tax which taxes company profits initially and a system of income tax which taxes dividends when the profits are distributed to the shareholders by way of dividend, double taxation applies to dividends. This argument is a very detailed one, and one which I do not have time to go into in every respect at present, but there are a couple of points which I think are relevant to make in this regard.
Firstly, various economic analyses have found that it is not just the shareholders who pay company tax but that in large measure it is paid by the consumers; that is, the companies pass on the company tax. So company tax, to some degree anyway, has the impact of an indirect tax. Once one takes that measure into account we have a

2296 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

situation in which the argument that double taxation applies to dividends seems much more dubious indeed. The shareholders are not paying much of that company tax. In fact, it is being paid by the consumers in the first place. Secondly, the dividends which flow to shareholders, are not the only income which they receive. They receive income also when they sell their shares. In most cases they sell those shares tax free. There is no tax applying to the capital gains which they make, to part of the profits which they finally realise. In that situation, I believe that the argument about double taxation of dividends is at best dubious.
I also point out that the exemption of $1,000, which is justified as encouraging the small investor, applies not just to the small investor but also to the very large investor indeed. It is not something which is limited to people with $1,000 of dividend income; it is something which applies also to those with over $100,000 of dividend income or $1 m of dividend income. It is not there for small shareholders; it is there for all shareholders. I believe that the arguments in support of this exemption are very thin. The Labor Party will not oppose this measure at this time but we certainly have great reservations about the need for it.
Finally, I mention in this context the tax deductibility which is given for gifts to various organisations. I note that one such organisation is the Centre for Independent Studies. This is something about which I will say more in the Committee stage of the debate. I just indicate that the Labor Party does not support the extension of tax deductibility to gifts for the Centre for Independent Studies. No reasons have been given for so doing. I will give some reasons for opposing that measure in the Committee stage of the debate. I move, as an amendment to the motion that the Bill be read a second time:
That all words after 'that' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the Bill, the House is of the opinion that-
(I) the home loan rebate is unduly generous to wealthy home-buyers and open to exploitation in that it provides benefits to persons owning more than one residence and is available on large loans in excess of $60,000;
(2) the further increase in the retention allowance to 80 per cent will widen avenues for tax avoidance;
(3) the introduction of a tax concession to shareholders through a rebate on the first $1,000 of dividend income is inequitable, and
(4) the Bill should provide mortgage assistance to those home purchasers not in receipt of taxable income such as the unemployed and pensioners'.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Gi/es)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Uren-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak later.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (5.20)-Jt is interesting to note from the speech of the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) that the Australian Labor Party appears to be maintaining its conscious policy of attack on small business and small investors in Australia. The complaint by the honourable member for Gellibrand, as his major view of this legislation, that the retention allowance for private companies really provides opportunities for tax dodging, is probably a comment more on him and his party than on the merit of the proposal. In fact, this is a vital element in assisting small business to compete, to become stronger and to retain within small business the profits which, of course, would otherwise attract tax at a penal rate if this money were not distributed in dividends. It is vital for the building-up of small business in Australia that private companies have this entitlement. I welcome the increase to 80 per cent as would, I think, most small businessmen in Australia. I remind the House and the people that under Labor this allowance was a grudging 50 per cent. We have lifted it to 80 per cent to assist small business.
I also think it is notable that the Labor Party does not like our help to small shareholders in Australia. The honourable member for Gellibrand said that he would not oppose it but he does not like it. No doubt the Labor Party objects, as it traditionally has, to the concept of small capitalists, petty capitalists. After all, I suppose that its total philosophic objection to the owning of assets has been reflected by its attitude to capital gains taxes-when it is being fair dinkum instead of wallpapering over the clear position that it has-which is that it is opposed to petty capitalists. It does not like small investors. That was evident from the speech of the honourable member for Gellibrand.
Mr Hodgman-They are socialists.
Mr BAUME-As the Minister says, members of the Labor Party are basically socialists. There is no doubt that a large element in the party is so obsessed by that proposition that it has encouraged the party to take anti-small investor positions. The fact that this exemption will apply only to dividends of up to $1000 clearly indicates that it is of no significance whatsoever to major investors. I remind the Opposition that companies that invest in other companies do not have to pay tax on the related dividends anyway, because dividends paid between companies are tax free. Let

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2297

me remind the Opposition that major institutions such as life insurance offices which invest in companies and receive dividends get special tax rates provided they meet the requirements of the Government's 30-20 legislation. In effect the small investor in Australia has been disadvan-
taged in the market place. It has not been worth as much to him to buy a share as it has been worth to big investors. What is vital, if we are to retain private sector involvement, the interests of ordinary Australians in companies and their rights to buy shares, is that small investors get a fair go relative to the big investors. It seems to me that when we look at what has happened in Australia, when there has been a reduction in the number of small investors, both directly and as a proportion of total shareholdings, we see how essential it is for ordinary Australians, small investors, to be given
this assistance. I think it says heaps about the attitude of the Labor Party to the small man, the small businessman, the small investor in Australia, to hear the negative approach that the honourable member for Gellibrand has enunciated today on this matter.
I wish to deal with the consequences, the impact on Australia, of the tax cuts which are involved in this legislation. These cuts were announced in the Budget. As I said yesterday, it interests me that because this was positive news it did not seem to get any run in the media in Australia. I suppose that follows a pattern; they are much more interested in reporting the smearing that goes on in this chamber than in reporting the good news. The good news is this: The Government's policy of cutting tax rates will, by I November when this legislation comes into effect, bring greater benefits to income tax payers than full indexation of taxes would bring. It is very simple. It means that someone whose income has risen since 1975-the year of the Hayden Budget-to keep pace with inflation will pay a smaller percentage of his income in income tax than he paid seven years ago. Would it not be nice if the media in Australia were prepared to accept that proposition and even to report it? Yet we have had editorial after editorial in most of the leading newspapers in Australia complaining about the level of personal income tax. When the facts are presented the media do not even bother to report them.
That is a very bitter comment, as far as I am concerned, on my former colleagues in the Press who, I believe, are so obsessed about assisting the Australian Labor Party to run a vicious campaign of smearing individuals in regard to various tax matters that they are prepared to overlook the reality of an issue that they thought was so

important-the newspapers thought was so important-that they have run campaigns on the need to reduce personal income tax. Let us see some integrity from the Press. Let us see some honest reporting about what these tax cuts really mean.
I am particularly disappointed about the level of recognition of this matter. There are, after all, plenty of self-styled experts within the media who have the capacity to do what I did; that is, look at a 1975 taxation return and see what rates of tax applied at that time. Before we adjust the rates for inflation we find some incredible figures. We find that a person on a $300 wage, which is the average wage of an Australian worker these days, will pay from I November something like 10.3 per cent of his income in tax. Under the Hayden scales of 1975 he would have paid 27 per cent of his income. People ask: 'Why has the Government not reduced tax?' For heaven's sake, what a dramatic reduction in tax scales that represents. An income of $300 would be taxed at the rate of 27 per cent under the Hayden Labor tax scales of 1975. We have cut it down to 10.3 per cent. One could say: 'Yes, but what happens when you account for inflation?' That $300 salary would have been $151 in 1975. Obviously the tax rate would have been smaller under the Hayden tax scales, but how much smaller? In fact it would have been 11.1 per cent. That is, 11.1 per cent of a salary of $151 would have gone in income tax under Hayden. Under us it is 10.3 per cent, a considerable fall.
There has been a real fall, after accounting for inflation, in the rates of income tax applicable to the ordinary worker. This, of course, extends across the range of incomes. By the way, the examples I gave relate to a worker with a wife and two dependent children. For someone who has no dependants the situation is similar. For example, someone earning $151 in 1975 would have paid, under Hayden, 21.2 per cent of his salary in tax. Under the present Government the figure remains at 21.2 per cent. Someone with no dependants and earning $201 in 1975-that equals $400 a week now-would have paid 25.1 per cent under Hayden. He now pays 24.4 per cent. The rate is down a little. Of course there is also a benefit for the family man now earning $400 a week, who would have been on $201 in 1975, taking inflation into account. His tax rate has gone down from 17.4 per cent under Hayden to 16.2 per cent under the present Government.
There is clear evidence that there has been a real fall in personal income tax collections; yet we do not see it reported in the media. There is, of

2298 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

course, also a real fall-I stress this-in the cur-
rent year, involving a substantial change in disposable income. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table showing the approximate weekly benefits from 1 November 1982 for a taxpayer

with a dependent spouse and a sole parent taxpayer with two dependent children.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

APPROXIMATE WEEKLY BENEFITS FROM NOVEMBER 1982

Weekly earmngs

Reduction in tax

New housing loan interest
rebate'

Increase in family allowances

Total savings

Change in disposable
income

$

$

$

$

$

%

Taxpayer with Dependent Spouse and two Dependent Children

200

8.54

5.05

4.25

17.84

9.6

300

10.54

5.05

4.25

19.84

7.8

400

16.36

5.05

4.25

25.66

8.2

500

16.36

5.05

4.25

25.66

7.0

750

16.36

5.05

4.25

25.66

5.2

Sole Parent Taxpayer with two Dependent Children

200

8.54

5.05

4.25

17.84

9.8

300

10.54

5.05

4.25

19.84

8.0

400

16.36

5.05

4.25

25.66

8.3

500

16.36

5.05

4.25

25.66

7.1

750

16.36

5.05

4.25

25.66

5.2

- Assuming a mortgage of $25.000 and interest at 13.5 per cent per annum.

Mr BAUME-I thank the House. These benefits, by the way, are very significant indeed, but there are some people who, quite rightly and quite properly, have said: 'Yes, but the average rate for the year will not be quite as good as that'. For example, Mr Risstrom from the Australian Taxpayers Association has said that whilst it is true that from 1 November there will be a very significant improvement in the tax rate, as these figures show, on average the improvement will not be quite so much. Nevertheless, it is important to look at the tables which Mr Risstrom has put out to show that he still expects a very considerable benefit-for example, the table in which he assumes not only that the average rate will apply for the whole year rather than from I November but also that the person paying the tax will get a 10.5 per cent increase in salary because his salary will keep pace with inflation. Mr Risstrom has shown clearly that even when those matters are taken into account there is still a very considerable benefit to the taxpayer.
For example, the person earning about $300 a week in Mr Risstrom's table will get a benefit of about $512 in extra buying power-that is, a taxpayer claiming a full dependent spouse rebate, including, of course, the children's supplement. That $512 a year extra buying power, as Mr Risstrom describes it, is very significant. It is interesting to me that the Labor Party does not appear to have grasped the fact that there are real and significant income tax cuts in this legislation. In fact it spreads over an enormous range.

More than 300,000 pensioners and lower income earners, for example, will be freed from the prospect of tax altogether as a result of these measures. Of course, all individual taxpayers will receive tax cuts. On top of that, families, lower income earners and pensioners will receive the greatest proportionate tax reductions. Firstly, of course, in cutting personal income tax, the amount of tax free income that can be earned will rise by $400 a year to $4,595. For a taxpayer with a dependent spouse this threshold is effectively increased to $7,361 where there are no dependent children. This will in effect mean that about 300,000 pensioners and other lower income earners who would have faced a tax bill this year will now not do so. Secondly, the Government is increasing the spouse and sole parent rebate by $200 to $1,030 a year where there are dependent children. This will effectively increase the amount of tax free income for such a taxpayer to $8,028 a year.
Mr Robert Brown-Your whole attitude towards taxation is crook.
Mr BAUME-If the honourable member keeps that up perhaps we should compare how much someone could earn under Labor before he had to pay tax. Thirdly, the standard rate of tax will be reduced from 32c in the dollar to 30c in the dollar under this legislation, which of course will benefit all taxpayers. Fourthly, the new 30 per cent standard tax rate will be spread to a higher level of income, with an increase of $1,606 to

income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2299

$19,500, after which the 46 per cent rate will continue to apply. As a result, about 75 per cent of individual taxpayers will be on the new lower standard rate of 30c in the dollar from I November when this legislation takes effect. These changes mean that the average wage and salary earners will have added incentive to earn additional income without moving into a higher tax bracket. Pensioners will also get additional tax benefits through a special tax rebate of $250 a year from I November. For the current year that will be $167.
Other tax benefits include a 30 per cent rebate from I November on any interest over 10 per cent on housing loans up to a maximum of $60,000. This will be applicable to all buyers who occupy the homes being purchased. This extends interest rebates to more home buyers than the interest rebate scheme for first home owners which was announced in March, although of course, that scheme will remain in place as well. Honourable members will see that overall there are very significant benefits particularly to Australian families.
Mr Robert Brown-Nonsense!
Mr BAUME-The average Australian family earning about $300 a week will be up to $17 a week better off as a result of the Budget.

Mr Robert Brown-That is nonsense.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The honourable member for Hunter has gone quite far enough. If he wants to express a view he should have the guts to get up and put his view. In the meantime he should treat the honourable member for Macarthur with a little respect.
Mr BAUMEThank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I am accustomed to the honourable member burbling on like that. He is an empty vessel. Most of the increases in family income will come from the cuts in personal income tax in this legislation.
I conclude by seeking permission to incorporate in Hansard two tables showing Commonwealth Budget receipts expressed in constant dollars-in other words, after taking inflation into account. The tables are very significant. I hope that the Opposition will be interested in them because they show what has happened in terms of the revenue that this Government has received. They demonstrate, of course, that there will be a reduction in real income tax collections as a result of these reduced rates in the current year. I seek leave to have those tables incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT BUDGET RECEIPTS AT CONSTANT 1979-80 DOLLARS' 1972-73 TO 1982-83
($ millions)

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982(f)

Customs Duty (incl. imports. co<11 exports)
Excise Duty (incl. crude oil and LPG)
Sales Tax

1.172.4
2,895.9 1.746.6

1.213.9
3,121.7 1,945.4

1,382.4
2,843.8 1,898.5

1,470.0
3,284.4 1,983.5

1,612.0
3.146.6 2,089.0

1,440.9
3,197.4 2.055.9

1,597.4
4,215.8 1,940.7

1,628.8
4,965.0 1,864.8

1,713.1
5,302.9 1,911.2

1,756.0
4,880.5 2,324.3

1,646
4,913 2662

Indirect Taxest

5.814.6 6,280.7 6,124.7 6,737.9 6,847.6 6,694.3 7,753.8 8,458.6 8,927.2 8,960.8

9.222

Income Tax Individuals Nel PAVE
Olher
TOlal

7,216.2 2,120.5

8,510.8 2,513.9

9.985.7 2,701.8

9,886.9 10,796.1 11,273.5 11,400.2 12,160.3 12,837.0 14,183.5 3,098.2 3,195.9 2,841.2 2,638.4 2,879.8 3,111.5 3.100.2

9.336.5 11,024.7 12,687.5 12,985.1 13,992.0 14,186.0 14,039.3 15,040.1 15,948.5 17,283.6

13,920 3,208
17,128

Companies ( inc I. wil holding lax)

3.730.4

4,080.7

4,024.5

3,687.2

3,697.2

3,758.1

3,454.6

3,547.6

4,414.3

4,281.6

3,837

TOlal Taxation Re-

venue

19,298.9 21,833.5 23,165.8 23,722.5 24,862.9 24,965.8 25,535.3 27,305.2 29,515.1 30,768.6

3092

TOlal Receipls

21,676.7 23,995.8 25, I 52.3 25,767.9 27,094.7 27,400.1 28,024.7 29,627.4 31,983.1 33,216.7 33,303

- Nominal values converted to 1979-80 basis using the Gross Non-Farm Product Implicit Price Deflator consistent with Budget Paper No. 10. Receipts adjusted for change in classification of Mint transactions. Components may not add to totals due to rounding.
t Sum of above three items.

2300 PRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT BUDGET RECEIPTS AT CONSTANT 1979-80 DOLLARS' 1973-74 TO 1982-83
(Annual percentage changes)

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83

Customs Duty (inel. imports, coal

exports)

3.5

13.9

6.3

9.7

-10.6

10.9

2.0

Excise Duty (incl. crude oil and

LPG)

7.8

-8.9

15.5

-4.2

1.6

31.9

17.8

Sales Tax

IIA

2A

4.5

5.3

-1.6

-5.6

-3.9

5.2

2.5

6.2

6.8

8.0

6.7

2.5

21.6

14.6

Indirect Taxest

8.0

2.5

10.0

1.6

-2.2

15.8

9.1

5.5

OA

2.9

Income Tax Individuals Net PAVE Other

17.9

17.3

1.0

18.6

7.5

14.7

9.2

4A

1.1

3.2

-11.1

-7.1

6.7

5.6

10.5

-1.9

9.1

-8.0

OA

3.5

Total Companies (incl. witholding tax) Total Taxation Revenue

18.1

15.1

2.3

7.8

1.4

-1.0

7.1

6.0

8A

0.9

9A

-IA

-8A

0.3

1.6

-8.1

2.7

24A

3.0

- lOA

13.1

6.1

2A

4.8

OA

2.3

6.9

8.1

4.2

-0.2

Total Receipts

10.7

4.8

2A

5.1

1.1

2.3

5.7

8.0

3.9

0.3

- Nominal values converted to 1979-80 basis using the Gross Non-Farm Product Implicit Price Deflator consistent with Budget Paper No. 10. Receipts adjusted for change in classification of Mint transactions. Components may not add to totals due to rounding.
t Sum of above three items.

Mr BAUME~I thank the House. I commend these Bills to the House.
Mr UREN (Reid) (5.37)~ The honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) made some criticisms of my colleague, the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), for not being concerned about small investors. It is a little hypocritical for anybody on the Government side of the House to be concerned about small investors or small businessmen because no government has attacked small businessmen, small investors and in particular the housing sector, in the way this Government has. This Government, by a deliberate policy which it has had from 1975 through to the present time, when it has been panicked into giving certain concessions to the housing industry, has deliberately diverted money from the housing sector to the resources sector. It has forced up interest rates to the highest level. Until yesterday the interest rate on Australian savings bonds was 14.75 per cent. The interest rate on semi-government authority loans was 17.2 per cent to 17.4 per cent. Housing interest rates, through the savings banks, were 13.5 per cent and, through the building societies, about 15 per cent~the highest interest rates in the history of the nation. This has been the deliberate policy of this Government. Of course, that policy has attacked the little people of this country. I do not want to hear anybody on the other side of the House criticising members on this side of the House about assisting little people.

In seconding the amendment to the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.2) 1982, I wish to deal specifically with that part of the amendment dealing with tax rebates for home buyers' loan repayments. It is important to see this Bill, firstly, in the context of the interest rate climb; secondly, the March housing package which introduced limited tax rebates for first home buyers; and, thirdly, this Government's Budget strategy. All honourable members know that these rebates were offered in the 1982-83 Budget as part of an election bribe. We all know that the Government and, in particular, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) wanted a September election. But he got frightened. I do not want to say that he chickened out as I do not like those words but he did not have the guts~if I can use that term~to bite the bullet. Consequently we are still in a predicament. The current prediction is an election will be held either on 4 December or 11 December.
We all know that that has been the Government's strategy. This Budget has been designed to allow the Government to go to the polls before the due time. I recall honourable members opposite congratulating one another on their cleverness, chuckling in the corridors on Budget night over the electoral impact of this bribe. Let us be frank about it. The housing tax rebate was offered, not out of concern for the hardships imposed on home buyers by this Government's policies, not arising out of an analysis of the acute

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2301

problems in the housing sector but for no reason other than to buy votes.
Very little has been done by this Government, apart from that cynical exercise to buy votes. We cannot expect much more from a government
that is on the skids and running scared. After all, this Government has the distinguished record of being the only national government in the postwar history of Australia that has no housing policy other than a policy of running down that industry. The prime evidence of that now is that this Government has abolished the housing portfolio. There is no department responsible for housing. The tax rebate bribe was conjured up in an early election atmosphere when the level of interest rates was at a record high and on the rise. Strangely, this legislation is being introduced in
the very week that interest rates generally appear to be on the turn. However, there is no indication yet that this Government will act to allow housing interest rates to move down. Instead, this Bill generates greater uncertainty about housing interest rates. Its provisions are part of a further move to regulate the financial system that will see housing interest rates sit at the so-called market level; that is, at a price that the corporate sector can afford. Of course, we will not allow the Government to do that. The people of Australia will throw this Government out as soon as they are given the opportunity, as they will throw out the Liberal Government in South Australia, as the Government will be defeated at the Flinders by-election, if there is to be a Flinders by-election, and as the Government will be defeated in the Western Australian State election. People are sick to death of the hypocrisy of this Government, of the failures of the policies of this Government.
Implicit in this legislation is the signal of further home loan interest rate rises. Those were the indications at the time. In March this year the Government announced certain measures in relation to housing. The main point of that housing package was a further lift in interest rates. The rates charged to home buyers by savings banks were raised in March by another one per cent to 13.5 per cent. To cushion the impact of that rise a scheme was hurredly introduced to provide tax rebates for the loan repayments of some first home buyers. The Australian Labor Party criticised that scheme at the time for being too blunt. Many households in need of assistance were given no relief. Others in less need were given handouts.
We recognise the hardship imposed on many households as a result of the unprecedented rise in interest rates under this Government. Savings bank lending rates rose by 4 per cent in just two years~from 9.5 per cent in March 1980 to 13.5

per cent in March 1982. Building society rates rose similarly from 11.25 per cent to 15.25 per cent. That sharp rise added around $88 a month to repayments on a $30,000 home loan repaid over 25 years. That burden was imposed at a time of real cuts in household spending power because of this Government's policies. We recognised the hardships and introduced matters of public importance for debate in this Parliament to make the Australian people aware of the problem.
All along this Government has merely dodged the issues and has denied the facts. It has paraded survey figures indicating the high levels of home ownership in Australia. One would have thought that it was precisely because the home ownership rate was so high, with about one-third of Australian households paying off home loans, that the problem of rising home loan interest rates was so acute. We said at that time that there were two immediate problems related to high housing interest rates: Firstly, the burden imposed on households paying off their homes and, secondly, the exclusion of prospective home buyers from access to home ownership because of the widening deposit gap. This Government has denied these problems. We have been told time and again that Australia has one of the highest home ownership rates in the world with 71.9 per cent of households in August 1980 either owning their own homes or paying them off. I am sad to say that Government members have not been brought up to date. If they look at the 1981 census figures, they will see that the home ownership rate is not 71.9 per cent but 68.2 per cent. That decline in home ownership is an indication of the Government's policies over the last few years. Approximately 1.6 million people are paying off their homes. Many of these 1.6 million people are having trouble holding on to their homes and meeting their mortgage repayments.
There have been reports in the media about the stresses caused to families because of multiple job holding, increased overtime and shift work and casual work necessary for one or both partners in order to obtain additional income to keep up monthly repayments. There have also been reports of families cutting back on decent food, risking not having health cover, and making other sacrifices to make ends meet, including putting off having children. Our research showed that people on average incomes~the problems were even more severe for lower income households~who had bought a home in 1978-79 with the then average building society loan of $27,500 were $44.50 a month worse off after tax in September 1981. That is, their real spending power had been cut by $534 a year. Those who bought in 1977-78 were

2302 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

down $54.50 a month, or $654 in a full year, and those who bought in 1976-77 were down $41.10 a month, or $493 a year.
In March this year the Government added further to this erosion of household incomes by imposing another one per cent rise in interest rates. It then gave tax rebates only to first home buyers who had bought after I July 1977. Those who had bought in 1976-77 and were $493 down got nothing. Those who bought in 1977-78 and were $654 down got $100. At the same time, others who were not suffering real hardship were given generous assistance. The March 1982 rebates were blunt; they were not targeted to the people who most needed help. The rebates provided by this Bill are even blunter and, might I say, they are wildly open ended.
The 1982-83 Budget estimates that the combined cost in taxation revenue forgone through the March rebates and the rebates provided by this Bill is $415m. We have had independent people cost those programs for us, and we believe that these figures are rubbery by $60m. The real cost of the tax rebates will be closer to $475m. Honourable members should take that fact into consideration when studying the rubbery figures of this Budget.
The rebates provided in this Bill open up wider tax avoidance opportunities and invite rorts. The Bill provides for tax rebates of 30c in the dollar on loan repayments from any source in excess of a 10 per cent interest rate. The rebates are provided for all home buyers, irrespective of the total size of the loan, regardless of whether the beneficiary owns another house or several other houses, and regardless of the means and income of the beneficiary. A person who owns three houses is eligible for the rebate. If he is not living at present in the home he is buying he can transfer the loan to his principal residence and get the rebate. If he has a loan of $60,000, $100,000, $160,000, or even $250,000 and above, he gets the rebate for interest in excess of 10 per cent on the first $60,000 of that loan.
Even in Sydney, where house and land prices are the highest in Australia at a median cost of around $83,000, the large majority of home buyers have loans of less than $60,000. For the statistics people, for the last three-quarters of the year the median price paid by first home buyers in Sydney has been $64,000, so this loan figure of $60,000 is in fact extremely generous. I am saying that no doubt some people within the Liberal f.arty Secretariat have plotted on a map of marginal electorates the people in mansions whose votes have to be won. There is no doubt that some

of the smart tycoons in these mansions have worked out that they can pay for next month's trip to St Moritz by getting a home loan that will attract a tax rebate. I have no doubt that that will happen. Meanwhile, the rate of home ownership falls and the tax rebates do nothing to reduce the prohibitive deposit gap as banks and building societies set loan limits on the basis of growth income. For those already paying off a home the rebates provide about $6 a week compensation for loan repayment increases of $22 a week. The rebates fail to adjust household incomes for the past effects of interest rate rises. They offer no security against further rises. In fact, they engender greater uncertainty because they signal a further move to deregulate interest rates. They set a trap for those at the bottom end of the home buying population. They encourage people who are desperate to buy a home to go to the fringe funding institutions that charge usurious interest rates of something like 20 per cent and above. In that process, the rebates destabilise the housing finance market and give the banks and building societies which want to direct funds away from housing an excuse to do so.
I repeat that Labor is genuinely concerned about the hardship imposed on home buyers as a result of this Government's policies. We support the provision of tax rebates that are targeted to the average home buyer who has been hurt in recent times, and to those in the community who really need help and assistance. We cannot condone the approach of this Government, which relies entirely on such schemes in the absence of a comprehensive housing policy. We cannot condone the horizontal inequity of this position, which turns its back on the one million people renting in the private market who have also suffered as a result of high interest rates. We cannot condone the vertical inequity of giving bribes to wealthy households, amongst whom are most of the tax evaders. Above all, the sad thing about this matter is that the real cost of tax rebates of $475m does nothing to overcome the deposit gap. It does nothing to stimulate the building industry, which needs leadership from governments. The tragedy is that there is no leadership in this country. The Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace noted that 'there is no national housing policy on which governments can agree'. There is no attempt by this Government to give leadership to both State and local governments, to co-operate in the interests of the people. The building industry is at an all time low. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table from the I982 ,report of the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry.

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2303

Leave granted. The table read as follows-

KEY POINTS - 1982 REPORT OF INDICATIVE PLANNING COUNCIL FOR THE HOUSING INDUSTRY
Australia: Demand forecast 1982-3, 152,000 new commencements.
Capacity estimate 1982-3, 150,000 new commencements.
Activity projection 1982-3, 118,000 new commencements.

States
New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia . Western Australia Tasmania . . . . . Australian,Capital Territory Northern Territory Australia . . . . . .

Capacity estimate 1982-83
52,000 32,000 30,000 8,500 20,000 3,500 2,000 2,300 150,300

Activity forecast 1982-83
34,800 25,800 29,000 7,800 14,500
2,700 1,500 2,000 118,000

Underused capacity
per cent -17,200 33 6,200 24 1,000 3 700 8 5,500 38 800 23 500 25 300 15 - 32,300 27

Mr UREN-I thank the House. This table sets out the estimated new commencements of activity projections forecast for this year. It is estimated that there will be 118,000 new commencements, but the Indicative Planning Council says that the industry has the capacity for 150,000 new commencements for the year 1982-83. This means that there will be a shortfall this year alone of something like 32,000 new commencements.
That is a shortfall of 27 per cent below capacity. Next to unemployment housing is the most serious social problem in this country. Apart from that, the housing industry is an industry which is labour intensive. It has a flow-on effect. The industry can create employment that would give a stimulus to the whole building industry. In the Labor Party's first year in government we will build 135,000 homes. That will create, directly and indirectly, at least another 27,000 jobs. Within three years we will lift the number of homes built to at least 160,000. This is the number which is needed to house the people in this country properly. I second the amendment. It is sad that this Government has had to use this measure as a political gimmick for an early election. I think it will backfire in its face. The Labor Party has a far better, more positive and more comprehensive housing policy.
Mr LUSHER (Hume) (5.56)-After all these years I think honourable members might have thought that the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) might have mellowed just a little., But honourable members who had looked forward to that prospect would again have been disappointed after having sat through the speech that he made

in the chamber this afternoon. Again the honourable member has given absolutely no credit to the Government for anything. He takes the line, of course, that everything that the Government does is perforce wrong. He reminds me of some people whom a colleague of mine used to speak with. He used to say to them: 'Well, of course, having sat here and listened to you for an hour or two you leave me with the impression that you believe that the Cabinet sits around that table every Monday morning and says "Now, what is the issue of the day? How can we possibly make the biggest mess that we can of it?" ,
Mr Leo McLeay-That is what you do.
Mr LUSHER-That is the impression the honourable member for Reid leaves the House with. I just regret that the honourable member for Reid is totally without generosity and totally without charity particularly as he gets into the senior years of his service to this country and to this Parliament. I hope that before he takes the decision to retire from this august chamber he does at least mellow a little and that he will come in here on at least one occasion and prove that he is not totall,y without generosity or charity.
The fact is that in the area of housing to which the honourable member was turning his attention, home buyers will have their mortgage interest rates effectively cut-many by more than 2 per cent-as a result of the new housing assistance measures that were introduced in this Budget. That is not all. There have been major stimuli given to the building industry and to the construction industry as a result of the initiatives that have been announced in this Budget. It is all part of a major $726m housing package which includes

2304 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

new interest rate subsidies, first home-deposit assistance grants and higher direct housing assistance to those in need. The interest rate cuts will be achieved by a tax rebate of between $5 and $8 a week for average mortgages. Higher rebates will apply to larger loans. But the rebates will give the greatest benefit to those home buyers who have not been able to obtain concessional mortgage rates from major lenders.
All home buyers will be eligible for the new rebate which, unlike the housing rebate which was announced last March, will cover all taxpayers buying the home that they occupy. Despite all the whingeing that has come from the Opposition benches I have not heard anybody suggest that he is not going to take advantage of the rebate. Of course, he is, and so is everybody out there in the wider electorate. They will be grateful to the Government for having provided the rebate. The new tax rebate is 30 per cent of all housing loan interest which is higher than 10 per cent on up to $60,000 of a loan on the family home. For a home buyer with a loan of, say, $25,000 at an interest rate of 13t per cent the home loan rebate will be worth about $263 in a full year or over $5 a week. The interest rate in this case would be effectively reduced from I3t per cent to less than 12+ per cent. Knocking one per cent off the interest rate on a home loan is not a bad sort of result.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr LUSHER-Where the effective rate of interest on the same mortgage is, say, 17 per cent, as it can be when there is a second mortgage or the loan is not made at a concessional rate by a bank or a building society, the rebate will be worth about $525 in a full year or $10 a week from November. The interest rate in this case would be effectively reduced from 17 per cent to 14.9 per cent. Mr Deputy Speaker, I think you will agree that that is a real reduction. Total direct outlays on housing in 1982-83 will increase by 25 per cent to $57Im-1 do not understand what the honourable member for Reid was really complaining about-which includes a 27 per cent increase to $333m for welfare housing. I do not want to speak any more about housing, but what I have said I think sufficiently makes the point in answer to what the honourable member for Reid said.
The amount of tax free income that can be earned following the passage of this legislation through the House tonight will rise by $400 a year to $4,595. For a taxpayer with a dependent spouse but no dependent children this threshold is increased to $7,361. That is a fair amount of income that people will be entitled to earn before

they are asked to pay any tax. This will mean that 300,000 pensioners and other low income earners who would have faced a tax bill this year will now not do so. The spouse and sole parent rebate will rise by $200 to $1,030 a year where there are dependent children. This will effectively increase the tax-free threshold for these families to $8,028. I believe it is a very significant and welcome move in the community that the Government has been able to reduce the standard rate of tax from 32c in the dollar to 30c in the dollar. That will benefit all taxpayers in Australia. Regardless of their income level, if they pay tax they will be paying less as a result of that move.
The new 30 per cent standard rate will be spread to a higher level of income with an increase of $1,606 to $19,500, after which the 46 per cent rate will apply. As a result, 75 per cent of taxpayers will be on the standard rate of 30c in the dollar. I think that is a really meaningful result that the Government has been able to achieve. Pensioners will get an additional tax benefit through a special tax rebate of $250 a year from I November. In 1982 this will mean, on a pro rata basis, a rebate of $167. Other tax cuts include an increase in home loan interest rebates, which I have already spoken about. That rebate will now be at a rate of 30c in the dollar and will apply to that portion of the interest on a housing loan that exceeds 10 per cent and to the first $60,000 of a home loan. It also comes into effect on I November. Resident shareholders of Australian companies will have a 30.67 per cent rebate in 1982-83 on dividends of up to $1,000 and employees will be able to buy shares in their employer company without being taxed on any benefits arising from the issue price gained under an approved scheme. I think that again is a very welcome move.
These tax cuts will cost the Government more than $1.6 billion this year, so that its total income tax revenue will fall by almost one per cent after adjustments for inflation. This is the first time since I became a member of this place that I can remember a government not having a real increase in its income tax collections. As a result of the cuts, real tax collections from pay-as-you-earn taxpayers will be 2 per cent lower this year. Cuts in personal income tax, except for tax avoiders, are almost three times greater than the increases in consumer taxes made up of sales taxes and excises on beer and tobacco. These consumer tax rises total only $600m compared with personal income tax cuts which total well over $1.6 billion. The real rise in indirect taxes this year of 3 per cent only restores their share of total revenue to the 28.3 per cent that existed two years ago. Sales

Income Tax Assessment Amendment BiJI

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2305

taxes as a proportion of Budget revenue, this year total 8 percent, which is still below Labor's 8.1 per cent in the 1973-74 Budget.
When considering how government raises tax revenue, what should not be ignored is where the tax dollar goes. This year's Budget divides the tax dollar up in roughly this sort of proportion: 28c on social security and welfare; 23c to the States, the Northern Territory and local government; 10c to defence; 8c to education; 7c each to health, economic services, general public services and public debt interest; and 3c to other miscellaneous services. I commend the Government on its taxation package which was brought down in this Budget, most of which is taking effect in November and which is providing real relief in places where it is needed. It is getting directly to the family man who is the single breadwinner and who has a mortgage. They are the people in this society over the last few years who, as a result of the Laborinspired inflation we have had to live with, have really felt the pinch. This Government has acknowledged and recognised that hardship and has done something about remedying it. I commend these Bills and I will be supporting them wholeheartedly.
Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (8.8)- The package of tax Bills under discussion will put into effect the announcements made in the Budget Speech in respect of taxation matters. The rebates and concessions outlined in these Bills consitute the basket of goodies included in the Budget to give it a credible nature prior to a then imminent election. These so-called goodies will flow on to the community from I November. They were included in the Budget for the express purpose of enticing people to vote with their hip pocket nerve. I am not entirely critical of the tax rebates and concessions which will flow to the community because we in the Australian Labor Party have been calling for measures for some time so that middle and lower income earners would receive a reduction in tax.
However, I am critical of the cynical nature of the Government's measures which smell so much of political expediency. I say that because on a number of occasions we have seen the Government make promises and then later not keep them or bring down other measures which had the effect of nullifying the benefits previously given. I instance the 1977 Budget which was brought down only months before an election was called. The Government offered tax cuts, maintained tax indexation and offered a range of goodies. These supposedly responsible economic managers estimated that the cost of all those Budget measures would lead to a Budget deficit of only

$1.4 billion. Three months later the Government went to the polls and won. Almost immediately afterwards it became apparent that the Budget had blown out. The deficit was heading towards $2.5 billion. The Government had given the elec-
torate the goods before the election but had wrongly calculated the cost. In the 1978 Budget the Government took back its tax concessions, backed down on its promise of full tax indexation, introduced the oil levy and dismantled Medibank. Health insurance became more expensive. Excise taxes were increased and there were further increases in sales tax and other indirect taxes. People were told to tighten their belts and that life was not going to be easy. They experienced further deception in 1980 when the Government fabricated the resources boom. Suddenly they were told that Australia was once again the lucky country and that all Australians could expect to share the benefits of exceptional growth and national development. The resources boom collapsed soon after the 1980 election. Many big projects were either shelved ot cancelled-for example, the Rundle shale oil project, the Alcan Aust. Ltd Lochinvar and Portland aluminium smelters and the now ironic proposal to expand the Newcastle steel works. The Australian people are awake to the Fraser Government not having a sound economic framework as the basis for its policy decisions. They are awake to the reality of the Government lurching from one election to the next trying to bring down policies which may get it re-elected, not policies which will get Australia out of its chronic economic malaise.
As a result of the tax measures presently under discussion, the Budget Bills provided for a deficit of almost $1,700m. As predicted by me and other Opposition members, the deficit has already been officially extended by a further $300m to provide the additional unemployment benefits necessary to cover the average number of persons unemployed, which was stated to be 395,000 and which the Treasur.er (Mr Howard) has now admitted will be 460,000. The figures used in the Budget were rubbery for the express purpose of providing the goodies contained in these Bills. It was a shonky Budget.
Let me now deal with some of the measures proposed. The personal income tax burden will be reduced by increasing the tax free zone from $4,195 to $4,595, by reducing the standard rate of tax from 32 per cent to 30 per cent and by increasing the top of the standard rate step in the rate scale from $17,894 to $19,500. The Treasurer has stated that these measures will provide the largest proportional tax reductions to persons on low to average incomes.

2306 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

The fact is, of course, that these tax concessions, to cost $1 ,600m this financial year, offer little more than what full indexation would have given taxpayers. If full indexation had applied the cost would have been $1 ,500m. The tax rip-off of the Australian taxpayer since the abolition of tax indexation is, perhaps, not greatly appreciated. Tax indexation was the only protection to the maintenance of a person's real after-tax wage in a time of high inflation. To explain, tax indexation was the process whereby the tax thresholds were raised in accordance with consumer price index increases and corresponding wage increases. Without tax indexation, when wages increase a greater proportion of the wage goes in tax. The Liberal Party praised the merits of tax indexation in 1975 when it promised to reform the tax system. Tax indexation, it said, would make the government more honest with taxpayers' money because government would no longer be able to rely on the secret tax increase of inflation. These words were spoken by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in 1975. Yet over the subsequent years that commitment was rarely met. In the six financial years from 1976-77 to 1981-82 inclusive, full tax indexation was applied only twice. In both these cases, 1976-77 and 1977-78 the unadjusted CPI increase was discounted fo; the effects of indirect taxes, et cetera, so that the tax scales were never fully indexed for inflation. In three of the remaining years half tax indexation was applied, and in 1979-80 there was no tax indexation at all. Seen in this context, this Budget's tax

concessions do not so much give something to the taxpayer as simply stop the practice of automatically taking the hidden tax increases that inliation permits.
As I outlined to the House in my speech in the Budget debate on 8 September, the saving achieved by a typical family of four with one income earner on $300 per week through these tax cuts is $2.03 less than if full indexation had applied. If that family is paying off a home mortgage of $25,000 it will, according to the Treasurer, be $17 a week better off. In fact it will be only $3.56 better off after taking full indexation into consideration. Of the 3.73 million families in Australia, only 30,000 fit the example of earning $300 per week. The Government is therefore not giving very much away. It is not true to say that those income earners on low incomes receive the largest proportion of the benefit. In fact, the current measures only marginally improve the situation for those on lower incomes, mainly because of the Government's previous tax policies, which have put an increased burden on the lower income earners but decreased the tax burden for those on higher incomes. I seek leave of the House to have incorporated in Hansard a table which I had prepared in the Parliamentary Library showing the regressive nature of taxable incomes for single taxpayers through to two-income families.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows~

THE CHANGING TAX BURDEN

Net tax as proportion of income(%) Family type/income"

1975-76

1981-82

1982-83

Per cent change in net tax as proportion of income

1975-76 to 1981-82

1975-76 to 1982-83

$
12.062 12.370 (average wage) 18,652 (AWE) 36.187 72.374
12.062 12.370 18.652 36.187 72.374
12.062 12.370 18,652 36,187 72.374

Single taxpayer

16.1

19.5

19.3

17.9

19.8

19.6

22.8

23.9

23.5

34.1

34.1

34.3

48.0

46.3

47.1

Taxpayer and dependent spouse

9.1

11.8

12.4

11.5

12.3

12.8

18.3

19.0

19.0

31.8

31.5

32.0

46.8

45.0

46.0

Taxpayer, dependent spouse and 2 children

1.6

7.7

6.4

4.8

8.3

7.0

13.4

16.3

15.1

29.3

30.2

30.0

45.6

44.3

45.0

21.1 10.6 4.8
-3.5
29.7 7.0 3.8
- 1.0 3.8
381.3 72.9 21.6 3.1 -2.9

19.8 9.4 3.0 0.8 -1.8
36.2 11.3 3.8 0.6 -1.7
300.0 45.8 12.6 2.3 -1.3

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTAT1VES 2307

Net tax as proportion of income(%) Family type/income'

1975-76

1981-82

1982-83

Per cent change in net tax as proportion of income

1975-76to 1981-82

1975-76to 1982-83

$
18.652 36.187
18.652 36.187

Two income family with 2 childrent

7.6

13.0

12.8

71.1

68.4

20.8

23.9

23.6

14.9

13.4

Two income family, no dependantst

12.4

15.7

15.9

26.6

28.2

23.3

25.3

25.3

8.6

8.6

- Income is expressed in 1982-83 dollars. These income levels were deflated by AWE to find net tax as proportion of income for a person on an equivalent real income in 1975-76 (this approach takes account of changes in both inflation and real earnings).
t The income level is total combined family income. It has been assumed that the primary income earner earns twice as much as the secondary income earner.

Mr MOUNTFORD~I thank the House. Over the past seven years the taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two children has had to pay a greater proportion of his income in tax the lower his income. For example, a person who now earns $12,062 pays 6.4 per cent of his income in tax. In 1975-76 he paid 1.6 per cent. The proportion has increased in this period by 300 per cent. Let us compare this example with a person earning $36, I87. He now pays 30 per cent of his income in tax. In 1975-76 he paid 29.3 per cent. The increase there is only 2.3 per cent. It is only in higher income groups that the percentage has decreased. So much for community equity. When the Prime Minister said in the 1975 election campaign that his Government would reduce the tax burden. we now see that he must have meant that the burden would be reduced for only a very select group of taxpayers, in other words the richer ones.
I will now discuss in further detail the measures proposed in the income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.5). There is provision for a home loan interest rebate of tax for home buyers for the top slice of their interest payments on home loans of up to $60,000. As already pointed out by my colleagues the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) and the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren), this provision will be abused by those who earn high incomes and reside in luxury homes. So that only those paying off a loan on a single residential property would receive the benefit, I support the amendment which has been moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand. It needs to be pointed out, however, that because this is a rebate measure, to receive the rebate a person has to have a tax liability in the first place. This measure, therefore, excludes pensioners, sole parents and those on low incomes paying off a home.

The special pensioner rebate coupled with the increase in the tax free zone to $4,595 will, of course, bring a long needed relief to those pensioners who in the past have been excluded from receiving fringe benefits even if their income may have just exceeded the limit. I have brought many
of these cases before this House during adjournment debates, including one case in which the pensioner in my electorate earned 50c a year too much. Therefore, I support this measure. Again, however, the measures assist only those pensioners who have an income as well as the pension. What about those pensioners who have to survive on only a pension? There is no rebate or assistance for them. The pension is below the poverty line and will still be below that level when the indexed rise is paid in November. Pensioners who receive the pension as their only source of income should have received a rise in the level of the pension in the Budget.
The more one looks at these measures, the more one comes to the conclusion that these Bills provide assistance to those who have money. Those who have no excess money receive nothing. Rebates and concessions are completely inequitable as those really in need, those in our community who are forced to survive on welfare assistance, receive nothing at all. Further measures in these Bills include the retention allowance for private companies. Allowance has been extended by a further 10 per cent so that a private company may keep 80 per cent of the proportion of after tax business income without becoming liable to pay the undistributed profits tax. When this Government came to power the retention allowance was only 50 per cent. It has been increased to 80 per cent which only really helps those who, in my opinion, do not need a great deal of help at all. In fact, in my opinion it is a further legal method of avoiding paying proper tax.

2308 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

I move on to one of the other measures-- deductions for gifts provided for in this Bill. In quite a number of areas tax deductions will be allowed for gifts made to charitable institutions. One must applaud the Government for allowing those institutions to have such gifts made tax deductible. However, I do not feel that the Centre for Independent Studies should be eligible to attract taxation deductions. It is a business organisation. In fact, one might say that it is a sounding board for the dries on the Government side. It would be one of their greatest supporters. It is quite beyond my understanding why the people of Australia should be asked to support the Centre for Independent Studies by giving donations to it tax deductibility. I certainly do not agree with the proposal in that regard.
The Bills before us at present were originally introduced into the House for the purpose of bringing into effect the Budget undertakings. As I mentioned earlier, at the time the Budget was presented to the House it was an election issue. I do not believe that it is an election issue at present because the Budget has blown out. As the honourable member for Gellibrand pointed out on two occasions in this House today, the funds which were provided in the Budget do not stand up to close scrutiny. Although the opposition is not opposing these Bills which are before the House tonight, if the Government had had a second look at them it would have realised the problems caused to the Budget and it would not have introduced them in the first place. The Government would not have given a forecast in the Budget of their being introduced. The way the situation is at present I do not believe that the Government will be able to afford the measures provided for in these Bills. My colleague the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) sitting opposite said yesterday in the House that he thought the Budget would not blowout by only $1 ,500m but that the figure would be far in excess of that. I am not going to quote the figure that he cited but I believe him. It is what we on this side of the House have been saying since the Budget was introduced. It does not stand up to scrutiny. Although we support these Bills, the Government is certainly at risk because they will cause the Budget to blow out further. At present in Australia we have very high inflation and high unemployment. The blowing out of the Budget is of no joy to us at all. We would certainly welcome the chance to go to the electors on this and other measures.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

In Committee
The Bill.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (8.25)-1 move:
Class 5, page 4, line 43, omit proposed sub-paragraph (I) (a) (Ixxv).
The purpose of this amendment is to delete the Centre for Independent Studies from the group of organisations which, by the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.5) 1982, are being granted tax deductibility for gifts. The inclusion of the Centre for Independent Studies in this group of organisations which is set out in the Bill is rather curious to say the least. No reasons were given why gifts to this organisation should be given tax deductibility. In fact, no reasons were given for gifts to any of the organisations listed being tax deductible although they mostly include organisations which members on both sides of the chamber would support. The Centre for Independent Studies is an economic and social research institute based in Sydney which has a particular flavour, a particular ideology. It is an organisation which I think it is fair to describe as very much on the right wing of the conservative side of economics. It has an advisory council which includes many of the more notable conservative economists in Australia. Interestingly enough, one of those is Professor Cliff Walsh who is the economic adviser to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). Therein, I believe, lies the reason why gifts to this organisation have been given tax deductibility.
We believe that it is a serious business indeed that the Government picks out one such organisation in this country and says: 'We are going to give tax deductibility to this economic research institute because we like it; we like what it writes'. That is basically what it is all about. The Government thinks that the kinds of publications and the people involved in this organisation are acceptable to it. Therefore it thinks it is appropriate that gifts to it be tax deductible. Thus it is given substantial encouragement and capacity to expand its activities. That is an extraordinarily biased and unacceptable action on the part of the Government.
There are several other economic and research institutes in this country which, in my viewcertainly that can be said to be a biased view-are much more worthy of support than this organisation and they are not given the kind of support which this organisation gets by way of tax deductibility. I believe that that kind of action on the part of the Government is totally unacceptable. We cannot support a completely biased action made by a government which seeks to promote an

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2309

organisation which it sees as producing, in effect, economic propaganda which is in line with the Government's ideology and approach. We cannot support that kind of approach. We think it is thoroughly wrong.
It raises a broader issue about the whole question of granting tax deductibility to gifts to institutions. It has become a complete mess in which the Government simply pork barrels all sorts of organisations which it thinks from time to time will be electorally attractive for it. There needs to be some set of rules applying to the application of tax deductibility for gifts to organisations. We simply should not go on as we have year after year, particularly under this Government, adding group after group to the list of institutions for which gifts are tax deductible just because those groups have been able to persuade the Government for one reason or another that they should be given the concession of tax deductibility but with no public guidelines applying as to which groups qualify and which do not. That is a thoroughly unacceptable situation for us.
What we have advocated in the past-I stress that the example of the Centre for Independent Studies brings this very much to the fore again-is the need for clear guidlines as to the application of tax deductibility for gifts to institutions. It should not be given in the way in which it has been given in the past. A clear set of principles should be applied. This process of pork barrelling organisations which are acceptable to the Government for one reason or another-particularly those which are just producing the intellectual propaganda which the Government likes and supports-is something which should be brought to a halt immediately. I thoroughly recommend to the House that this amendment be supported.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (8.30)--1 will speak for just a couple of minutes on the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.5). In its amendments to section 78 the Government is adding a number of institutions, and I wish to make some criticisms. My first criticism relates to proposed sub-paragraph (I xxii), and I will read the amendment relating to donations to particular organisations, which donations are to be tax deductible. Proposed sub-paragraph (I xxii) reads:
A public fund established and maintained exclusively for the relief of persons (other than members of armed forces) who are in Lebanon. or are refugees from Lebanon. and who are in necessitous circumstances as a consequence of attacks upon. or the invasion of. that country by the armed forces of Israel;
I think that is an extremely biased approach to what has happened in Lebanon. I do not approve of what happened there, but it is ridiculous to

suggest that the necessitous circumstances are due purely to the invasion of that cou:'try by the armed forces of Israel. I think it is appropriate that the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) should be at the table because he would be aware that refugees have been
leaving Lebanon for many years now. Long before there was any suggestion of an invasion of that country by the armed forces of Israel there were Palestine Liberation Organisation and Syrian forces there and there was fighting amongst groups inside Lebanon. Surely it is very restrictive to confine that to a particular public fund. That is a specific point. I also suggest to the Government that the whole series of 78 sub-paragraphs is ridiculous. If we look at the original Act we can see contraditions. For example, sub-paragraph (xxxvi) reads:
The Australian Post Graduate Federation in Medicine. the College of Radiologists of Australiasia, the Australian College of General Practitioners and the College of Pathologists of Australia. where the gift is for the purpose of education or research in medical knowledge or science;
I think that is very appropriate. However, if we look at sub-paragraphs (xx), (xxi), (xxii), (xxiii) and (xxiv) we see references to donations to the Royal Australian College of Surgeons, the Royal Australian College of Physicians, the Australian Regional Council of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, et cetera. There is no restriction on the basis that donations must be for the purposes of education or research in medical knowledge or science. I think that most honourable members would agree that those donations should not be tax deductible unless they are for that purpose. I have a particular hang-up about the Australian Conservation Foundation. I do not think donations to that organisation ought to be entitled to tax deductibility. I think it is a malignant organisation in Australia. It is anti-people; it opposes immigration and any sort of development jobs for people. I think it is one of the most reactionary organisations to be found in this country. In fact, I think it is far more reactionary than the Centre for Independent Studies. Although I must admit that I do not know much about that Centre, in the first instance I would be tempted to give more money to that organisation than to the ACF.
Other types of organisations have been added to the legislation. For example, we have the Council for Christian Education in Schools and the Council for Jewish Education in Schools. Apparently Christian education in schools did not seem to include Roman Catholics, so we have in sub-paragraph (xlix) a Roman Catholic council exclusively for the purpose of providing religious instruction in government schools in Australia. I

2310 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

think it is quite ridiculous to have provisions in the Income Tax Assessment Act on that basis. Obviously any group that comes along and puts pressure on the Government is included. In any case, I think there is a basis for arguing that the Government, if it feels that money is required for those sorts of institutions, ought to be taking the initiative to give money for those purposes or institutions rather than giving what in effect is taxpayers' money on the basis of those institutions
being able to raise money.
I have grave reservations on this matter. At the same time. I can see that people can argue in a different way. They can argue, in effect, that what the Government is doing in allowing, let us say, the original 32c or 33c in the dollar rebate is giving a three to one benefit to those institutions, depending on the money they can raise. I always have had basic reservations when donations are made on that basis. Just this year, before these 20-odd organisations that are being added under the present Bill were included, we have added the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the Queensland Cultural Centre Trust, the Connellan Airways Trust, Polish relief appeals, the Tongan cyclone relief appeal and Falkland Islands Relief Appeal. I do not quite know what the Falkland Islands Relief Appeal refers to. I appeal to the Government to look at this matter and to review the Act as it stands. I ask it to note my reservation, which I think would probably be shared by other honourable membersalthough it may not be shared in relation to specific groupsthat this is not the correct way of going about the matter.
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (8.37)-Mr Deputy Chairman, I wish to make one or two brief points in the Committee stage of the debate on the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.5). Firstly, I refer to clause 5, sub-paragraph (1 xxii), which deals with the tax deductibility of gifts to the public fund for the relief of persons who are in Lebanon or who are refugees from Lebanon. Particular mention is made of the reason for the fund being established, that reason being, in terms of this peice of legislation, the invasion of that country by the armed forces of Israel. I have raised that matter with the Treasurer (Mr Howard). We did try to have an amendment ready for the Committee this evening to indicate simply that instead of referring to Israel it would refer to all foreign armed forces in Lebanon. For technical reasons it was not possible to introduce that tonight, and as I understand it the Government will introduce that very minor amendment in the Senate. It is an amendment which would not change the substance of the clause, but I

would be happy to see it made so that that particular wording is not in the statute books.
As the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) said, the devastation of Lebanon is due not just to recent events there but also to the presence of the Palestine Liberation Organisation and the Syrians over many years. I think that too many people forget that Israel lived at peace with Lebanon for about 34 years during a lot of ArabIsraeli wars. The devastation of Lebanon really did not begin until the PLO and Syrians came, uninvited and un welcomed, and devastated large parts of that country. I think if we could remove the word 'Israel' it would provide more balance and give a truer indication of the history of the ravaged country of Lebanon.
I also simply state that the word 'invasion' is one about which I am not particularly pleased. If we look at the United Nations definition of that word we find that the act of Israel entering Lebanon does not by the strict terms of any United Nations definition constitute an act of aggresion with a neighbouring country acting as a host to an organisation committed to the destruction of Israel. These are very minor points. I indicate to the Committee that I think the Government will rectify that situation when the Bill goes to the Senate.
Mr HODGES (Petrie-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs) (8.39)-ln the absence of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and on behalf of the Government I reject the amendment moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). I think the overriding consideration in supporting tax deductibility for the Centre for Independent Studies is the fact that the Centre is independent. It is not tied to government, to any political party or to any religious group; indeed, it is not beholden to any group or individual. Object 3(a) in the Memorandum of Association for the Centre for Independent Studies states:
to undertake and prosecute scientific research and inquiry into the fundamentals and theory of the free society including but not thereby limiting its application, the philosophical, historical, economic, legal and social aspects of such society with particular relevance to the Commonwealth of Australia.
Object 3(e) states:
the Centre shall be non-political, non-sectarian and nonracial and shall not take any step or make any decisions whereby it shall in any manner whatsoever align itself with any political party. religious, philosophical, or other group.
The honourable member for Gellibrand made reference to the fact that one of the members of the Advisory Council for the Centre for Independent Studies was an adviser to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). There is no dispute in relation to that matter. I say to the Committee, though,

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2311

that he is one of 17 quite eminent Australians who are on this Advisory Council. I suggest to the
Committee that one person would have very little influence. Indeed, I suggest that he is a very able
person and quite rightly should sit on that particular Advisory Council.

I think the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) raised the issue of the difficulty in selecting various organisations to receive tax
deductibility under section 78 of the principal
Act. The fact that the honourable member for Prospect does not agree that the Australian Con-
servation Foundation should receive tax deduc-
tibility for donations I think indicates the difficulty that one runs into when endeavouring to
classify organisations. I suggest to the honourable member for Prospect that almost to a man members of the Opposition other than himself
would support tax deductibility for that organisation. As I have said, it just highlights the difficulty that any Treasurer and any government
runs into in endeavouring to select various organisations for inclusion under section 78 of the Act.

The Centre for Independent Studies, of course,
is financed, as is stated in its papers, by sales of its
pUblications and by voluntary subscriptions and contributions from individuals, organisations and companies. Therefore tax deductibility will be of immense value to this Centre in assisting to
finance its operations. On behalf of the Government I reject the Opposition's amendment. I fail
to see why there should be any objections to the
inclusion of this body under section 78 of the Act.

Question put:

That the amendment (Mr Willis's) be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-(Mr J. L. Armitage)

Ayes

39

Noes

60

Majority

21

AYES
Beazley. K. C. Blewett. N. Bowen. Lionel Brown. John Brown. Roben Cass.M. H. Cohen. B. Cross.M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling. E. E. Da\\- kins. J. S. Duffy.M.J. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Holding.;\. C. Howe. 8. L Humphreys. B. C. (Teller) Jenkins. H. A.

Jones. Charles Keating. P.J. Kelly. R.J. Kerin,J. C. Klugman. R. E. McLeuy. Leo McMahon, Les Maher. M. J. Mildren. J. B. Milton.P. Morris.P.F. Mountford,1, G. Scholes. G. G. D. Scott. J. L. Theophanous. A. C. Uren. T. Wallis. L.G. West.S.J.

AYES
Johnson. Les (Teller) Jones. Barry

Willis.R.

NOES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony.J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield.J. M. Brown. N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr.M.A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron. Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Cariton. J. J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles. G. O-H. Good luck. B. J. Hall. Steele Harris,G. McD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. C. Hodgman. W. M. Hunt. R. J. D.

Hyde.J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull. D. F. Katter, R. C. Killen, Sir James Lloyd. B. lusher, S. A. MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean. R. M. (Teller) Newman, K. E. Nixon, P.J. O-Keefe. F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson. Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair. I. McC. Spender. J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey. C. W. Viner,R.1. White. P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. C.

Campbell.G. Everingham, D. N. Jacobi, R.

PAIRS

Braithwaite, R. A. Chapman. H. G. P. Dobie.J.D.M.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Bill agreed to.

Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.

Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodges)-by leave-- read a third time.

INCOME TAX (RATES) BILL 1982 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.

2312 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Legislation

INCOME TAX (RATES) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.
INCOME TAX (INDIVIDUALS) BILL 1982 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.
INCOME TAX (COMPANIES, CORPORATE ,UNIT TRUSTS AND SUPERANNUATION
FUNDS) BILL 1982 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.
INCOME TAX (MINING WITHHOLDING TAX) AMENDMENT BILL 1982 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.
LOAN BILL (No.2) 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (8.58)~Mr Deputy Speaker~
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)~ Order! Would the honourable member for Blaxland resume his seat for a moment. The honourable member for Fadden is seeking to make a personal explanation with the indulgence of the Chair. He intimated to the Chair his desire so to do but he failed to rise at the appropriate moment. The business has been called on. The honourable member will have to be a little patient.
Mr KEATING~ The Loan Bill (No.2) approves payments for the deficit on defence expenditure from the Loan Fund. It is necessary because of the constraints upon the spending of Consolidated Revenue and because the expenditure exceeds revenue, given the fact that this is a deficit Budget. The Opposition does not oppose this legislation but it points up the fact that this Budget, as the Opposition has indicated on a number of occasions, was designed for an election. It is one of the sloppiest Budgets ever constructed by the Fraser Government. Its construction is rivalled only by the 1977 Budget which was actually falsified by the Government for a premature election. The Government offered tax cuts and a level of deficit it thought the public would accept. This is clearly the case in respect of the 1982 Budget which was drafted in the middle of this year~in June and July~when the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) thought that the Liberal Party could prosecute an early election. The figuring of the Budget is designed to give away tax handouts in November of this year and thus facilitates the Government's election prospects.
On a number of counts it is worth detailing where this Budget is so obviously faulty and where the Government has sought to minimise the expenditure side of the Budget so as to make it look a more respectable document. We have seen a turnaround in the last couple of weeks by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in regard to unemployment benefit outlays. The Budget, it is said, was

Income Tax Legis/ation

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2313

premised upon the recipients of unemployment benefits totalling 395,000 persons. That figure has now been increased to 460,000. The 395,000 was supposed to be the average for the financial year 1982-83. Already the additional costs for unemployment benefits on the expenditure side of the Budget are $300m. Because there is an overstatement of employment in the Budget assumptions there will be a cost to revenue in the fallaway in employment which the Budget has not
figured upon. If employment falls by one per cent there will be a cost to revenue of $21 Om. Again that would have been clear to the Government at the time the Budget was being formulated. The Government understood that, in its Budget estimates, there was an understatement of unemployment and an overstatement of employment and that a cost to revenue of $21 Om would result.
The total drought package will be a cost to revenue of $356m. It was clear at the time of the formulation of the Budget that many of the agricultural regions of the country were in the grips of serious drought and that the $356m would be a contingent cost upon the Budget. In addition no account was taken of a drop in farm income as a result of the drought. My colleague the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) has estimated that this will be a cost to revenue of approximately $400m. We have seen also an overestimation by the Government in the construction of the Budget in the tax recoupment figures. The Government figured upon recouping $255m in tax previously avoided. This very day we find that the Government has chickened out on the tax recoupment measures contained in the Bill which it presented to the Parliament but withdrew just last week.. A period of 12 months will now be granted to those people who will be issued with assessment notices as a result of previous avoidance practices. One could reasonably argue that at least $200m will be lost to revenue this financial year as a result of the tax recoupment legislation deferring payments for 12 months.
Let us do some figuring. We have $200m in tax recoupment which is lost to revenue, $356m in the drought package, $400m in respect of the drop in farm incomes as a result of the drought, a $21 Om cost to the revenue as a result of the overestimation of employment, and $300m in respect of an underestimation of unemployment benefits. That amounts to $1,566m--or $1.5 billion-understatement of the Budget deficit. Therefore, one can cogently and respectably argue that the Government has produced a shonky and rubbery Budget which was designed for an election this year and that, therefore, it is in the same category as the 1977 Budget. At the end of that financial

year, we saw that the deficit had blown out by $1.1 billion. There was a $1.1 billion underestimation of the deficit in the 1977 Budget and this year the underestimation of the deficit is something like $1.5 billion. This is as blatant an example of the Budget falsification as that which we saw in 1977.
Of course 1977 becomes even more interesting given the fact that, as honourable members recall, the then Treasurer, the honourable member for Flinders (Sir Phillip Lynch), took ill in the middle of the then election campaign. That election was held 12 months before the due time. He happened to take ill at a time when matters were raised in the Victorian Parliament about his private dealings. It is worth recalling also that he was stood down as Treasurer in the course of that election campaign under criticism and questioning by the media. He was stood down without any notification from the Prime Minister. Indeed, I think it is fair to say that the honourable member for Flinders read about it in the media or heard about it on the radio. What becomes very clear on hindsight is that Sir Phillip Lynch, as Treasurer, objected to the rubbery Estimates included in the 1977 Budget-a Budget which was designed for an election. He made it clear to the Prime Minister that, if the Prime Minister was not prepared to invite him into the new Cabinet in the event that the coalition government was returned in the 1977 election, he would release the Treasury estimates for the employment assumptions in the Budget in 1977, which clearly showed that the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, at the instigation of the Prime Minister, falsified the 1977 Budget for the purpose of being able to offer tax cuts at an election and producing a Budgeet deficit which the Prime Minister knew to be false. That was the reason why Sir Phillip Lynch was invited back into the Cabinet as a Minister for--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! I invite the honourable member to refer to the right honourable member by the electorate he currently represents.
Mr KEATING-That is the reason why the right honourable member for Flinders was invited back into the Cabinet after the 1977 election. There is an analogy to be drawn here. The 1982 Budget is also a Budget cast for a possible election, a Budget which has been criticised severely for its provisions, a Budget in which expenditure estimates have been underestimated and in which all the various assumptions that I have just mentioned have not been included in the figuring. This time, of course, the right honourable member for Flinders has also resigned his position in the

2314 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Income Tax Legislation

Fraser Ministery. I think it is worth the public of Australia recalling that this Prime Minister will try anything to return himself and his party to government. If it means falsifying another Budget five years later to offer tax cuts and other election goodies which, in terms of responsible fiscal policy, he knows that he cannot afford he will do it to try to look after his miserable political hide. I think it is high time that the right honourable member for Flinders published the Treasury estimates for the 1977 Budget to indicate what sort of skulduggery the Prime Minister got up to on that occasion and to indicate to the public at large that
he is back trying the same old trick yet again five years later. He is trying to underestimate seriously the size of the deficit notwithstanding the fact that he has made such a virtue of the whole notion of balanced Budgets, saying that high deficits are spooky and economically irresponsible. Indeed, what he is now doing is pursuing an election strategy in the Budget estimates which he knows he cannot sustain. The figures which I have just enumerated show quite clearly that what we have here is a serious overrun in the deficit-a massive deficit which flies in the face of all the rhetoric and conventional economic wisdom which has come from this Government since its election to office in 1975.
The Loan Bill (No.2) 1982 approves payments in respect of defence from the Loan Fund. The Loan Fund is designed to meet those expenditures which exceed moneys collected by way of Consolidated Revenue. I use this opportunity to indicate to the Government and to the public that the Opposition understands quite clearly what the Government is up to. These expenses which have arisen are not contingent items on the expenditure side of the Budget. It is clear that they should have been taken into account at the time of the figuring and formulation of the Budget strategy in June and July this year. We are seeing a repeat of the practice of 1977. We see the evil hand of the Prime Minister yet again in the falsification of a Budget to suit his own political ends. The members of the public should take the view they are entitled to take-that is, a very cynical view of anything this Government ever says about tax reform or about handouts in a Budget which was clearly designed for an election and which, after that election, would be the subject of massive remedial changes by way of a supplementary Budget. So the public can put appropriate weighting upon the words of the Government, upon the veracity of the Government in respect of any of the measures which it says it will introduce, which are supposedly for the benefit of the general tax paying public, after November of this year. I

make the point in respect of this Bill that we approve of the defence expenditures and, therefore, we do not oppose the legislation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr McVeigh) read a third time.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-I understand that the honourable member for Fadden seeks to make a personal explanation.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden)-Yes. The honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins), who I trust has been alerted to the fact that I am now speaking, made certain comments this afternoon in this chamber. To recap the entire events, my interjection of 12 October followed the commencement of a speech by the honourable member for Fremantle. He was the second speaker for the Opposition in a debate which attacked Mr John Reid. He had described the--
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I understand the honourable member is making a personal explanation. I ask: What is he explaining? What offence has been committed?
Mr DONALD CAMERON-The honourable member for Fremantle will be very disappointed--
Mr Morris-Mr Dawkins isn't here.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fadden will resume his seat. In respect of the point of order, the honourable member for Fadden, with the indulgence of the Chair, is making a personal explanation under Standing Order 64 which relates to a personal matter not necessarily attendant on the business of the House. I call the honourable member for Fadden.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. The honourable member for Fremantle has now joined us. In that speech the honourable member for Fremantle described the Prime Minister (Mr Malcom Fraser) as 'a cornered rat'. On two occasions in a most disparaging and what I regard as an unmanful way--

Personal Explanation

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2315

Mr Keating-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I am quite certain the honourable member for Fremantle can look after himself in any of these matters, but let us make it clear that there should be no abuse of the Standing Orders. The Standing Orders provide that in personal explanations an honourable member should indicate where he has been misrepresented or, where he has been personally affected in some way, to explain his position. It seems to me that, in the train of this argument, he is not personally affected at all. He is introducing argument and accusations--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I interrupt the honourable member. The honourable member for Fadden is not making a personal explanation on the score that he has been misrepresented. I refer the honourable member for Blaxland to Standing Order 64 and the position will become clear to him. I call the honourable member for Fadden.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I hope everyone settles down and allows me to get into this. On two occasions in a most disparaging and unmanful way, in my view, the honourable member for Fremantle referred to the age of the Leader of the House, the honourable member for Moreton (Sir James Killen).
Mr Keating-I raise a point of order. Mr Deputy Speaker, why have you granted the honourable member for Fadden leave to make a personal explanation? On what basis?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Standing Orders permit the Chair to grant indulgence when in its judgment it is appropriate under the circumstances. The honourable member for Blaxland will be mindful that this afternoon the honourable member for Fremantle sought enlightenment on a certain matter. It is the Chair's understanding that the honourable member for Fadden is responding, at the invitation of the honourable member for Fremantle, which happily may resolve the issue. I call the honourable member for Fadden.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Thank you again, Mr Deputy Speaker. Honourable members will recall the difficulty that Mr Speaker had in making the--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! I suggest to the honourable member for Fadden that he not embellish his explanation. If he could quickly come to the issue, I would invite him todoso.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-With due respect, I feel more of my time has been taken up

with objections than with my comments. I am trying to recall the history of the occasion because it is important to the explanation. An accusation has been made about the honourable member for Fremantle. I feel, in fairness to all sides, that the history should be recalled. Mr Speaker had some difficulty on 12 October in making the honourable member for Fremantle withdraw his comment. For some time the honourable member for Fremantle has cultivated what I regard as a rather unrefined art of being the Opposition House of Representatives dirty bucket man. Whether he is self-appointed or appointed, I do not know. I freely admit to having been deeply angered by the honourable member's personal reflections on others. As I saw it, it was yet another performance by someone who comes into this place portraying himself as being without a blemish and initiates attack after attack upon persons in this place and in the community at large. With the knowledge that I possessed I could contain myself no longer on that day. Mr Speaker will be aware of the difficulty he had in containing me and making me withdraw. That is recorded in Hansard.
Later that afternoon at the reception for Her Majesty the Queen and His Royal Highness, the honourable member for Fremantle approached me in a courteous way and requested that I explain to him what had been the basis of my interjection. His recollection of that conversation of eight days ago, as relayed by him earlier today, to be extremely charitable is either a deliberate precis or his memory is beginning to fail him. He may now recall that my response-my outburst-had been caused by anger. I said to him that a parliament was made up of different individuals and that, for me, my outburst was uncharacteristic. I used some word like that. I said that I supposed the individuality of this place allowed him to conduct himself in the manner he did, though I personally disagreed with his style. I told him that though I did not wish to pursue the matter it had something to do with a trip to London or somewhere I had heard about a long time ago. He told me that neither he nor his wife had been to London since about 1975 and asked me how long ago all this was. Not wishing to pursue the matter, I did not respond. He then referred by nickname to the Minister for Administrative Services (M r Newman) as being my source of information. I hope the honourable member for Fremantle remembers this conversation. I assured him--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I ask the honourable member not to be argumentative in his remarks. He is enjoying the indulgence of the Chair.

2316 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Personal Explanation

Mr DONALD CAMERON-I assured the honourable member for Fremantle that the Minister had not been my source of information. I told him I had no intention of raising the matter again or pursuing it and it was probably best for all to forget it. He then said that this depended on whether it had been picked up by Hansard because if it had he would have to respond. I agreed with that and said that it possibly had not been picked up because even Mr Speaker had said, when he demanded that I withdraw, that he had not heard what I said but that I was to withdraw it. We parted like civilised persons. The next day the interjection appeared in the printed Hansard and the honourable member for Fremantle, for reasons best known to himself but probably wisely, ignored it all. My determination to let the matter rest is probably best exemplified by my declining a request for details from an honourable member on this side of the House. He is not, by any stretch of the imagination, a friend of the honourable member for Fremantle. I felt that all he wanted it for was to do to the honourable member for Fremantle that which the honourable member for Fremantle is becoming so famous for doing to others. The honourable member for Fremantle has today again raised the matter and I must put up or shut up. My interjection on 12 October was: 'What about the airline ticket when you cheated on the taxpayers?' I ask permission of the House to incorporate in Hansard an extract from the Remuneration Tribunal. This relates to the rules concerning overseas travel.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Mr Dawkins-Can we have a look at it first?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Before the matter is resolved, in response to the honourable member's request for leave the Chair must intervene on the score that if the material which the honourable member seeks to have incorporated contains any contravention of the Standing Orders the Chair cannot approve of its incorporation.
Mr Dawkins--I simply ask the honourable member for Fadden to indicate the year of the Remuneration Tribunal's report from which this document is an extract.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I think it is 1980-81, or 1981.
Mr Dawkins-It is important because the rules have changed from time to time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is leave granted? The honourable member's request is not unreasonable, but it rather stretches the obligation of the Chair to dispatch business of the House.

MrDONALDCAMERON-I think it is 1981.
Mr Dawkins-I am certainly happy to have incorporated in Hansard the appropriate rules relating to whatever are the circumstances to which the honourable member is now going to refer. I have no idea whether these are the rules or some others.
Mr Morris-I do not grant leave anyway, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Leave is not granted. I call the honourable member for Fadden.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Basically, I can understand the reason for the objection by the honourable member for Fremantle. I concede that particular point. There may have been a slight change in the rules, but that does not alter the situation.
Mr Morris-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I feel that you are being extremely tolerant and that the House to date has been extremely tolerant of the honourable member for Fadden. Honourable members on this side of the House are being gagged from participating in important debate associated with the Budget. May I read to you Standing Order 64? I cannot see any provision in Standing Order 64 that provides for the kind of exercise the honourable member for Fadden has embarked upon. Standing Order 64 says--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Chair is familiar with the Standing Order and rules at this point that there is no point of order. I ask the honourable member for Shortland to resume his seat.
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask you under what provision of Standing Order 64 you are allowing the honourable member to speak? What he has said so far does not comply with the Standing Order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order. The Chair is not obliged to explain to the House its rulings. The honourable member for Fadden must bring his remarks to a conclusion. The Chair cannot extend indulgence indefinitely.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-The document I was endeavouring to have incorporated in Hansard is the Remuneration Tribunal requirements relating to the provisions which apply to members and spouses travelling overseas at the expense of the Commonwealth or, might I add, at the expense of the taxpayer. It is clear enough from the rules that if a member's wife is to travel overseas she must accompany him to be eligible.

Personal Explanation

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2317

Reluctantly, I explain my interjection. In so doing I express my view that in this place there would be few who are lily white. If someone takes upon himself or herself the role of chief bucketer--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member exhausts the patience of the Chair. I am quite sure that he could acquit himself in this matter with much more conciseness than he is presently demonstrating. The honourable member has 60 seconds to conclude his remarks.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I hope that you have a slow watch, Mr Deputy Speaker, because that is almost impossible. I refresh the memory of the honourable member for Fremantle. At the time he applied for overseas travel for himself and his wife and obtained the necessary prepaid tickets, as is required, the tickets were issued on the understanding that both would be travelling overseas. The man who parades as the paragon of virtue in this place had no intention of going overseas and stayed in Australia while his wife went overseas. Then, to compound it all, I was informed that they had to drag the money out of the honourable member for Fremantle--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fadden is not permitted under the guise of an explanation under Standing Order 64 to reflect on the character of an honourable member of this House. He can do so only by substantive motion. The Chair is not prepared to hear the honourable member further. The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr Dawkins-Mr Deputy Speaker, this hardly requires me to reply.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is not free to reply.
Mr Dawkins-MT Deputy Speaker, I seek your indulgence to make an explanation. What I asked Mr Speaker this morning was for the honourable member for Fadden to substantiate his disgraceful claims or withdraw them and, more importantly, to get his colleagues the honourable member for O'Connor and the Minister for the Capital Territory to desist from repeating his scurrilous accusations. He has declined to provide any substantiation. However, in the process he has compounded the slur and I want an opportunity to reply.
Mr Armitage-If you do not give him an opportunity to reply, this is a bloody dictatorship.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Chifley will contain himself.. Implicit in his remarks was a most serious

reflection on the Chair. The Chair is in an invidious position. It granted indulgence to the honourable member for Fadden on the premise that he would quickly despatch the matter that was of concern to him. This in turn was in response to a request of the honourable member for Fremantle. The honourable member has not addressed himself to that in a manner which would leave the Chair free to permit him to continue in his remarks, which were quickly assuming the character of a personal reflection on another honourable member. The Chair was thus obliged to require the honourable member to resume his seat. That leaves us in the situation where the honourable member for Fadden has been denied, if you like, the opportunity completely to present his case. For that reason the honourable member for Fremantle is now seeking to respond--
Mr Dawkins-Mr Deputy Speaker, I am prepared to give him leave to carryon because I know that he has nothing to say. I am giving him leave, and the Opposition is prepared to give him leave, to carryon because he has nothing whateverto say.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair is not amenable to leave being taken.
Mr Keating-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! I suggest that the honourable member for Blaxland not be too impetuous. We may resolve this matter. The Chair is not bound to accede to the leave arrangement, but in an earnest desire to accomodate both sides of the House, as the situation now develops, the Chair will afford the honourable member for Fadden a brief period to despatch promptly the matter that concerns the House as a whole at this juncture. I call the honourable member for Fadden.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden)-I am at a disadvantage in not having heard the remarks of the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) this afternoon because I was not advised that he was speaking. What I was going on to suggest was that the money had to be dragged out of the honourable member to repay the cost of the ticket which had been wrongfully used. To conclude my comments, I trust that it will be understood how someone can lose patience with somebody who stands up here week after week portraying himself as a custodian of all that is right and proper in this place. I acknowledge the possibility that the honourable member for Fremantle may well not have been the first to try this little trick, but I hope that honourable

2318 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Personal Explanation

members will recognise how someone in possession of this knowledge can become impatient with a prima donna. Hence, I made my interjection of 12 October. The honourable member for Fremantle never hesitates in this Parliament to give it to anybody, whether they be inside or outside the Parliament. His reaction to this matter has been rather remarkable.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fadden will resume his seat. Does the honourable member for Fremantle seek to make a statement?
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I seek leave to make a statement.
Leave granted.
Mr DAWKINS-It is scarcely necessary to respond to that sort of feeble statement on the part of the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron). Let me speak on the assumption that these were the rules that applied at the time. The honourable member for Fadden has not even indicated the pertinent date which related to this alleged incident. On the assumption that the extract he has provided to the House shows the provisions which applied at the time, the rules say that a member or senator is entitled to draw from the credit relating to overseas travel so long as that senator or member first provides a statement in writing setting out fully:
(i) the purpose or purposes of the journey;
(ii) the period of the visit . . . and
(iii) whether or not the senator or member will be accompanied by his or her spouse.
(A copy of the above statement may be obtained from the Minister upon request by any member of either House of the Parliament and the statement may be tabled in the Parliament at the discretion of the Minister).
My first point is that I would welcome the tabling by the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) of the statement relating to my request at that time. I also want to know from the Minister how it was that the honourable member for Fadden came to be in possession of the correspondence which passed between me and the Minister. I have nothing to be ashamed about in relation to this matter, but I want to know how this little sneak got access to that correspondence. I am happy for that correspondence to be tabled.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! At this juncture the Chair intercedes under Standing Order 79 to prevent"'the prosecution of a quarrel between members. The matter is concluded.
Mr Armitage-Oh, come on! This is the most unfair and prejudiced thing I have seen.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The House will come to order. I warn the honourable member for Chifley.

Mr DAWKINS-I move:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Fremantle replying to the statement of the honourable member for Fadden.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

Mr Keating-I second the motion, Mr Deputy Speaker.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

~~

~

Noes

59

Majority

19

AYES
Armitage. J. L Beazley, K. C. Blewett. N. Bowen. Lionel Brown. John Brown. Robert Cass.M.H. Cohen, B. Cross.M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins. J. S. Duffy.M.J. Free. R. V. Fry,K.L Holding, A. C. Howe. B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)

Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kerin. J. C. Klugman, R. E.
McLeahy, Leo McMahon. Les Maher, M.J. Mildren. J. B. Milton, P. Morris. P. F. Mountford. J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L
Thephanous. A. C. Uren. T. Wallis, L.G.
West,S.J. Wiliis.R.

NOES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,1. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron. Donald
Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.l. Coleman. W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean. A. G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H.
Hall, Steel Harris. G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman. W. M.

Hyde,J. M.
Jull,D. F. Katter. R. C. Killen. Sir James Lloyd, B.
Lusher, S. A.
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J.
McLean, R. M. (Teller)
Newman. K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock. A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson. Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury. M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street. A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson. D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D.

Privilege

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2319

Ho""urd.J. W. Hunt. R. J. D.

NOES

Wilson. I. B. C.

PAIRS

Campbell.G. Everingham. D. N. Jacohi. R.

Braithwaite. R. A. Chapman. H. G. p" Dobie. J. D. M.

Question so resolved in the negative.

PRIVILEGE
Mr NEWMAN (Bass~Minister for Administrative Services)~Mr Deputy Speaker~
Mr Dawkins~1 seek leave to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~ The Minister is taking a point of order.
Mr NEWMAN~I want to raise two points~ first of all, a matter of privilege and, secondly, a personal explanation in response to certain things that were said by the member for Fremantle a few moments ago.
Mr Scholes~Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. The Minister has risen on a point of privilege. He is not entitled to deal with any other business until he has dealt with that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~ The honourable member for Corio is quite correct. The Chair was in the process of taking that matter in hand. The Minister may address himself to his point of order.
Mr NEWMAN~On the passing of the two parties in the division a few moments ago I was berated by the member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins). He used objectionable words which I will not repeat and, worse than that, shouldered me as I went past.
Opposition members~Oh!
Mr NEWMAN~They are the plain facts of the matter. I repeat them.
Opposition members~Oh!
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~Order! Honourable members on my left will remain silent and be helpful in the situation.
Mr NEWMAN~I repeat: As we passed a few moments ago the honourable member~not the honourable member; the member~for Fremantle used objectionable and threatening words and shouldered me as I went past. I raise it as a matter of privilege.
Mr Scholes~I take a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. The Minister is required to address members in a proper manner. He has deliberately not done that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~In a strict sense the honourable member for Corio is correct. The

Minister qualified his form of address of the honourable member for Fremantle in a way which was inconsistent with the Standing Orders. He is to be referred to as the honourable member for Fremantle. The Minister would be well advised to meet that requirement in the future. The Minister has raised a matter which, in view of the density of traffic moving in the House, could be seen as disorderliness or clumsiness. The Minister feels aggrieved. The Chair is not in a position to make a judgment on the matter from its own observation. At this juncture the Chair is of a mind to reflect on the matter and consider what future action it might determine.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)~Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek your indulgence. It is true that I asked the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman), as we passed at the end of the table, whether he gave the letters which passed between me and him to the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron).
Mr Newman~Say what you said.
Mr DAWKINS~The Minister should hang on. I will saywhat he said first. He said: 'It is true what they say about you.' I then referred to his nickname. This matter can be cleared up in about 60 seconds.
Mr Hodgman~Just plead guilty.
Mr DAWKINS~ You are the cause of most of this, you little punce. You have continually
interjected~
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~Order! The Minister will remain silent. He is not being at all helpful.
Mr DA WKINS~ What the honourable member for Fadden sought to refer to is this: In about August or September of 1980~1 do not remember the dates because I do not have the letters with me~it was the intention of me and my wife to travel to Great Britain. As required by the Remuneration Tribunal provisions, J informed the Minister for Administrative Services of our intention to travel, indicating that we could not leave together but that it was my intention to join my wife and for us to travel back together. I had first sought the view of the Department of Administrative Services in relation to that arrangement. It told me that so long as the spouse travelled to or from the destination with the member or senator that was perfectly adequate.
Having made that explanation to the Department, and having received the permission of the Minister to undertake the travel, my wife departed. At about that time an election was called. If the honourable member for Fadden had gone

2320 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Privilege

on to read the rest of what the Remuneration Tribunal stated he would have seen that it is not possible for a member to depart this country after the dissolution of the Parliament. Even if I had wanted to travel during an election campaign it would not have been possible. By that stage my wife had reached a destination somewhere in the South Pacific on her way to London. When it was clear that I could not join her she decided to come back. She came back at my expense.
Some months later the Minister wrote to me and said that because I had not joined her on that travel I should meet the expense of her getting to her interim destination. I said to the Minister that the travel had been undertaken in good faith, we had left with his blessing and I did not think that was entirely appropriate. I would be happy for the Minister to give to everybody, as he has apparently given the honourable member for Fadden, the complete correspondence so that everybody can be clear about the circumstances. The Minister having made this point to me-he wrote to me, I think in February of 1981, saying that notwithstanding my explanation I should pay upI then paid up. I paid the amount of money which the Minister required me to pay in respect of my spouse's travel from Sydney to some point in the South Pacific.
Mr Hayden--That is more than Ian Sinclair would ever do.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent.
Mr DAWKINS-Exactly. As far as I know, there is not an outstanding cent between me and the taxpayer. For the honourable member for Fadden to say that I have cheated on the taxpayer, having paid back the money which the Minister said lowed in relation to this travel, properly undertaken but then disputed by the Minister, is absolutely scurrilous and disgraceful.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Mr Deputy Speaker-
Mr Hayden-The dreadful little deadbeat drummed out of the Army.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition demeans himself.
Mr NEWMAN-I wish to make a personal explanation to clarify the issue.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER. It is customary to acquaint the Chair in advance of the nature of the explanation but the Chair is reasonably confident as to what the Minister wishes to address himself. On that premise the Chair will give indulgence for that express purpose.

Mr NEWMAN-I wish to make one point very clear to the honourable member for FremantIe (Mr Dawkins) and to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). There has been correspondence between the honourable member and me on the question of this trip. No backbench member of this Government has seen that correspondence. Not one single person.
Mr DawkinsYou told him about it.
Mr NEWMAN-I have not told the honourable member for Fadden about it. I make two points very clear. Nobody has seen the correspondence, nor has it been discussed with the member who made the accusations against the honourable member for Fremantle. That is the first point I want to make. The second point is that when I heard this afternoon that the honourable member was concerned about the matter I had all the correspondence produced. I have it here. I make no judgment on the matter at all. I would like to table the correspondence and have it incorporated in Hansard so that people can make their own judgments.
Mr Hayden-In tabling the correspondence, would the Minister-
Mr Bourchier-Don't you want it tabled?
Mr Hayden-I can take a lot but can the honourable member take this?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Bendigo will remain silent.
Mr Hayden-Will the Minister table the documents for the past two to three years in relation to the claims for overnight travelling allowance from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Primary Industry-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!-The honourable member is referring to matters that are not related to the issue immediately before the House.
Mr Hayden-I am not talking about that at all. I am asking for a separate thing altogether. May I expand very quickly on the matter?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition is seeking to address himself to a matter not presently before the House.
Mr Hayden-I have brought it before the House. I have asked whether it can be done.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has not sought leave of the House to make a statement.
Mr Hayden-I seek leave of the House to make a very brief statement on this matter which, I can

Privilege

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIV~S 2321

assure you, will make a great story for the people above and put some balance onto this issue.
Sir James Killen-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. The Minister has sought to table correspondence regarding a matter of disputation. That is the issue before the Chair. If there is any other procedure that the Leader of the Opposition would like to resort to it will be considered on its merits. It is this matter that must be dispatched.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister has tabled the documents as he is entitled to do. That is the end of the matter. There is no motion before the House that the House should take note of the documents, nor in any respect is an opening created for another member to address himself to the issue.
Mr Dawkins-I take a point of order. As has been made perfectly clear, I have absolutely nothing to hide in relation to this matter. In fact, it was on my initiation that the documents have been tabled. I want to know how, in the first instance, the honourable member for Fadden was in possession of this information which was apparently confidential between me and the Ministernot that I have anything to hide. I also want to know how the Minister for the Capital Territory can, day after day, come into the House and make unsubstantiated allegations about it. What I want to know, and it seems to me to be a matter-
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members will remain silent.
Mr Dawkins-The Minister for the Capital Territory is as guilty as the honourable member for Fadden on this matter. The honourable member for Fadden made the original interjection. He has climbed down; he has nothing to say in support of his allegation. His point has been totally paralysed but it is being picked up day after day by him-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle, in the judgment of the Chair, has put the position concisely and coherently. His position has been made abundantly clear to the House. The Minister has tabled documents which will be available for perusal by any honourable member who is interested. The Chair is of the mind that the matter is now at a conclusion. If the honourable member for Fremantle elects to ask questions on the matter he is free to do so at an appropriate time. This is not it.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a matter of privilege. One of the basic heads of privilege is that a member of

parliament will not be obstructed or hindered in the performance of his duties. There is a great deal of supporting documentation in May's Parliamentary Practice which says that correspondence that passes between a member of parliament and a Minister is privileged. If any member of parliament cannot believe that correspondence that he so conducts with a Minister is in that position the whole basis of privilege, of course, is threatened. If the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) in raising this matter did so simply as a matter of guess work and had no real basis for it that is a position that is open to him. On the other hand, it seems, from the mere fact that the allegation was made, that the honourable member for Fadden had access to material which was clearly privileged. The Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) has given an explanation to the House and the House is bound to accept that explanation. However, I suggest that the way in which this matter has been raised raises a supposition on the part of all honourable members that unless the honourable member for Fadden is prepared to indicate to the House that he did not have access to the correspondence of the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) a very serious breach of privilege has taken place. Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask you to rule on that. The matter can be .resolved if the honourable member for Fadden is prepared to indicate to the House that he did not have access to this correspondence nor could have had access to it. Mr Speaker, now that you have taken the chair-
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne Ports may rest assured that I have heard every word that he has said. If the honourable member wishes to proceed with his matter of privilege he may do so.
Mr HOLDING-The point is very simply this: If the honourable member for Fadden has access to correspondence which passed between the honourable member for Fremantle and the Minister, that involved a very serious breach of privilege indeed and it goes beyond the normal situation of a leak. The matter can be easily resolved by an explanation to the House by the honourable member for Fadden. In the absence of that I raise this matter as a very serious breach of privilege indeed. There is no way that any member of this House can communicate with a Minister and expect the confidentiality that that correspondence is entitled to receive from the Minister if that correspondence is not regarded as privileged between the Minister and the member. Mr Speaker, I ask you to rule on that matter.

2322 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

Mr SPEAKER-I am obliged to rule on the matter of privilege.
Mr Jarman-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I want to make it clear why I abstained from voting in the recent division. I felt that certain charges had been made against the honourable member for Fremantle-
Mr SPEAKER---Order! There is not a point of order; it is a point of explanation. The honourable gentleman will get an opportunity at another time to raise the matter. I will deal with the point of privilege which was raised by the honourable member for Melbourne Ports. I am required to decide whether or not there is a point of privilege of a kind which would give it precedence of all other business. I am not so satisfied. I have heard the Minister's statement that the papers were not available to anybody else and I therefore rule that privilege has not been breached.
[ am also aware that some documents were tabled. The Minister tabled them, as he has a right to do, and he asked that they be incorporated in Hansard. I do not propose to permit the incorporation in Hansard. [ will be making a statement tomorrow morning. I think the Manager of Government Business and the Leader of the House have already received a copy of it. In anticipation of what I will say tomorrow I will not permit these papers to be incorporated in Hansard. Briefly stated, that is because Hansard ought to be a record of what is said in the House. As I will make clear tomorrow, the practice is growing whereby a great amount of material is incorporated in Hansard and it is perverting it as an accurate record of the House.
AUSTRALIAN BICENTENNIAL ROAD DEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND BILL
1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 October, on motion by MrHunt:

Mr MORRIS-Mr Speaker, it seems quite farcical to be beginning a debate on a subject as important as the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Bill at two minutes to 10 when one hour of the House's time has been devoted to the kinds of allegations and smears made by the honourable member for Fadden.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will remain relevant to the issue before the Chair.
Mr MORRIS-The Opposition does not oppose this Bill but we will move an amendment at a later stage in which we outline our disagreement with certain provisions of the Bill. The Bill seeks to establish the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund to receive funds raised by special surcharge on motor spirit and diesel excise for the purpose of upgrading Australia's road system by 1988, the Bicentennial year. This new tax is expected to yield a net $2.5 billion from motorists over the next six years. The surcharge on motor spirit and diesel fuel will be Ic a litre from Budget night until June 30 next and 2c a litre from I July next year until 31 December 1988. Funds are to be allocated to national highways, including developmental roads, urban and arterial roads and local roads. Part of urban arterial funding may be spent on urban public transport capital projects. The Bill gives the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) sole power to allocate national highway funds but urban arterial, rural arterial and local road funds are to be allocated on the basis of relativities contained in the Roads Grants Act 1981 and as set out in the schedules attached to the Bill.
The conditions that are applicable to the States and the Northern Territory before receiving ABRD funds are that the Commonwealth Government will have to give approval for each of the projects covered under the program; that the States and the Northern Territory must maintain their real level of funding from their own resources.

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Debate interrupted.

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (9.57)--Mr Speaker, may I, through you, suggest to the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) that as it is now two minutes to 10 it may be an appropriate time for the House to adjoarn and hold over the debate until tomorrow.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland has been called; the debate has been called.

ADJOURNMENT Mr SPEAKER-Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Sir James Killen-I require the question to be put forthwith without debate.
Question put.

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

~~

~

Noes

61

Majority

21

AYES
Armitage. J. l. Beazley. K. e. Ble\Vett. N. Bowen. Lionel Brown. John Brown. Robert Cass.M.H. Cohen. B. Cro.,. M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins. J. S. DutTy. M. J. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Holding. A. e. Howe. B. L. Humphreys. B. e. (Teller) Jenkins, H. A. Johnson. Les (Teller)

Jones. Barry Jones. Charles Keating. P. J. Kelly.R.J. Kerin.J. C. Klugman. R. E. McLeay. Leo McMahon. Les Maher. M.J. Mildren. J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Mountford. J. G. Scholes. G. G. D. Scott. J. L. Theophanous. A. e. UTen. T. Wallis. L.G. West.S.J. Wiliis.R.

NOES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony. J. D. Baume. M. E. Birney. R. J. Bourchier.J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown. N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr.M.A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron. Donald Cameron. Ewen Cameron. Ian Carlton.J.J. Coleman. W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean.A.G. Drummond. P. H. Edwards. H. R. Falconer. P. D. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Giles. G. O'H. Hall. Steel Harris.G. MeD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. e. Hodgman. W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt. R. J. D. Hyde,J. M.

Jarman.A. W. Jull. D. F. Katter. R.e. Killen,Sir James Lioyd. B. Lusher.S. A. MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. McLean. R. M. (Teller) Moore,J.e. Newman. K. E. Nixon, P. J. O-Keefe. F. L. Peacoc~, A. S. Porter.J. R. Robinson. Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack. P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender. J. M. Street. A. A. Tambling,G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner. R. I.
White, P. N. p.
Wilson. I. B. e.

PAIRS

Campbell.G. Everingham. D. N. Jacobi. R.

Braithwaite, R. A. Chapman. H. G. P. Dobie.J. D. M.

Question so resolved in the negative.

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2323
AUSTRALIAN BICENTENNIAL ROAD DEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND BILL
1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr MORRIS-Another of the conditions on the States for qualification for ABRD grants is that they must call tenders for national urban arterial and rural arterial road construction projects and for urban public transport projects. The Australian Labor Party welcomes this much needed injection of road funds. It welcomes the roads objective of the legislation which comes after six years of continual cuts in the real level of Federal road funding. It welcomes the fact that our road system will be upgraded, that road safety will be improved and that jobs will be created. It deplores the fact that no provision has been made in the criteria for the allocation of grants for the consideration of road safety matters.
The Bill is final acceptance by the Government of Labor's repeated claims that Federal road funding had been cut to a dangerously low level by its short sighted monetarist policies. It is a belated acceptance of Labor's argument in favour of additional Commonwealth funding for roadsthat better roads mean more jobs, improved road safety and increased economic and energy savings. Indeed, all Government members as recently as 20 April this year and on 26 May in the other place hypocritically rejected Opposition amendments to make available & substantial supplementary allocation of road grants to the States and the Northern Territory.
Now the Government and the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) have accepted the spirit of our amendment and the reasons we gave at those times for moving it. In effect, the program is Labor's 1974 national highways program dressed up in new clothes. Whilst we welcome the objectives of the Bill for new roadworks, motorists recognise it in stark reality as a new $2.5 billion tax. Boiled down to essentials, that is what it is. Motorists might more readily accept that if they had seen and could see a fairer share of Federal fuel taxation that they have already paid being directed to roadworks. Instead, under this Government in the past seven years $4 in every $5 of fuel taxation has not been spent on roads but has been directed to other purposes-squandered on the lavish lifestyles of the Government's friends through tax evasion, revenue forgone and the rackets involved there.
Let me say that I strongly deplore the use of the Australian Bicentennial Authority in the launching of this program. The Chairman, in my view,

2324 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

participated in a political exercise to mask the introduction of a new $2.5 billion tax. The Authority is supposed to be an apolitical organisation to promote and develop a spirit of unanimity in this country in the celebration of our bicentenary. When it gets down to blatent political involvement in the softening of the introduction of a new tax, I believe that the role of the Bicentennial Authority has been soiled. Added to that, we have this piece of propaganda, $21 ,000 worth~just enough to pay for a set of traffic lights at one of those dangerous intersections in the country towns in provincial areas of Victoria~which ought to have been spent on roads and not in this manner to promote the Government. Government members are promoting the program as a cure-all for the problems of roads and jobs. They avoid mentioning the pitfalls of its inaccuracies and discrepancies. Just let me point to a little of the fine print for them.
The Government will have two road programs when this legislation is passed~the program set
up under the Roads Grants Act and the proposed Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program. Rather than improve the former, the Government has come up with a new scheme, hoping to avoid reference to the disaster of its management of the roads grants legislation of past years. Let me refresh honourable members' memories in regard to what is happening with the Roads Grants Act. In every year of the Fraser Government real road grants have been cut. They were cut by 8.2 per cent in 1976-77,2.2 per cent in the next year, one per cent in 1978-79, 7.1 per cent in 1979-80, and 3.7 per cent in 1980-81. The Minister has finally admitted with his introduction of this legislation and in a recent statement, that in the five years to 1980-81, in 1980-81 prices, there was a staggering $517m cumulative cut in Commonwealth road grants to the States. South Australia, for example, has suffered a grant cut in cumulative terms of $77m over that period~a 28 per cent cut in real terms on its grant in 1975-76. Victoria has been robbed of $112m, Western Australia of $lllm, Queensland of $95m, New South Wales of $92m and Tasmania of $30.5m. Over that period Commonwealth fuel-related revenue has more than quadrupled. Motorists now pay a 100 per cent Fraser tax on petrol. I emphasise that it is Federal taxation that doubles the price of petrol in this country. In 1982-83 Roads Grants Act funds will rise by a meagre 7 per cent in comparison with 1981-82 funds. In money terms they will rise by only 6 per cent in 1983-84 and 1984-85. Yet currently road construction and maintenance costs are rising at the rate of about 15 per cent per annum. In overall terms, the

ABRD funds for this year and most of next year will make up only what the Fraser Government has ripped from road works since it came to power. What is the solution put forward by those opposite? It is to introduce another tax on motorists. One way of solving the road problem is to make it so expensive to use the roads that people will not be able to use them. The Government's solution is to slug road users with another $2.5 billion tax. If the Government were really concerned with maintaining real road grants it would have amended the Roads Grants Act to return a fairer share of motorists' taxes to road works and it would not be imposing a new $2.5 billion tax on motorists.
The Australian Automobile Association with its 3.5 million members~not a small number of motorists~has already labelled the program as a confidence trick. I have to agree with that proposition. It is a confidence trick. The Association says that its members are already overtaxed by this Government. Yet State and local governments are so strapped for funds that they have no choice but to accept the provisions of the legislation, the conditions set out in the Bill. Let me say to honourable members opposite who complain about what I have just said that if they and their colleagues had not allowed the tax cheats and the tax thieves to prosper since they came to office there would not be any shortage of money at all for roads. The Government would not again be slugging motorists as it is now proposing to do. Let me make the point that the Budget and this legislation will force up all transport costs. Motorists' costs will rise. The changes to the petroleum products freight subsidy scheme will add 0.56c a litre to country fuel prices. My friend the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) is not concerned about the country people. They just dropped the word 'country' from his party's name. Removal of exemption from excise duty on diesel fuel used on public roads will raise money from these people and seriously disadvantage local
government~
Mr LIoyd~At least I drive on country roads which is more than you ever do.
Mr MORRIS~ I grew up on a farm, which is more than the honourable member ever did.
Mr LIoyd~You did not stay in the country. You are a traitor to the country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)~ Order! The honourable member for Murray will remain silent.
Mr LIoyd~Ifhe remains silent.

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2325

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Murray.
Mr MORRIS-Air fares will rise following the 20 per cent increase on I October this year, in air navigation charges on domestic trunk and regional airlines. Increases and extensions of sales tax on some transport equipment and the imposition of sales tax on increased freight components of goods will also add to increased transport costs and freight rates. Honourable members opposite say that they represent the business community also. An article in the 30 September edition of Australian Business states:
The Victorian manager of Pioneer Asphalt, R. Ekberg, spells out the industry's criticisms, saying that the introduction of 7.S per cent sales tax on equipment, previously exempt, and the removal of the fuel tax rebate would add millions of dollars to costs.
Those costs are also added to road costs because the equipment is subject to sales tax and the increased fuel charges have an impact upon road construction and road maintenance costs. M r Ekberg was quoted as having gone on to say:
You couldn't say that we are pleased with a budget that is going to lift the cost of asphalt alone by $4m a year with the removal of the fuel rebate and which will increase the fuel cost of operating earthmoving machinery, rollers and so on by 16 to 18 per cent because of the need to pay an additional 6.ISc a litre on diesel fuel.
That shows how the Government gives with one hand and takes with the other. So the claw back that is coming through the imposition of these new sales tax rates and the withdrawal of the exemption from excise of the off-road use of diesel will increase costs for the road construction industry and the freight industry and claw back some of the benefits being provided under this legislation.
There are three conditions for the States to meet in order to get the ABRD funds. They include the maintenance of a real level of funding by States. Commonwealth approval, that is approval by the Minister for Transport and Construction is required for each project. States must call tenders on national highway works, urban and arterial road projects and urban public transport projects. Let me look at each in turn. The Commonwealth is demanding that the States maintain their real level of funding until 1988 in order to get ABRD funding. It is a hypocritical proposition because it comes from a Government that itself has reduced its real level of funding by $517m since 1975-76. It has reduced its funding in every year since it came to office. The proposition is an example of the heavy hand of creeping Canberra centralism that is coming from this Government, further intruding into the budgetary responsibilities of State and local government, further controlling the Budgets of the States and

local government bodies. What is worse is that if some of the States find that they cannot raise the additional money in the years ahead to maintain a real level of funding they will suffer a 100 per cent penalty because the amount by which they default will be the amount of funds that will be withdrawn from them under this program.
The States are now spending a record share of their total funds on roads to compensate for reduced Commonwealth real road funding since 1975-76. In 1975-76 the Commonwealth funded 37.6 per cent of total real road funds. By 1979-80 that figure had fallen to 30 per cent. To compensate, the States' share rose from 30.5 per cent in 1975-76 to 39 per cent in 1979-80. The States' share increased, therefore, by 28 per cent while the Commonwealth's share fell by 20 per cent. Now the Commonwealth wants to dictate to the States that they should maintain a real level of funding based on their peak expenditure levels of last year. In addition, ratepayers across Australia have all been slugged with higher rates to help local government make up for the deficiency in funds from the Commonwealth Government. This legislation is thus designed to force up State licence fees and State taxes on motorists and road users. The States will otherwise forfeit ABRD funds. It is heavy handed, it is hypocritical, and it removes the States' discretion over a large part of their Budgets up to 1988. I have mentioned that the States' charges are already at record levels. Queensland, for instance, raised registration charges by 60 per cent in 1981. In New South Wales motor vehicles registration charges rose by 30 per cent in 1981 and a further 13.6 per cent this year.
The Bill gives the Commonwealth-that is, the Minister for Transport and Constructionabsolute power over national roads, arterial roads and local roads, and it is an outrageous extension of centralism, as I mentioned earlier. Clothing the Minister for Transport and Construction with the sole power to determine which national road projects are carried out and when is, I understand, unprecedented. He alone will have a blanket power under the terms of the Bill to decide which national roadworks in which State or Territory are constructed and when.
From information provided it can be seen that funds to be allocated in this Bill will enable $1,047m to be expended on national roads in the light of the program. In effect, the Minister will have a billion dollar slush fund at his personal disposal to dispense patronage to favoured States and favoured regions if this Government were, by some incTp.dible means, left in office. That

2326 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

prospect is something we hope very shortly to dispense with.
The matter would not be so serious, though, if we had a competent, fair-minded Minister and a responsible government. The fact is that this Minister has a proven record of incompetence and a proven record of prejudice against metropolitan Australians. The Government has gone to extreme lengths during its life to discriminate against Labor States in the allocation of national funds. I remind the House of the Minister's outrageous action earlier this year when he overruled the New South Wales Government and directed that 30 per cent of that State's 1981-82 allocation for national developmental roads be spent on the east-west road in his own electorate-near his brother's property, he is just trying to indicate to me.
Mr Hunt-Nowhere near my brother's property. That is a lie.
Mr MORRIS-I thought that is what the Ministersaid.
Mr Hunt-Nowhere near it.
Mr MORRIS-He is confirming it. That is enough. He directed that that money be spent in his own electorate, on a road that carries onefiftieth of the traffic carried on the coal roads which have been recommended for construction by the New South Wales Government. That is the kind of Minister we have in charge of this billion dollar slush fund which this legislation will.create. That road in his electorate is expected to cost $25m. That is why there is no legislative power to determine allocation of national road funds. He wants it open-ended-put it wherever they want to put it.
Mr MacKenzie-Whose recommendation was it?
Mr Lloyd-Stick to the facts.
Mr MORRIS-It is the Government's Bill. It is here in the provisions. Government members who are interjecting are happy with it; they want their fingers in the till. With a Minister of this calibre we can be sure that the billion dollar slush fund for national roads will not be expended on an equitable or efficient basis if this Government remains in office. Giving this Minister absolute power over the allocation of national road funds and all ABRD projects is like putting Dracula in charge of a blood bank. The extension of the tender requirements to arterial roads is another removal of the States' discretionary powers in regard to road construction. There is no evidence that private contract work is cheaper at delivering high quality roads than the present mixed system

and it means, for those in cockies corner, that more jobs will be lost in the country again as a result of this provision in the legislation. More country people will lose their jobs. More country councils will suffer reduced incomes. The States are not allowed to add their supervisory cost on to contract prices so the final cost to the consumerthe taxpayer-of a cheaper private tender may, at the end of the day, finish up to be higher in total.
There are too many holes in this legislation. Too much is badly thought out and the negative points have been glossed over. I have sought additional information. I have placed five questions on notice. I am still waiting for the answers. Under the legislation, as I mentioned, there is no set portion of funds for national roads allocated to each State, unlike earlier roads Acts. Victoria, for
instance, is concerned that it does not get less than was earlier announced, as it is already disadvantaged in ABRD compared with federal fuel taxes raised in the State. Let me emphasise to those who sit opposite that the national road allocation tables distributed by the Minister and misrepresented by this Government in some of the States are not undertakings. They are not allocations; they are only suggestions. Whatever is
allocated to the States will depend upon the whim of the Minister who sits opposite and who looks .after his own electorate first.
We cannot believe Government promises on the ABRD program. This Government has not kept promises on roads in the past. The most blatant example of political pork-barrelling in the legislation is the wildly exaggerated view of national roadworks that can be performed with the funds available. For instance, the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) and the honourable member for Eden Monaro (Mr Sainsbury) who hold very marginal seats are bragging about how much money will find its way to their electorates for the upgrading of the Hume Highway. It is a fact, however, that the estimate of works that can be performed is very rubbery. The estimates and the provisions in this legislation are like the Budget before the House; they are rubbery and shonky.
Let us look at New South Wales, for instance, in regard to which we have been able to do some calculations in the few short days since this Bill was introduced. The estimated cost of projects involving the Sydney to Victorian border-I do not have time now to read all the qualifications describing the construction-together with construction of one new carriageway throughout is $592m. A further $196m is required to upgrade the existing carriageway and to provide for grade separations in accordance with notified national

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2327

highway standards. The total cost will be $788m. The next item-this is all on the Minister's handout-is 'Sydney to Newcastle'. The estimated cost of the Wahroonga to Estelville link is $400m. The likely cost of the connection from Estelville via Kurri Kurri to Branxton is another $120m. So that is a total of $520m. With regard to the Newcastle to Queensland border project, the estimated cost of upgrading, including an Armidale bypass and duplication through Tamworth, is $268m. With regard to the Goulburn to Canberra link, it is estimated that to provide one new carriageway would require additional expenditure of $54m and to provide dual carriageways, further expenditure of $64m-a total of $118m. General upgrading of the Barton Highway is estimated to cost $31 m. So that is a total of $1,725m to carry out the works that have been listed by the Minister in the handouts-in the propaganda-that the fellows over in cockies corner have read and believed; the works that could not possibly be carried out with the funds that will be available.
If we remember, the estimate is $1,725m. The road grants Act for 1985-86 to 1987-88 is yet to be decided, so we can add something on for that. But from that total and what is being provided we have to deduct road construction cost, inftationthe figures I am using are at 1982-83 prices-and provision for developmental roads, and the Minister will have a good hand in that, and provision for maintenance. On any responsible reasoning, given that the provisions in this legislation indicate that New South Wales will get $660m, the estimated shortfall to New South Wales alone is $1,065m. It may be a little less, depending on the provisions in the Roads Grants Act when its successor comes in 1985-86, but by any stretch of the imagination the work listed by the Minister cannot be carried out in New South Wales by the dates that have been set. The tables that have been distributed are shonky. The claims made by those who sit opposite in respect of the works to be done are shonky. If we have a chance to do calculations in regard to Queensland and Victoria I am sure we will find a similar situation.
The Government obviously hoped it could call an election before the details of the scheme could have been examined thoroughly. As I have said, the Government has misrepresented the ABRD Program on another count. The Minister stated in his second reading speech that the new tax to fund the scheme was supported by all States and the Northern Territory at the last Premiers Conference. That again is untrue. The Minister of Transport in South Australia is on the parliamentary record, in response to a recent question from

the South Australian shadow Minister for Transport, as saying:
There is no way that I was going to agree to an additional tax being levied . . . No, I did not agree to it and neither did the Premier nor I at the Premiers Conference. .
Who is telling the truth? The Minister for Transport and Construction here or the Minister for Transport in South Australia? Honourable members can take their pick, but both of them cannot be telling the truth; one has to be telling a falsehood. Similarly, the Victorian Minister of Transport has said that neither he nor the Premier of Victoria agreed to the imposition of this new $2.5m tax. There again, two State Ministers-one Labor and one Liberal-deny any agreement; only the Minister for the east-west road, the Minister for Transport and Construction, claims that everybody agreed. No doubt, in New South Wales a similar situation occurred. In the sloppiness of this Bill clause 26 delegates power to determine inspections on State ABRD construction works to Department of Transport and Construction officials. The Victorian Government believes that only the Federal Minister for Transport and Construction should authorise this delegation and authorise also the inspection powers in relation to particular projects. I have little doubt that Queensland and Western Australia will also disagree with this provision and will see it as an intrusion of their rights by the bureaucracy. For the benefit of those who read Hansard the comments I have made relate to the delegation of powers in the Bill under clause 23 (e) and clause 26.
Various States are to be disadvantaged by the distribution of funds under the ABRD scheme and have been consistently disadvantaged under the existing Roads Grants Act as well. The States that are disadvantaged are Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia as they receive in road grants consistently less money than is raised by Federal fuel taxation in the respective States. Some figures which I have had prepared show that New South Wales provides 33 per cent of fuel taxation but will get 32 per cent of ABRD funds. Victoria provides 26 per cent of fuel taxation but will get 20 per cent of ABRD funds and South Australia, which provides 8.6 per cent of fuel taxation, will get 7 per cent of the funds. These figures are based on the year 1981-82.
I turn now to local government which employs about 34,000 people on roadworks in Australia. Local government has been treated in this legislation as a poor relation by this Government. The ABRD scheme will do precious little for local government. What funds it will gain under the program are almost taken away by the rise in petrol and diesel costs and by the removal of the

2328 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

exemption from excise duty on diesel fuel used off public roads. The Australian Council of Local Government Associations has calculated that, in overall real terms, local government will be barely any better off as a result of this legislation due to increased costs. In net terms I understand that, on preliminary estimates, local government will receive less than a 2 per cent real incrase in road funds in 1982-83, about a 4 per cent real increase in 1983-84, and will suffer about an 8 per cent decrease in real terms in the following year.
Mr Hunt-After what the New South Wales Government did, New South Wales councils will receive a lot less.
Mr MORRIS-Is not the Minister for Transport and Construction the Minister who devotes funds to his own electorate instead of the busy coal roads where people are dying? The Minister put funds amounting to $25m into roads in his own electorate.
Mr HuntYou do not like the facts.
Mr MORRIS-The Minister ought to be ashamed of himself yet he interjects.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiJIar)-The Minister will remain silent. The honourable member for Shortland will ignore the interjections and proceed with his speech.
Mr MORRIS-In effect local government has been the victim of another pea and thimble trick from this divided and discredited Government and this Minister who cannot allocate funds on a fair and equitable basis in the interests of the Australian community.
Mr HuntRot.
Mr MORRIS-The record shows it, my friend.
Mr Hunt-I will show you the records.
Mr MORRIS-The Minister probably cooked the records himself. I have shown how national road funds are to be allocated between the States in the Bill; that some States are dissatisfied with the allocation of funds provided in the Bill in relation to the fuel taxation being collected from them; and that, in the case of local government, it has been treated as a poor relation under this legislation. In fact, local government has been conned by this Government in the preliminary discussions that took place prior to the preparation of the legislation. I move the amendment I referred to earlier which has been circulated in my name.
Mr DeanWe have not seen it.
Mr MORRIS-it is with the Clerks. It reads:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:

'whilst not declining to give the Bill a second reading, the House--
(I) recognises the special roads needs of the various regions of Australia and deplores the failure of the Government to make provision in the Bill for an equitable allocation of national roads funds between the states and the Northern Territory, and
(2) condemns the Government for its discriminatory decision to allocate an inadequate level of funds to local government bodies for local roads '.
I commend the amendment to the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER--Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Les Johnson-Mr Deputy Speaker, I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.
Debate interrupted.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon--Prime Minister)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I would like your indulgence for a moment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-The Prime Minister seeks the indulgence of the Chair. For what purpose?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER--To correct a matter that ought to be corrected at the earliest opport uni ty.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-This afternoon, in answer to a question asked by a member of the Opposition, I said:
The company L. J. W. Nominees was liquidated.
Or the trust. Then I said:
I know there were one or two Press reports at the time about Nareen Trust. That was set up in my father's time and, because of the nature of it, it is not within my power to wind it up. They are matters purely within the family and they do not, in any sense, involve any of the devices which are the subject matter of debate.
I have to confess to the House that I think I was confusing the Nareen Trust with my father's own estate which, of course, is continuing and will continue for some time. The Nareen Trust was wound up early in 1979. L. 1. W. Nominees, which I said at the time in a Press conference on 2 March 1979 was a family trust, was also wound up. It had been formed to enable me to stand at arm's length from the management of non-farm assets of myself and my family. I had come to the view that it would be much better not to own any equity shares. The trust was wound up and the money was invested in Commonwealth Government Bonds. As a result and since then L. J. W.

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2329

Nominees has not done anything at all. It is the intention that it be struck off the register. It has not traded and--
Mr MorrisYes, but was the trust stripped to avoid tax? You have not told us that yet. That is the important question.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Yes, I have. I said that at Question Time. I said that it was not subject to any of the devices which are the subject matter of debate. The only point I need to make is that the Nareen Trust has been wound up and the assets distributed in accordance with the trust. L. J. W. Nominees has since ceased to trade because no longer were there any equity shares held by the Fraser family. Therefore, there was no longer any need for that trust. Since then L. J. W. Nominees has not traded at all. It will be struck off the register of companies, having not traded since 1979.
Mr Morris-One way to resolve this matter would be for the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister to table income tax returns. That would be the way in which to resolve the matter. Otherwise there will be constant contradictions about it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Shortland will resume his seat.
AUSTRALIAN BICENTENNIAL ROAD DEVELOPMENT TRUST FUND BILL
1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr DEAN (Herbert) (10.39)-At the outset one of my comments about the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Bill 1982 is that the Opposition has shown itself to be totally ambivalent and totally unreliable on the question of additional funds for Australian roads. On the one hand the Opposition has said that it welcomes the injection of additional funds into the Australian road system but, on the other hand, the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) spent virtually the whole of his time actually criticising the whole fact of this additional funding. I am not really quite sure what he intends in that respect. What is more, he has come forward with an amendment that is meaningless. He says in the first paragraph of his amendment that the House:
recognises the special roads needs of the various regions of Australia and deplores the failure of the Government to make provision in the Bill for an equitable allocation of national roads funds between the States and the Northern Territory.
That is a reference to the claim of the honourable member for Shortland that this Bill, insofar as it

gives the Minister a discretion in relation to national roads funds, is an outrageous extension of centralism. That was his claim. He supported that claim by saying that the Bill discriminates against Labor States. I would like to ask him this question: Where does that leave a State like Queensland with the greatest number of kilometres of national roads of any State in Australia? Does he want to see the Labor States of Victoria and New South Wales get more money and Queensland, with its long length of national roads, get less? Is that what he really wants? If that is what this amendment really means then, of course, I reject the amendment.
I would like to make sure that the Commonwealth Minister has some say in the allocation of Commonwealth-raised, Commonwealthexpended money. I would like to think that the State of Queensland, as an example, will get a fair share. Not only that but also that the State of Queensland will be told by the Commonwealth Minister that it will get a fair share and that the Commonwealth Minister will make sure that a fair share of that allocation is spent where it most needs to be spent. Let me remind honourable members opposite where it most needs to be spent. It is on the national highway system in Queensland. On 18 August 1982 Senator Jones asked Senator Messner as the Minister representing the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) the following question:
Did the Minister for Transport and Construction carry out a survey recently of the North Queensland section of the National Highway One (Bruce Highway); if so, did he subsequently state that it was the worst section in Australia.
In answer on 9 September 1982 the Minister said yes. I would like to think that the Minister, having acknowledged that, will therefore make sure that a fair proportion of the money goes to that most needed section and does not favour the Labor States of New South Wales and Victoria against that most needed national highway section in Australia. Senator Jones in another place asked:
Will the Minister for Transport and Construction consider amending this legislation-
He was referring there to the normal road grants Bill-
to provide sufficient supplementary finance to render this appalling section of Australia's number one arterial highway safe in accordance with his Government's stated concern over the nation's road toll.
The Minister replied in writing on 9 September 1982. He stated:
Works on the Bruce Highway will undoubtedly carry high priority in Queensland's national roads program. National roads programs are currently being developed for Commonwealth approval and details of specific projects will be provided annually to parliament.

2330 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

This amendment is saying: Do not give the money to the most needed section. This amendment is saying there should be more money to New South Wales and Victoria. This amendment has to be rejected. Why? Not because I am a Queenslander. It is not that at all. It is, firstly, because there has been an acknowledgment that the worst sections are on the Bruce Highway in North Queensland and, secondly, because we are talking about a national program. We are talking about the need to upgrade the whole of Australia's national road program to an acceptable standard by the end of 1988. We are talking about a national program. If, in developing a national program, we are going to make sure that the worst sections get upgraded, if in a national program we are going to make sure that individual State Ministers do the right things with the money that is there, then of course the Minister for Transport and Construction has to have that discretion. I welcome it. I believe it to be a protection for some of the States which in the past have been so disadvantaged. I deplore the amendment, which in fact seeks to discriminate against States such as Queensland in favour of States such as New South Wales and Victoria.
Mr Cohen-The best part of his speech is when he is silent.
Mr DEAN-It is nice to know that honourable members opposite appreciate the point I made. I think it was very good too. What we have to do is to go on against this amendment that the honourable member for Shortland has sought to introduce to make the point that he welcomed, as I said earlier, the injection of additional funds for roads. The Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund has to be one of the most important pieces of legislation I have seen in this Parliament in my five years here. It is important because at last we have a recognition from government that a decent, sensible, safe and effective road system in Australia is a matter of national concern and ought to be accomplished within a reasonable period. This is something that I have been seeking for five years. At last there is recognition of it. Is that not exciting? Is that not visionary? Is that not an achievement? Of course it is. Members of the Opposition have already said they agreed to it. I cannot see the sense in the amendment. It is a great achievement. It is a matter of great excitement.
I have had to concentrate my efforts on the national highway system in North Queensland, which is where some of the greatest deficiencies are. Having invited the Minister along with the honourable member for Dawson to tour sections of the Bruce Highway in February of this year, I am pleased that the Minister did and was able to

give the answers which he gave to Senator Jones and to which I have referred. We now have in place a much more effective road development program than has existed before. That is something to be applauded. It is something to be regarded as exicting by all Australians.
We are not talking about just the national highway system. I refer here to the objects of the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund as set out in section 3 of the Roads Grants Act. The object of the Act is to establish this fund for the purpose of providing moneys for a program of upgrading and construction of roads. The idea is that within or soon after the Bicentennial year this fund will, in accordance with national priorities, upgrade the road network in Australia to facilitate the reliable and efficient carriage of road traffic-that is, the total road network, not just national roads. It will enhance the safety of Australian roads. When I think of sections of roads in North Queensland with many narrow bridges and with very many narrow strips of bitumen where safety is a great issue, then of course reconstruction and upgrading in order to enhance the safety of national roads has to be applauded as a national project.
The program will bring the national highway system that links the main centres of population to a standard that will meet the growing transport needs of Australia. It will accelerate the construction of development roads, including roads of importance for national tourism. When one thinks of a highly developing tourist State, such as Queensland, one cannot underestimate the importance of that objective. The program will assist the development of urban and rural arterial roads. As I said, it is not just for national roads but for all roads. It will also enable the appropriate authorities to upgrade local road systems.
The program is therefore a major national initiative to upgrade Australia's road system to a high standard by 1988. Indeed, unless there is a major upgrading effort, which this Bill will make possible, the total network will not reach an acceptable standard until well beyond the turn of the century. We are really bringing forward the upgrading of road standards in Australia very much indeed. This program is a one-off effort. Grants are already being provided under the normal States Roads Grants Act. In addition, by this one-off effort, for the period from now until the end of 1988, a special fund is being developed which will specifically provide the additional moneys needed in order to pay for road construction.

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2331

This brings me to another point that was made by the honourable member for Shortland; that is, that this is a confidence trick. What confidence trick is there in a measure that specifically provides $2.5 billion which will be spent specifically on something that the Opposition agrees it should be spent on? It is hardly a confidence trick. Of course there is a new tax and nobody likes new taxes. What is the alternative? In order to provide this additional money to spend on roads, does the honourable member for Shortland want to take the money away from pensioners? Does he want to take the money away from health to spend on roads? Does he want to take it away from defence to spend on roads? Does he want to raise other taxes to spend on roads or does he want to be certain, as I want to be certain, that specific moneys will be raised and will be spent on roads? That is what is to be applauded. It is not a confidence trick. The absolute honesty of this Bill should be applauded. The Government says: 'We will raise money for roads and by the establishment of a special trust fund we will make sure that money is spent on roads. This is not a confidence trick; it is something which is to be applauded and something which the Australian public will appreciate because of the improvement to the road system that will surely flow.
It remains for me to say a few words about some of the conditions that apply under this Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Bill. The honourable member for Shortland has deplored the fact that the States will be required to maintain their own road funding contributions in real terms over the time of this legislation. I would have thought that it is to be applauded that the States are going to be kept honest.
Dr Jenkins~Queensland?
Mr DEAN~I agree, including Queensland. I want to keep Queensland honest too. I want to keep that fellow Hinze honest. Do not worry; I agree with that. What I do not want to see in relation to road funding is the sort of situation where, because of personal tax sharing with local government, some State governments are wiping out other subsidies for local government. I ask honourable members to look at the Wran Government in New South Wales wiping out $30m to $40m in pensioner rebate subsidies. What a nasty attack against local government that was. I do not want to see that sort of thing happening in relation to road funding. That is why we have to keep the States honest. That is why this condition is absolutely essential and absolutely reasonable.

Secondly, I applaud the decision overall that the Government will require the States to call tenders~private contracts~for the construction of national and arterial roads. However, I agree with the point that the honourable member for ShortIand made. He may be surprised but I agree with him. I am concerned about the effects of that condition in some of the country shires of this nation. I am thinking of some of the country shires in north Queensland and in northern Australia. I think it is possible that there will be a problem. The best that I can urge the Government to do here is to monitor carefully the operation of this condition. I will be as quick as the honourable member for Shortland to criticise the Government if the program is not working and to make sure that the position is remedied.
A third condition that I think is sensible is that signs approved by the Minister for Transport and Construction as Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust project signs be erected where these specific moneys are being spent. Too often we have seen State governments spending Federal money on roads without designating that it was Federal money. At last people will be able to see that Federal money being spent. People's taxes collected by this surcharge will be spent where they are supposed to be spent. I think that is an eminently sensible suggestion. I think it is sensible also that the States must allow somebody authorised by the Minister to inspect or to carry out reasonable tests on approved projects. I am concerned, as I have mentioned before, that the States be kept honest and the fact that the
Minister~~
Mr Morris~Who is going to keep you honest?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles )~Order! The honourable member for Shortland will behave himself. That is no way to behave. I call the honourable member for Herbert.
Mr DEAN~Mr Deputy Speaker, I happen to be a very honest person. I am happy to be making some very honest comments.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~I ask the honourable member not to respond to that inane interjection.
Mr DEAN~lt was really silly; quite right. I think it is perfectly reasonable for the Minister to be able to require the inspection of projects as it is reasonable for the Minister to be able to direct, in terms of national highways and arterial roads, where moneys might be spent in the national interest. These, I think, are reasonable conditions within this legislation and are to be supported.

2332 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

Finally, let us put to rest the second part of the amendment that has been moved by the honourable member for Short land. Again he does not specify what he means. His speech did not spell it out at all. Let me refer, however, to the second paragraph of his amendment which states that the House:
(2) Condemns the Government for its discriminatory decision to allocate an inadequate level of funds to local government bodies for local roads.
What does the honourable member mean by that? Does that mean that less money which is to go to local government should be spent on national highways or arterial roads? Is the honourable member referring to the somewhat veiled-not too veiled-criticism in his speech about local government and local roads that what is given is clawed back? I think that if the honourable member is referring to that in his second proposition, he is misreading the true situation. On the best information that is available to me at this point, the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Program together with the normal road grants program in the next financial year will give something like $38m more to local government for local road projects. The effect of the excise tax, as it affects local government, is anticipated to be something like $1 Om to $12m.
To imply-it was only an implication, I admit-that all that is given in one hand is to be taken away with the other is wrong. There is still great benefit to local government so far as this program is concerned. What is more, that benefit is added to by the fact that local government has the benefit of income tax sharing and gets the benefit of spending on arterial roads because many of them are within local government areas and are constructed and handled by local government. So the second part of the amendment, as unsubstantiated and vague as it is, just simply cannot stand up.
This is an exciting road program. The Opposition admits that it is exciting by at least admitting that it welcomes the spending of additional funds on roads. It certainly does allow us, as the Opposition says it will, to spend money on roads and develop roads in the way that ought to happen. Therefore, I have no hesitation at all in supporting the legislation and equally no hesitation at all in rejecting completely the amendment that has been moved.
Mr COHEN (Robertson) (10.57)-The Opposition supports the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Bill as my colleague the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) has already indicated. We have been calling for increased spending on roads for years. The

honourable member for Shortland has pointed out on many occasions that in real terms the Government's contribution has been falling dramatically. Road construction costs have increased at a much faster rate than the inflation rate. I think I am right in saying that the increase has been in the order of 15 per cent in each of the last three or four years whilst the Government's allocation for funds for roads has been less than the inflation rate. We have had it coming at us from both directions.he amount of funds available for roads has been dropping quite dramatically.
We have some doubts about the fact that this was announced as part of the Australian bicentennial project. Perhaps I do not feel quite as strongly about the matter as my colleague but we are concerned that the Government may decide to use the Australian Bicentennial Authority as a means of promoting projects of its own. I happen to be the one member in this House who is a director of the Australian Bicentennial Authority. I applaud the fact that we are starting now to get something done towards the celebration of Australia's great birthday in six years time. However, obviously between now and 1988 a whole range of activities will be announced both by State and Federal governments. But one senses that this project, which is the first real project for the bicentenary, has been used as a means of raising taxation. The Government ought to have done this if it felt it was necessary without using the Bicentennial Authority. In that sense, I have some reservations. But in principle we support the Bill.
I think that the funding through the levy is an appropriate way of paying. There would be very many differences of opinion on whether the user pays principle should apply. I do not think it is something that should apply in every area. I do not think it ought to apply in health, education or in a number of other areas. But I think in this one project one can justify the principle that the user should pay. If it is not the user who pays, then surely it has to be the non-user. I for one would be opposed to the principle that people on pensions or low income earners who do not own a car should pay for those who own cars, trucks and so on. In that sense I applaud the way in which the extra funding is being found.
I take issue with the road lobby, which for years has argued that all the money paid by way of excise should be spent on roads. In my view, one of the most specious arguments put up over the years by the National Roads and Motorists Association, the Australian Automobile Association, and a number of other road lobby groups is that if we raise x billion dollars a year from fuel excise then x billion dollars a year should be spent on

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2333

roads. The reason I say that is very simple: Such groups never take into account the whole range of other costs which the community bears and which are attributable to road transport. The first one that comes to mind is death and injury on the road. I do not recall the latest cost of social welfare benefits, health care, loss of life and loss of productivity attributable to death and injury on the road, but 3,500 people are killed and 19 times that number are injured on our roads each year. I could be wrong, but I think $8,000m is attributable to that loss. If we are serious, that sort of cost-the cost of pollution, the cost of police, the cost of government administration, and the cost of use of resources-has to be taken into account. I reject completely that argument which the road lobby uses so consistently.
I was quite surprised, as a matter of fact, when this tax was introduced. I know that the Treasury has always opposed hypothecation. I have heard on the grapevine that it bitterly opposed it in this case. I am glad that it lost this argument because, whilst I do not agree with hypothecation as a broad general principle, I think there are cases in which it should apply. There are plenty of cases where governments can justify the implementation of taxes which people will accept if they are placed in a fund and it is made sure that the money in the fund is spent in the area in which it was intended to be spent. I am delighted that the principle of hypothecation has been permitted in . this case. If the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) is listening and I can drag him away from the conversation he is involved in, let me say this to him: I thought he might have had the good grace to pay tribute to the Labor Government. We are often accused of being mean with praise, but I have often said in the House that the greatest single piece of legislation passed by the Labor Government, unnoticed mainly by Labor members, I might add, was the National Roads Act.
Mr HuntYes, I quite agree. It is a very good Act.
Mr COHEN-I am glad that the Minister is nodding. It is a great piece of legislation. Without that Act this legislation would never have flowed on. I like to think that I had a little to do with it, because we initiated that road safety conference at Terrigal in 1972. The then Minister for Transport and the previous Prime Minister agreed at that seminar to introduce the legislation, from which this legislation has flowed. What happened in a small way in 1972 has now flowed on to what will ultimately give Australia a set of roads and highways equal, I hope, to the best in the world. I argued in 1971-72 that we should follow

the example of the 1956 United States FederalAid Highway Act introduced by President Eisenhower. That legislation provided a 20-year program for the provision of 40,000 miles of highway in the United States. I would like to quote from an address given by Charles N. (Chuck) Brady, Director of the American Automobile Association's Highway Department, when he was the keynote speaker at the Australian Automobile Association's road symposium in 1980. He said:
In 1956 Congress-
The United States Congress-
considered and subsequently passed the most significant highway act since its initial efforts forty years before. The FederalAid Highway Act of 1956 and its accompanying Highway Revenue Act of 1956 laid out a broad highway improvement program for Interstate and other highways and incorporated a method of financing improvements on a pay-as-you-build schedule financed by a broad array of highway user taxes depsited in a Highway Trust Fund.
The mileage proposed to be built originally was 40,000, which was later increased to 41,000 and then to 42,500 miles. I continue to quote the comments of Mr Brady:
During the period 1956-September 1978 the Trust Fund has received over $1 00 billion.
Of course, that is United States dollars. To continue:
It has paid out $89 billion for all federal-aid programs including the Interstate System. About 93 per cent of the latter is now open to traffic but much of it needs additional work and/or upgrading. A little over 30,000 miles of the almost 40,000 miles open to traffic are in need of minor improvements . . . The latest Interstate cost estimate submitted to the US Congress in August of 1979 reveals a remaining cost to complete of some $42.5 billion . . . The United States occupies a land mass of approximately 3 and one half milliom square miles-not much larger than Australia. Travel times over the controlled access highways provided by the Interstate system and other arterial highways have improved about 30 per cent. So as a practical matter in terms of transportation accessibility, the country has shrunk about one-third in total size.
I think it is important to realise what this legislation will do. It will not simply make for comfortable driving; it will shrink the country. To continue:
Easier access to land and natural resources has stimulated economic activity in areas which were poorly served . . . Approximately 800,000 man years of employment is directly attributable to every $1 billion expenditure on highway construction. About one in every seven jobs in the US are a direct result of highway transportation.
Better highway service has improved educational opportunities for all citizens from the rural child transported by school bus to centralised schools to the city and urban residents who now find it is quite convenient to attend night classes in our universities and community colleges.
I point out that the improvement in the road between Goulburn and Canberra has turned what used to be an arduous I t hours into 50 minutes. People come from Goulburn to attend university

2334 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

and go home each night. That is the sort of improvement in a social sense that we will get. To continue:
Hospital care has improved through easier access provided by good highway networks. Not only are more comprehensive medical care facilities available to a larger percentage of our population but rapid transport of emergency cases has literally meant the difference between life and death.
The better designed highways made possible through the Highway Trust Fund has had a significant effect on lowering our accident rate.
Some honourable members will remember my long interest in this area as a former Chairman of the House of Representatives Road Safety Committee. To continue:
It has been estimated that one life per year is saved for every five miles of Interstate opened to traffic-that's 8,000 lives per year just on the Interstate. The fatality rate per 100 million vehicle miles of travel on Interstate roads is now about 1.6. The rate on all other roads was about 3.24 per 100 million vehicle miles of travel in 1978. It had been 6.28 in 1956.
If we get that sort of improvement we will get quite a dramatic reduction in death and injury on our roads. Those who have followed the activities of our Road Safety Committee will know that it said that to save lives three things had to be done-introduce safety belt legislation, improve the design of the motor vehicle, and build decent roads and roadside furniture. We have made as much progress as we can with regard to seat belt legislation. Because of the constraints of the United States design system, we have probably done as much as we can do with regard to improving the motor vehicle. I will not go into that. In my view, here is where the next big break-through will be made. To continue with Mr Brady's comments:
If that same rate had prevailed in 1978 we would have had some 95,000 highway deaths instead of the 50,226 reported by our Fatal Accident Reporting System of the US Department of Transportation.
I have written a number of letters recently to the editor of the Bulletin in which I have pointed out to people that those who keep screaming about the fact that Australia's road safety record is bad ought to take the time and trouble to look at what it would have been if we had continued exponentially from 1970 at the time that the seat belt legislation was introduced. Now we are losing about 3,500 people a year. We would have been losing 6,000 or 6,500, so we have made progress. There have been vast increases in the number of people who are driving cars. There have been increases in the number of cars on the road, the number of miles driven and so on.
Australia has always had a much greater problem with communications than just about any other country in the world. As Geoffrey Blainey points out in his classic book The Tyranny of

Distance, Australia's isolation from the rest of the world and the isolation of Australians from one another has played an enormous role in determining so much of Australia's history, geography, demography and urban structure. Initially, sailing ships determined where Australia's ports and later cities were located. Then the maze of railways which spread out from the ports of each of these separate colonies created a nightmare patchwork transport system that did nothing to unite Australia as a nation. Even by the turn of the century and the coming of rail, the vast distances of Australia were not covered by railways, horses or bullock teams but by Afghan camel teams. Not surprisingly, few people, least of all governments, envisaged 80 years ago the enormous impact that the horseless carriage would have on Australia, the shape of its towns and cities and the lives of its people.
It is hard to believe that a fraction over 70 years ago, when my father-in-law was only IO years of age, Australia had only 5,000 registered vehicles. By 1930 it had 600,000. By 1963 it had 3,400,000. Now-I do not have the latest figures-it has about 6,500,000. It is true that our forefathers lacked vision. The tragedy of early Commonwealth road Acts-I go back only 20 years when some present members were in the Parliamentwas that they failed to have the vision to see what ought to be done with Commonwealth road legislation. The States and local government took a very short-sighted view. They used the funds provided to improve back country roads. They ignored the national need. The result was that we have the worst highway system in the world. The State governments deliberately denied funds for a national highway for fear that it would damage railways and assist the trucking industry. In my view that was the wrong approach. Trucks should pay their fair share of building roads. I am told that heavy trucks on the road do 70 times the amount of damage that a normal car does.
Let me conclude by making a few personal comments. I am a member who represents a seat that is highly affected by transport and the lack of roads. I represent the area connecting two of Australia's largest cities, Sydney and Newcastle. It is the main link between Sydney and Brisbane, the Hunter Valley, northern New South Wales and all the coastal cities such as Port Macquarie, Taree, Kempsey, Coffs Harbour and Grafton and the inland cities such as Tamworth and Armidale. People have to go through my electorate to get to all those places. Most of the road is still deplorable as the Minister for Transport and Construction 'mows, because he comes to my electorate on holiday. He uses his car on my roads and pays

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2335

nothing for the privilege. However, we are delighted to have him because he gets the chance to see how bad things are. Other honourable members opposite can come too if they like. Most of that road is still a fourth rate goat track. But things are happening as a result of the National Roads Act passed in 1974 which are starting to improve the road between Sydney and Newcastle. In 1984 the stretch of about II kilometres of four to six lane divided highway between Ourimbah and Doyalson will come on line. Work is now proceeding on the Calga to Ourimbah section. I think the distance is 25 kilometres.
I would like people to see the magnificant engineering work being done by the State Government. It is unbelievable. Huge gulleys are being filled in and the sides of mountains are being carved out. It is a massive piece of work and extremely costly. I hope that by 1987 or 1988 this area will be completed particularly, if work continues and the Government, as it has promised to do, provides funds for the section from Pearces Corner in Wahroonga to Berowra. We will then be able to leave the northern part of Sydney and go practically right through to Newcastle uninterrupted. What used to be a 3t hour run should be reduced to a journey of an hour, I t hours or one hour 20 minutes at the most.
I would like to ask the Minister one question. I would like him to let us know what he means by tourist roads. It is not very clear in my mind. I am speaking now as a parish pump parochial politician. I believe that the central coast, as the Minister well knows, is one of the top tourist areas in New South Wales. The people of my area suffer unbelievably during the holiday periods because of the hundreds of thousands of tourists who go there. We want them to go but we need some funding to enable us to provide decent access roads, apart from the major road, through Gosford and Terrigal to The Entrance. Now the road is a single lane track. Traffic bogs down over the Christmas period for two or three hours. Does this legislation provide that that road will be a tourist road?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (11.16)-The addition of $2.5 billion to the existing road programs of Australia must surely, in a national sense, create a greatly improved road network in Australia. In the national sense, it is to be commended. Certainly, leadership has been required to provide the plan and to have it carried out on a basis which will serve this nation. However, the

Government is not a benevolent society that has found hidden funds to distribute to Australian motorists. It is evident that it will take the money from motorists through fuel taxes and build roads with it. It is ennobling the process by calling the program, our national birthday roads project, the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program. On a broad front, carried out with equity, it is a fine concept. However, in regard to my State of South Australia there is an inherent unfairness which is quite breathtaking. By 1988 the Government will have bled out of South Australia $54m and fed it to its favourite States. In six years that will be an average of $9m a year. It will mean a haemorrhaging of South Australian fuel excise collections and it will deplete South Australia's economic capacity.
One might well ask how this could come about when we consider the high-minded approach of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) when he spoke in Parliament in support of a major comemmoration of the Bicentenary. In introducing that subject on 5 April 1979, he said:
The bicentenary will be a most important event for Australia. Deep in any human community is consciousness of its origins and identity and its hopes and resolutions for the future-a consciousness to which it will want to return and dwell upon at particular moments in its history. The marking of a bicentenary is one such time . . . It will be a time to reflect upon our developing and changing national identity, as a united community transformed in a remarkable way by the migration programs of the years since World War II.
They are fine sentiments. If they are to be applied to the Bicentennial Road Development Program I believe they should be applied fairly. It may be said that the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund is a special fund. It will terminate after the Bicentenary and the money will be applied through a special trust fund. However, one must begin in relating South Australia's problem, at the deficient distribution which it receives from the existing national road program. Mr Deputy Speaker, as you would know, South Australia has 9 per cent of the Australian population and it gets 8.22 per cent of the distribution of road funds. I understood, from an earlier remark of the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt), that that distribution would continue, as deficient as it would be, for the bicentenary program. But the figures extracted from the information available show that South Australia will get 7.15 per cent of the bicentenary road development program. South Australia has a population of 9 per cent and we will get a 7.15 per cent return. Therefore, on a population basis, we will lose 1.85 per cent of the total involved which would be a figure of $46m over the six-year program.

2336 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

However, to get on to a more factual basis, something which cannot be questioned, we come
to the statistic that fuel consumption in South Australia is 9.34 per cent of the Australian fuel consumption. It is incontrovertible that the money for this program will be drawn from those who consume fuel. That is the source of the $2.5m and South Australia provides 9.34 per cent of that source. Therefore at constant figures of usagethey are projected into the future and can be taken at 9.34 per cent-of this $2.5 billion South Australia will provide $233.5m. However, with the return to my State of 7.15 per cent, we will get $178.75m. We will be deficient by $54.75m. It does not appear to me that it is appealing to the pride and partriotism of South Australian motorists to ask them to give from their resources $54.75m over six years in cold, hard cash to the motorists of other States.
If my State happened to be a standard State under the arrangements for the Commonwealth Grants Commission one might say: 'That is normal. The two standard StatesVictoria and New South Wales-are used to it. It is a fact of life in the averaging of the Australian living standards'. But we are not a standard State, as I will develop directly.
Mr Bourchier-Sub-standard State.
Mr STEELE HALL-As my friend from Bendigo says, we are certainly regarded as a substandard State by the Minister who has entrenched in his mind, in action after action, that we are to be differentiated against and shown bias and unfairness in the allocation of Commonwealth road funds. I would not have expected this to be done in the name of patriotism. South Australians are expected to respond to this patriotic call and to once again be a doormat and have the feet of Queenslanders and Western Australians wiped upon them. That, of course, is where the favouritism is shown by the Commonwealth Government. I want to take nothing from those States. What I am asking is that if we are to be subjected to a deficiency in the normal road program surely we in South Australia can receive in this special bicentennial road development at least the money we collect in our State. If we are to subsidise the other States I ask this simple question: 'Which is the strongest economically of the three States, Queensland, Western Australia and South Australia, today?' Western Australia and Queensland are two of the great resources development areas of this country and South Australia has a hugely concentrated population in the metropolitan area which is largely dependent on industrial manufacture. Which is the weakest-if one puts it in the negative-of these three States?

There can only be one answer economically today. Which of those three States is subsidising the other two? From a study of the statistics honourable members will find only one State the weakest economically. It is a totally unconscionable attack on the weakest of the mainland economies and it cannot be sustained by any statistic.
I know that the Minister is tired of these statistics. I give them to him here in every debate on roads. He nods politely, because he is a very polite man, but he totally ignores them. I have said to him before that there is only one thing to do and that is to take up arms in South Australia in a political sense and educate people to the fact that they are being done in the eye on this matter by the Government. I repeat a few statistics to support this argument once again in case some people have not read or heard of the previous situation. The facts of the matter are that apart from the incontrovertible figure, as I have said, that 9.34 per cent of the collection will come from South Australia, at present South Australia has 9.21 per cent of vehicle kilometres of travel in Australia and 9.42 per cent of the vehicle numbers. We have 15.5 per cent of the area, which I do not think is much of a figure. Motor fuel consumption, as I have said, is 9.34 per cent, road length is 12.2 per cent and population is 9 per cent. I refer now to some figures that I gave on 31 March in this House, when one could look to the future, to head off any argument that South Australia may be lagging behind in vehicle usage or road development. I will use this limited extract from a number of figures that I gave. I stated:
The estimates for 1980 show South Australia as having 11,355,000 vehicle kilometres travelled and Western Australia as having 11,775.000. The estimate for 1985 is 13,753,000 and 15,251,000 respectively . . . on a percentage basis, the figures are 99.8 per cent, 96 per cent and 90 per cent.
I went on to say:
It is estimated that in 1989 South Australia will have 691 vehicles per thousand of population compared with 680 vehicles per thousand of population in Western Australia.
These figures show definitely that South Australia should not be subjected to this huge reduction in funds which it is now being subjected to. South Australia, under this proposal, will get 6.5 per cent of the bicentennial funds for national roads whilst it has 16 per cent of the national road lengths within its borders. We will get 7.6 per cent of funds for urban arterial roads whilst we have 9.25 per cent of arterial roads. For rural arterial roads we will get 7.5 per cent of the funds whilst we have 10.25 per cent of the national total within our border. On a comparative basis, totalling the new bicentennial funds with the old, existing, continuing road funds, Western Australia will get an

Road Development Trust Fund Bill

20 October 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 2337

increase for 1982-83 of 34 per cent; South Australia will get an increase of 30 per cent, and Queensland will get an increase of 35.3 per cent. For the next financial year, when the program bites more heavily, Western Australia will get an increase of the two put together, of 76.7 per cent, and South Australia will get an increase of 68.1 per cent and Queensland will get 80 per cent.
It is not simply that we start from a low base. Funding is going down year after year under the bias which is being shown in this way. The figures which I have cited can be multiplied, as they have in the past, many times. I put it again to the Minister that if he has not considered these figures he should do so now. If South Australia has 9.34 per cent of the usage of fuel within its borders he must concede that South Australia will be the source of basically 9.3 per cent of the funds that we are distributing through this plan. I ask the Minister at any stage to deny that small but important point. I also ask him to look at the economies of Western Australia, Queensland and South Australia as three of the mainland States which are not standard States according to Grants Commission consideration and I ask him to comment on the strength of the economies of those States. I then ask him to justify how he can return to my State $54m less than will be collected in it in the six years of this program. As I say, I believe that he cannot do that. He cannot follow those points cogently and simply and provide any excuse for the bias which he has continued.
I know from private conversations with people in the State Government in South Australia that they are extremely disappointed-that is putting it mildly-at this continued fact. I pay tribute to my State colleagues. In the South Australian Highways Department and at a ministerial level there has been a determination to build national highways even though we have been denied the percentage help that we should have been given on any statistics we could bring up. For example, during the I970s the State Government diverted $27m of its own funds from normal State construction into national highways. A great deal of this money was to complete the Eyre Highway to meet up with the Western Australian effort at the border.
It is interesting that, South Australia having spent those sums to the detriment of its own internal roads, Western Australia under the Bicentenary program is to get money to redo some of its section of the Eyre Highway. I do not begrudge Western Australia that. We need the highway. But is it not ironic that we could not get the national funds to build it the first time but now

Western Australia is getting funds to build it a second time? What sort of justice is that? As far as I am concerned, the Minister will not get cooperation in his plan. I can have little influence on it here. Of course, if one could wave a magic wand one would not want to stop a development desirable for the whole of this nation. Indeed, on the whole, it is a great concept. What is it that South Australians have to do to get a fair deal? Do we have to reject our own Government? Do we have to stand up here and revile the Government's plan time after time? Do we have to get our people in South Australia up in arms to vote against the Government? What is it we have to do? The Minister will know there is a point beyond which a community will not accept that treatment.
Mr Cunningham-It is a good pork barrel job if you can just get your share of it.
Mr STEELE HALL-The honourable member opposite might say that it is a pork barrel job but it is no good asking people who are subject to such a bias-when everyone else is the beneficiary of that type of bias-to sit down and continue to be good boys and take it. There has to be sufficient complaint for a turnaround in official thinking. Honourable members from the Labor Party benches cannot speak with any confidence. In the Whitlam years the Labor Party did nothing to redress this circumstance. I am just disappointed now to see that we are getting a double dose through a new plan. I ask the Minister to take stock of where he is heading in asking the mainland State which today is reliant on industrial production far more than the other three States that are non-standard States in the Commonwealth Grants Commission considerations, the State with the hardest pressed economy, to do some of the subsidising-a lot of it will come from the standard States-of the rest of the States. How on earth can the Minister countenance that?
As I close I point out to the Minister, without using harsh words because I do not want to be personal, that South Australia will not continue to accept this. He must see the reasoning that I put to him. The weakest State is to receive $54m less than it is to contribute to the scheme whilst the strongest States in a similar position are to go ahead from strength to strength. I reject the logic of that sum.
Debate (on motion by Mr Les Johnson) adjourned.
House adjourned at 11.35 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:

2338 REPRESENTATIVES 20 October 1982

Notices

Mr Macphee to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Mr Hunt to present a BiII for an Act to amend the Australian Shipping Commission Act 1956, and for related purposes.
Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act relating to the Australian National Railways Commission.
Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act to enact certain transitional provisions, to repeal certain Acts and to make certain amendments on consequence of the enactment of the Australian National Railways Commission Act 1982.
Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil and other harmful substances discharged from ships.
Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.

Mr Thomson to present a BiII for an Act to amend the Weights and Measures (National Standards) Act 1960.
Mr N. A. Brown to present a BiII for an Act to establish a National Crimes Commission.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 20 October 1982, pursuant to statute:
Lands Acquisition ActLands acquired for Aboriginal Hostels Limited purposes-Broken Hill, Burwood and Neutral Bay, N.S.W.
Statement of lands acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (I).
Seat of Government (Administration) ActRegulation-1982No.47 (Instruments Ordinance).


