House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 128, 1982 Thursday, 9 September 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Notices ofMotion

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1239

Thursday, 9 September 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers.
ELECTRONIC HOME ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY
Notice of Motion Mr JULL (Bowman)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) Recognises the rapid technological advances being made in the communications and electronic home entertainment industries;
(2) Acknowledges that the Government is correctly examining this new technology for the orderly introduction of satellite services, cable television, subscriber television, video text and teletext services, and sees the continuing acceptance of home video tape recorders, video disc, laser disc and other new devices as providing Australia with one of the highest penetrations of this equipment in the world;
(3) Expresses concern that present copyright laws may be unable to protect artists, writers and producers of this information and material; and
(4) Urges the Government to undertake a complete examination and update of all copyright laws in Australia to accommodate this new technology.
MR DENIS BYRNE HORGAN Notice of Motion
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House demands that the Treasurer suspend from his directorship of the Australian Industry Development Corporation Mr Denis Byrne Horgan, Chairman of the Western Australian Liberal Party Finance Committee and a known participant in bottom-of-the-harbour tax avoidance schemes.
LAW REPORTING Notice of Motion
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House- (I) Notes-
(a) the CCH (Commerce Clearing House) August newsletter announcing that the Council of Law Reporting of Victoria has refused CCH permission to publish the text of a major taxation judgment of the Supreme Court of Victoria, Suttons Motors v the Federal Commissioner of Taxation, and
(b) the consequent inability of loose-leaf legal services to provide full information concerning taxation and other federal laws; and
(2) Calls on the Government to take such steps as will ensure the unhindered availability of judgments of all courts exercising Federal jurisdiction.

MR DENIS BYRNE HORGAN Notice of Motion
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I give notice that, on the day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House demands that the Minister for Communications suspend from his directorship of Aussat Pty Ltd and from membership of the Australian Broadcasting Commission Mr Denis Byrne Horgan, Chairman of the Western Australian Liberal Party Finance Committee and known participant in bottom-of-the-harbour tax avoidance schemes.
MR DENIS BYRNE HORGAN Notice of Motion
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House demands that the Minister for Industry and Commerce suspend from membership of the Australian Manufacturing Council and Project Australia Committee Mr Denis Byrne Horgan, Chairman of the Western Australian Liberal Party Finance Committee and known participant in bottom-of-the-harbour tax avoidance schemes.
MR DENIS BYRNE HORGAN Notice of Motion
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House demands that the Minister for Foreign Affairs suspend from membership of the Australia-Japan Foundation Mr Denis Byrne Horgan, Chairman of the Western Australian Liberal Party Finance Committee and known participant in bottom-of-the-harbour tax avoidance schemes.
MR DENIS BYRNE HORGAN Notice of Motion
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House demands that the Minister for Science and Technology suspend as Chairman of the Western Australian Committee of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation and as a member of the Advisory Council of the CSIRO Mr Denis Byrne Horgan, Chairman of the Western Australian Liberal Party Finance Committee and known participant in bottom-of-the-harbour tax avoidance schemes.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAX AVOIDANCE Mr JACOBI-My question without notice is directed to the Prime Minister. I notified the Attorney-General of it a week ago. What steps has the Government taken to ensure that persons named in the Costigan and McCabe-Lafranchi reports as having been involved in tax avoidance and evasion or in other alleged illegal activities, and against whom there is substantial evidence, are not allowed to leave this country in order to escape possible criminal proceedings? In view of the ministerial discretion conferred by sections 7

1240 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Questions without Notice

and 9 of the Passports Act 1938 will the Government give an assurance that steps will be taken to withhold or cancel the passports of those involved in possible criminal proceedings arising from the reports? Will the Government take appropriate action to ensure that such persons do not attempt to transfer assets out of this country pending such proceedings and thereby obviate costly extradition proceedings as a burden on the taxpayer?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I know of the honourable gentleman's interest over a significant period in matters of this kind and also in matters relating to the establishment of a crimes commission. I hope the House will, in the course of the day, have the opportunity to give speedy passage to the special prosecutor legislation, and I hope that it will do just that. We have taken a number of steps. We have proposed the establishment of a special prosecutor whom we hope will be able to work very closely with the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. We also hope that the Royal Commission will be able to assist in providing information and documentary material which can assist in speedy and effective prosecutions of the promoters and those involved in criminal activities in relation to bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. The tax legislation that will be introduced a little later is obviously related to the recovery of funds and not to the work of the special prosecutor in that sense.
The Attorney-General will be having discussions with Mr Costigan tomorrow in relation to other aspects of the Costigan report. Very wide-ranging matters-matters of the utmost seriousness and concern-are involved. We have already indicated that we are prepared to establish a further special task force to assist in the gathering of evidence and preparation of cases for prosecution. I have been discussing with the Attorney only this morning the fact that if Mr Costigan believes that the establishment of a further special prosecutor would be desirable to assist in the prosecution of the general matters related to the Costigan report, again working very closely with the Royal Commission, then that is obviously a matter that the Government would want to pursue with the utmost vigour.
Mr Jacobi-What about the passports?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Let me come to that. It is necessary to indicate what is being done to assist in the prosecution of these cases. That, in a very real sense, gives effect to a significant paragraph in the Costigan report which indicates that a Commission such as his or any that might succeed it needs, not necessarily as a constituent part

of its own operations, a prosecuting arm acting in concert. In a very real way the measures that we have in train will establish that.
I have in this Parliament and in other forums expressed the Government's determination in relation to the establishment of a crimes commission. If the Costigan report reveals anything at all it reveals the fact that traditional methods of law enforcement have indeed failed, that modern devices of crime have enabled people to sidestep or pass by the traditional law enforcement methods which to a very considerable extent have rested on the State police forces and State operations. Those methods have been supplemented in recent times not only by the Costigan Royal Commission but also by the Stewart Royal Commission, by joint police task forces and by effective action. Indeed, in many ways, the development of a crimes commission would be a logical successor to everything that has gone on. I hope the honourable gentleman will be able to persuade his colleagues to support us when the enabling legislation comes down.
Mr Jacobi-I will support it, no worry.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I know that. The honourable gentleman has made his position very plain and I commend him for it. All of this demonstrates the total and absolute determination on the part of this Government. If people have been named in particular reports as participating in schemes, until prosecutions are launched they still have their rights as Australian citizens. Other people have expressed their concern in relation to civil liberties. That is something that obviously all honourable members of the House would also have a feeling for. The Premier of Victoria in particular has expressed those concerns and, as a consequence, he has expressed doubts about the establishment of a crimes commission. I hope that his doubts can be overcome.
Mr Hayden-Bjelke-Petersen has too.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Yes, he has. I hope that his doubts also can be overcome because this Government's determination is absolute in relation to these matters. I hope that the situation will not develop in which people, as a result of the activities of a special prosecutor, as a result of the work of the Royal Commission or other royal commissions, or as a result of a crimes commission, have their normal rights taken away from them even before a prosecution has been launched against them. We would not want to be in that kind of society.

Questions without Notice

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1241

BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT: ELECTION BLACKOUT
Mr PEACOCK-My question, which is addressed to the Minister for Communications, relates to section 116 of the Broadcasting and Television Act, the section which imposes an election blackout. In particular I refer to the Minister's reported statement last week that he was now in favour of amending the Act. When will the amending legislation be introduced?
Mr N. A. BROWN-It is true that in the course of a question and answer session following a public address that I gave some time ago I was asked what my personal views were with respect to what is popularly known as the election blackout provision of the Broadcasting and Television Act. In response to that question I said that in my view those who supported the ban or blackout had to acknowledge the fact that this was indeed a severe restriction on the freedom of expression and debate which was fundamental to our democratic process and that, therefore, there was an obligation on them to make out a strong case in support of maintaining the blackout and that they had not made a very good fist of making out that case.
There are very strongly held opinions of this issue on both sides. Views are held on both sides with very good faith. People have made a substantial effort, in correspondence and discussions with me, to make out their side of the issue. The Government's view is that the matter certainly should be investigated and the provision reviewed to see whether it has the support of the Australian people and to see whether it properly reflects the views that the Australian people believe should be implemented in the immediate pre-election period. I have examined the provision. The Government has looked at it and is looking at it further. At the earliest possible opportunity the Government will make an announcement as to whether it intends to propose an amendment to the law-and if so what that amendment is-or whether it intends to maintain the present provision in the Act.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE FEDERATED SHIP
PAINTERS AND DOCKERS UNION
Mr HOLDING-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. Will the Government extend the terms and powers of the Costigan Royal Commission in such a way that will allow it to investigate tax evasion and avoidance in all its ramifications, including the administration of the tax laws by the bureaucracy, and, where that administration has failed, the role played in that failure by

Ministers of this Government, and, where relevant, their colleagues at senior levels in the Liberal Party?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am not aware that the Royal Commissioner has requested that extension to his powers. He has requested an extension of his powers in relation to search warrants and the subpoenaing of witnesses and he has made further recommendations in relation to the modifications of section 16, the secrecy provision, of the Income Tax Assessment Act. Those matters are being examined as a matter of great urgency, and the Commonwealth will make its decision in relation to them shortly.
ROYAL COMMISSIONS AND COURTS: IN CAMERA HEARINGS
Mr BIRNEY-My question is directed to the Minister representing the Attorney-General. Is it a fact that courts, royal commissions and similar bodies on occasions hold proceedings in camera and write unpublished decisions or reports? Are those reports normally kept confidential? What are the consequences of revealing publicly the contents of in camera proceedings and unpublished confidential reports?
Mr N. A. BROWN-It is true that courts on occasions hold in camera proceedings and order that proceedings and, on occasions, decisions should not be made public. That is a practice also of royal commissions. It may well be for that reason amongst others that there is a provision in the Royal Commissions Act creating an offence for wilful contempt of royal commissions. This is a very basic principle, of course, in both cases, first, to protect the innocent and, secondly, to prevent the guilty or potentially guilty--
Mr Hayden-From getting into trouble, as in the Liberal Party.
Mr N. A. BROWN-From being warned and being able to take steps to avoid the full prosecution of the law, something the Leader of the Opposition, by reason of his interjection and of statements he has made, does.not seem to understand. Let us look at some statements made by the Leader of the Opposition. I refer to a statement made in public, not in the Parliament, when he said:
However, we have also observed, as Costigan does in one of his reports which has not been published--
Then in the Parliament he said:
But as Commissioner Costigan points out in his report, not the published one--
He also said:
when the two unpublished volumes of the Costigan Royal Commission report are produced--

1242 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Questions without Notice

When we consider those statements it is very apparent that the Leader of the Opposition was engaging in a gross breach of confidentiality in respect of reports of the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. Those reports were given to him on a confidential basis. They are in the same category as in camera proceedings in a court, and it is a contempt in fact, if not in law, of the Royal Commission by the Leader of the Opposition. This is an elementary principle which the Leader of the Opposition has very clearly breached.
TAX EVASION
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I ask the Prime Minister whether, despite the debacle of not being able to prosecute anybody for taxation evasion because of the failure of the first law officer, it is of significance that the second law officer, the Solicitor-General, has not been involved in giving any advice to the Government or launching any prosecutions. I note that the present action taken under the Public Service Act will be of minimal concern because it can lead only to the dismissal of people. In view of the serious nature of the crime and corruption that seem to be permeating our society I ask: In view of the matters disclosed in both the McCabe-Lafranchi and Costigan reports will the Prime Minister immediately instruct the Solicitor-General to investigate all persons referred to in these reports with particular reference to their income, assets and liabilities in order that the Government can be informed as to whether there have been any breaches of the Secret Commissions Act or the Crimes Act relating to official corruption, thereby ensuring that anybody so guilty will serve a prison sentence?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Again the honourable gentleman has made out a good case for the speedy passage of the special prosecutor legislation. Beyond that, the honourable gentleman seems to want to establish a body to do over again the work of the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. I can see no point in that.
SOVIET SCIENTISTS
Mr SPENDER-Will the Minister for Foreign Affairs inform the Parliament of the Government's present attitude towards the admission of Soviet scientists to international conferences in this country?
Mr STREETI am happy to answer the question. I have consistently pointed out that the main thrust of the Government's policy toward the Soviet Union since its invasion of Afghanistan has

been directed towards the suspension of bilateral, as distinct from multilateral, exchanges. We are very conscious of the importance to Australia of multilateral co-operation. We try, wherever possible, not to allow the current state of relations between Australia and the Soviet Union to interfere with our high standing as a participant in and host to multilateral conferences. Australia will not abrogate its national right to decide who enters this country and who does not. The Soviet Union has now clearly embarked on a policy to try to prevent Australia being used as a venue for multilateral conferences of one kind or another. We are not prepared to give the Soviet Union that satisfaction because it is not in our interests to do so.
So far as genuine multilateral scientific conferences are concerned, Australia will maintain conditions similar to those applied by like minded western countries in their national interests. There will be no change in our policy on bilateral contacts with the Soviet Union or any change in our continued condemnation of unacceptable Soviet policies as exemplified by Afghanistan and Poland. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a letter which I have written on this matter to Professor Christiansen of the Australian Academy of Science.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
MINISTER FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS CANBERRA
9 September 1982
Dear Professor Christiansen
Since writing to you on 31 August 1982 I have been giving some further consideration in consultation with my colleagues to the issue you have raised.
You will recall that in my letter of 31 August I pointed out that "the Government's procedures in relation to the entry of senior Soviet nationals wishing to participate in genuinely international conferences are not inflexible". I also said that the practice of other likeminded Western countries relating to the assurances given to the ICSU were being studied and that the Government was prepared to give the most careful consideration to your Academy's suggestion about the application of policy. I thought it would be useful for you and your colleagues when meeting in the United Kingdom at the ICSU meeting to be informed of the Government's views.
In his letter to the Australian Academy of Science in June 1980 the then Australian Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, Mr Macphee, said that the International Council of Scientific Unions could be advised that:
"Bona fide scientists from all countries will be admitted to Australia to attend the conference subject to the application of normal rules and requirements for visitor entry to Australia in operation at the time. Every effort will be made to facilitate the issue of visas to such scientists."
In so far as the admission of Soviet representatives is concerned, the Government takes account of the following main considerations:

Questions without Notice

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1243

the thrust of the Government's policy towards the Soviet Union since its invasion of Afghanistan is directed at the suspension of bilateral as distinct from multilateral exchanges.
the Government is very conscious of the importance to Australia of multilateral co-operation and tries, wherever possible, to avoid allowing the current state of its bilateral relations with the Soviet Union to interfere with Australia's high standing as a participant in and host to multilateral conferences.
at the same time and aside from the Government's prevailing attitude towards bilateral relations with the Soviet Union, Australia, like other countries will not abrogate its right to refuse entry to any visitor coming to Australia when it judges this to be necessary in the national interest. Our position was most clearly set out in this regard in the letter from Mr Macphee to Professor Ada on 28 June 1980.
It is clear that the Soviet Union has now embarked on a policy of trying to prevent Australia being used as a venue for major international scientific conferences. It was, for example, a Soviet decision, not an Australian one, which stopped a delegation of twenty-five Soviet representatives attending the recent Biochemical Congress in Perth. I am sure you would agree that it would be a matter of deep concern if the Soviet Union were to try to use the ICSU to "blacklist" Australia as a host for international scientific conferences.
My scepticism about Soviet motives is also reinforced by the knowledge that although the Soviet Union is quick to advocate freedom of exchange among international scientists, its treatment of its own scientists is deplorable by our standards and those of most other Westerm countries. The most striking example is the eminent Soviet physicist Andrei Sakharov, who, because of his views on human rights, still remains under house arrest, unable to travel abroad or within his own country.
For its part, the Government has noted the recent representations by the scientific community, and in cases involving attendance at multilateral conferences will carefully weigh the above considerations in seeking to ensure the entry of all bona fide participants provided, of course, normal entry criteria are met. In this respect the Government will maintain conditions similar to those applied by likeminded Western countries in their national interests. I also believe it would be in the interests of both the Academy and the Government for there to be prior consultation on forthcoming conferences.
You may wish to draw upon this letter in your discussions with colleagues attending the ICSU meetings in the United Kingdom. I would have no objection to your making public the contents of this letter.
Yours sincerely
A.A.STREET
Professor W. N. Christiansen Foreign Secretary Australian Academy of Science Gordon Street
TAX EVASION ACTIVITIES
Mr CHARLES-Has the Prime Minister's attention been drawn to reports today of the multimillion tax evasion activities of a Mr Peter Gallus, a prominent member of the Victorian branch of the Liberal Party? What action does his Government propose to take to recover the millions of dollars lost in revenue from the schemes operated by his Victorian colleague?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Anyon~ho is involved in activities of the kind that have generally been the subject of discussion on bottom-of the-harbour schemes and the like is no colleague of mine, no matter where he may come from. I have said on more than one occasion that if there are any members of the Liberal Party who have been involved in bottom-of-the-harbour schemes I hope that they will leave the Party before the special prosecutor gets at them. Incidentally, as it happens, I am advised that the person to whom the honourable member referred resigned from the Victorian branch of the Liberal Party 15 months ago.
SELF-EMPLOYED PEOPLE: UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
Mr FISHER-Is the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security aware of allegations concerning recent determinations by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal that it has removed the opportunity for self-employed people to be assessed for unemployment benefits? As many rural industries and small businesses are facing a severe downturn in their economies due to drought and depressed export markets, will the Minister review the relevant sections of the Social Services Act with a view to making it effective and not open to these determinations?
Mr WILSON-It is not true to say that any determination has been made by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal or any other tribunal that has removed the opportunity for self-employed people to receive the unemployment benefit as suggested by the honourable member. The fact is that people who may be truly described as selfemployed have never been entitled to unemployment benefit. Two recent cases were before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. I mention them because I think it will bring to the attention of honourable members the sort of problem that needs to be considered. One was the case of an opal miner who engaged in opal mining for 40 to 50 hours a week and claimed unemployment benefit. Clearly he was self-employed in opal mining.
There was another case of a self-employed person engaged in a business, but the business was not profitable and the Administrative Appeals Tribunal found, and we agreed, that a person who is self-employed need not be profitably employed in the sense that the income from his activities exceeds the outgoings. That is not to say that the proprietor of a business may not, in certain circumstances, be entitled to unemployment benefit because of the circumstances. Provided he satisfies the necessary criteria laid down in the

1244 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Questions without Notice

Social Services Act that he is capable of undertaking, and is willing to undertake suitable work and is taking reasonable steps to engage in such work and obtain such work then he may well be entitled to unemployment benefit. I assure the honourable member that this is an area of administration where the Department of Social Security is extremely sensitive to the needs of those involved. I also assure him that so far as the Minister for Social Security and his departmental advisers are concerned, nothing which has been said by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal has changed the application of the law in this area.
Mr Morris-Mr Speaker. I raise a point of order. Under Standing Order 321 I require the Minister to table the two pieces of paper from which he was quoting in replying to the question.
Mr SPEAKER-Was the Minister reading from a document?
Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, there were two pieces of paper.
Mr SPEAKER-The documents are tabled.
TAX EVASION
Mrs DARLING-Is the Prime Minister aware of the statement, as reported in today's media, by the New South Wales Attorney-General that tax evasion exists in New South Wales on a massive scale involving at least 4,000 bottom-of-theharbour schemes? Is he aware that the New South Wales Attorney-General stated on the Australian Broadcasting Commission radio this morning that the New South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission had been passing on the details of these schemes to the Commonwealth authorities as they had been uncovered? Has the Government, as a result of this information accumulated over the years, yet made any estimate of how many hundreds of millions of dollars have been lost to revenue as a result of these schemes being allowed to continue for all this time?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I thank the honourable member. I had considered getting a Dorothy Dix question on that very subject, but then I thought that somebody from the Australian Labor Party would ask me the question and it would not be necessary. I thank the honourable member very much indeed. I have noted the comments by the New South Wales Attorney General. What information he has been handing over to the Commonwealth tax officers I do not know. If he and his Corporate Affairs Commission believe that these things have been happening it is very difficult to see how that could occur without a breach of New South Wales companies law and therefore it would be subject

to prosecution by the New South Wales authorities. If the honourable member reads the report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union again she will find that the report says that the prosecutions could have been laid by the State Attorney-General. So if there is a problem in relation to prosecutions, Mr Walker should look to his own house.
IMMIGRATION
Mr JULLIs the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs aware of public concern at the increase in the number of New Zealanders arriving in Australia and settling here permanently? Is it a fact that the number of permanent settlers from New Zealand has more than doubled in the past five years? Do New Zealanders arriving here have automatic unemployment benefits? Are jobs for Australians being taken away by this influx of visitors?
Mr HODGES-From time to time concerns have been expressed to me about the influx of people from New Zealand. Under arrangements that have been in place for many years New Zealanders have the right to come to Australia without being visaed. In 1980-81 about 12,000 New Zealanders came to Australia. The following year the figure was about 14,000, and it is expected that in this financial year the net gain of New Zealanders to Australia will be about 14,000. I understand from figures provided to me by my Department that about 40 per cent of those people are actually taking up residence in Queensland. I have had concern expressed to me, particularly by the honourable members for Fadden and McPherson in relation to those who are taking up residence in the Gold Coast area. About 34 per cent are going to New South Wales and about 14 per cent to Victoria. So those three States are receiving the great proportion of the New Zealanders who are coming here.
The 1976 census showed that about 90,000 New Zealand born people were in Australia. Five years later, the 1981 census indicated that there were 177,000 New Zealand born people in Australia. Of course, one has to subtract from that figure the Australians who go to New Zealand. In any case, there is still a major net gain to Australia. My predecessor, Mr Macphee, in July last year introduced the passport system which has resulted in some checks being made on criminals-those involved in drug running and so forth-coming into Australia via New Zealand. At the moment there are no immediate plans to change the present system from one of passport requirement to visa requirement, although the

Questions without Notice

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1245

matter is constantly monitored and from time to time my Department provides reports to me. The matter is being kept under very close surveillance.
TAX AVOIDANCE SCHEMES
Mr MOUNTFORD-Is the Minister representing the Acting Treasurer aware that the recent report of the Auditor-General expressed concern that a statutory authority of the Commonwealth-the Australian Industry Development Corporation-had utilised an artificial tax planning scheme involving currency futures to reduce its tax liability last financial year? Was the Government aware of the operation of this tax scheme? Has the use of such tax avoidance schemes by the AIDC arisen from advice received from a member of the AIDC board who is a well known past finance director for the Western Australian Liberal Party and who was named in the McCabe-Lafranchi report as a prominent tax avoider?
Mr MACPHEE-I understand that the Acting Treasurer has asked the Treasury to have a report in relation to that matter ready for the Treasurer when he returns.

out of that State. I await his request and advice with interest. The formation of a single national export selling authority would require close consultation with the apple growing States. I am not sure, having regard to Tasmania's experience, that Tasmania would be interested in such a proposition, but I would be prepared to canvas it with the Tasmanian Minister and other Ministers.
JOSE RMS HORTA
Mr FRY-I direct my question to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. In view of his earlier statement regarding the granting of visas to Russian scientists, will he reconsider the case of Jose Ramos Horta who, I understand, was not involved in any way in the invasion of Afghanistan? He has been invited to give evidence to the Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence inquiry into human rights in East Timor. He has had no problem in getting access to the United Nations or to any other country. I ask the Minister: What is so special about Australia that Mr Horta will not be allowed to enter Australia? Will he reconsider the application so that the Parliament has the benefit ofMr Horta's evidence?

APPLE AND PEAR INDUSTRY
Mr GOODLUCK-Is the Minister for Primary Industry aware that the Tasmanian Apple Marketing Authority has been discontinued? If so, was he consulted? Should the Federal Government be involved? Is the Minister also aware of widespread criticism of the Apple and Pear Corporation in respect of its not fulfilling one of its functions regarding the export marketing of apples to the satisfaction of many growers? Will the Minister give consideration to forming a single national authority to market export apples, similar to the one operating in New Zealand and, apparently, in South Africa?
Mr NIXON-It is a fact that the Tasmanian Government has decided to abolish TAMA, which has been the single selling authority for the export of apples out of that State. I understand it has taken that decision because TAMA has over the last couple of years suffered severe losses. There has been a downturn in the volume of apples being exported under its control. The State therefore took this decision. I was not consulted on the issue. It is not a matter for consultation with the Federal Minister. Since then I understand that the State Minister has been giving consideration to what might replace TAMA as an export selling authority in that State. I have read in the Press that he will be approaching me to seek perhaps up to three export licences for private enterprise to take over the export selling of apples

Mr STREET-The gentleman mentioned by the honourable member is well known as a representative of the Fretilin movement in East Timor. The Government does not recognise that movement. It recognises East Timor as an integral part of Indonesia. Mr Horta has been denied a visa to this country for about five years now. That policy will be maintained.
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE
Mr MacKENZIE-My question, addressed to the Minister for Primary Industry, relates to drought assistance measures recently announced by the Commonwealth Government. How have the Commonwealth's initiatives on drought assistance been received by the various farmer organisations? Can the Minister provide further details of the farm debt interest subsidy scheme? What is the definition of readily available liquid assets? Will indirect beneficiaries of the farm business have to realise their liquid assets? What is the situation of people who have debts incurred through hire purchase or leasing commitments? How will the stock fodder subsidy scheme operate? What measures are being undertaken to prevent abuse of this scheme? Have the States agreed to the additional core measures proposed to them by the Commonwealth last Monday? Have the two most severely affected States-New South Wales and Victoria-yet accepted the Commonwealth's proposition that they provide carry-on loans and

1246 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Questions without Notice

assistance to small business in drought affected areas?
Mr NIXON-I am delighted to inform the House that the drought relief measures proposed by the Commonwealth have been very well received. I have received a number of letters and telegrams and a great number of telephone calls praising the Commonwealth's approach to the drought issue. The first proposal of interest, of course, is the interest subsidy. That will be paid on all farm debt that a farmer has on 31 August and any new farm debt created for carry-on purposes as a result of the drought after that date. The farmer will have to divest himself of any liquid assets such as cash deposits, debentures, stocks and shares and the like, if he has any. I will be issuing a Press statement today which will be made available to all honourable members, giving further details of the whole of the Commonwealth arrangement. I will list those things in particular. The interest subsidy will apply on hire purchase plant bought for farming purposes. It will not apply to leasing equipment because there is no beneficial ownership in leasing equipment. So, there is a difference. Any beneficial owner or part owner of a farm also will have to divest himself of any liquid assets or use those liquid assets in carrying on the farm before the interest subsidy will apply.
The fodder subsidy will be administered by the States, as distinct from the interest subsidy which will be administered by the Commonwealth. Measures are being put in place, under the arrangement with the States, to prevent abuse. One simple measure is that farmers will be paid the subsidy on the fodder one month at a time. If anybody thinks he is going to rip into the market by buying ten times as much as he needs and reselling it he will be due for a shock because he will not be able to abuse the system in that way. The subsidy will be paid at 50 per cent on the basis of wheat and the transfer nutrient price across to the other products on an agreed formula with the States. The formula has been in place for many years. There is no difficulty about that.
As to the core measures, I had a very interesting meeting with the State Agricultural Ministers on Monday on this issue. Some States welcomed the Commonwealth's initiatives very generously and open-heartedly. These were the States of Western Australia, Queensland, Tasmania and South Australia. I had a miserable time with the New South Wales Minister for Agriculture and Fisheries. I find him a miserable person, nit picking and hard to get on with. He is very ungenerous in every way. I can understand why it is that the New South Wales farmers are having a lousy time

with him as Minister. Mr Wran really ought to consider finding somebody with an understanding of the farming community to put in as Minister for Agriculture. I am afraid his Victorian counterpart is not doing any better. He is a slow learner, to say the least. I had to punch him three times at the table before I could get any sense out of him. I have some hope that the Victorian Minister might learn. After all, he has been living in Gippsland for a while and must have picked up a bit. As to the implementation of the core agreements--
Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. This is Question Time. Why will the Minister not make a statement on this important subject after Question Time? He is a talking machine. He has been talking for about five minutes. Mr Speaker, I ask you to direct him to finish his answer.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order, but it is a reasonable point. I ask the Minister to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr NIXON-Thank you, Mr Speaker. I draw the honourable member's attention to a very important subject. Thousands of Australians are affected by these measures.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The point made by the honourable member for Reid is that this is an important subject and therefore he is claiming it ought not to be dealt with in Question Time. That is why I have asked the Minister to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr NIXON-Mr Speaker, I would be delighted to put a statement down on the issue at any time. I will give consideration to that issue.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr NIXON-I will complete my answer in my own way without an interruption from Opposition members.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will continue his answer and ignore the interjections.
Mr NIXON-The Commonwealth announced that it was prepared to extend a number of the core measures, such as carry-on loans, which are presently some $20,000 in some States and $30,000 in Queensland. The amount varies from State to State. The Commonwealth announced that it was prepared to double the base amount of $20,000 to $40,000 and to double the other amounts to meet the needs of the drought. It is prepared also to assist local government bodies to put down bores. There is a series of core measures that are very important. They can be put in place only through proper administration of drought relief. Whether the States pick those core measures up is a matter for them individually. Again I am pleased to see that Queensland has picked up the

Questions without Notice

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1247

core measures and will put a number of them in place immediately. Again I cannot say the same for New South Wales or Victoria. They are the two drought affected States where these core measures are most required. I hope that some common sense will prevail on both the New South Wales and Victorian governments.
GREEK COMMUNITY: PROSECUTIONS
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Has the Prime Minister's attention been drawn to the lengthy prosecutions by the Attorney-General's Department of members of Sydney's Greek community, prosecutions in which $7.5m was spent on an incompetent and vengeful attempt by the Attorney General's Department to charge hundreds of Greek immigrants?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will cease his comment and ask for information.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Is the Prime Minister aware that the charges against all but seven of the 184 persons were either withdrawn or dismissed?
Dr Theophanous continuing to address a question to the Prime Minister-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The first part of the question was in order. I call on the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I will see whether there is any specific information I can get for the honourable gentleman. I would have thought the honourable gentleman would be concerned to see that taxpayers' funds are protected wherever there is fraud. I think it is a great pity that the practice was adopted of calling this a Greek social security case, and I condemn that practice. I think it impugns a community. It is a totally wrong description, and I condemn the use of that most unfortunate term in the most full blooded way.
Dr Theophanous-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. The Prime Minister had many occasions on which to condemn this situation. He was asked to do so. He never did so for over three years.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
MEDIBANK PRIVATE
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Has the attention of the Minister for Health been drawn to comments I made on the subject of Medibank during the adjournment debate on 25 August? If it has, has he had time to examine the second table which I incorporated in Hansard and which shows the detailed comparative costs of management expenses between the major private health

funds and Medibank for the latest available period of operations? Are my figures, which indicate that Medibank management costs in some States are double or almost treble those of the major private health funds, correct? If so, does it indicate that if the private sector is wiped out, as promised by a certain group, and a new health system is built around Medibank, Australians will end up paying hundreds of millions of dollars more for health care? Finally, why does the Minister not require Medibank to set rates in each State to meet the requirement of two months reserves as is required of the other health funds to protect the fund membership?
Mr CARLTON-Of course I have had my attention drawn to the remarks made by the honourable member for Fadden. I think any Minister who ignored remarks that had been made by the honourable member for Fadden would do so at his peril, in view of his well known capacity to act as a watch-dog of the public interest. I have no reason to doubt any of the figures put forward by the honourable member. He has done a lot of research into this subject and, as far as I am concerned, his figures appear to be correct. There is a problem when a private health fund is run according to Public Service rules and requirements. As far as I can see in the time. I have had a chance to look at it, Medibank Private is a very well managed fund in the sense that the managers of the fund are very competent and a very good commission is in charge of it.
However, any public sector trading operation faces certain difficulties in competing with private enterprise. Firstly, it must abide by the Public Service managerial structures, which are more costly than those of private enterprise. It has to abide by the Public Service awards, which means that it has a more costly structure of employment. Of course, it is also bound by industrial relations and financing rules which are set for it by the Government. In this context it is difficult for the management of Medibank Private, however capable it might be, to compete adequately with the private funds. In some of the States there is no doubt, as the honourable member has pointed out, that this is proving to be difficult.
I regard this as an important area to look at because I have a very great responsibility for those who work in Medibank Private. I also have responsibility for the customers, who receive a quite good service through the on-line computer system run by Medibank Private. I am conducting a full investigation and I am hopeful that we will be able to come up with some solution to ensure that the organisation continues, but in a way that does not subject it to continuing criticism based on its

1248 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Allegations against Member

performance. It also becomes quite clear, from my investigations to date, that it is quite impossible, using public sector provisions, as the Australian Labor Party would wish to do, to run a cheaper system of health insurance than can be run through regulated private funds. I repeat: It is quite impossible, and that is a conclusion I have already reached in the course of my investigations.
EXPORT DEVELOPMENT GRANTS BOARD
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 41 (4) of the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974 and section 20 (4) of the Export Expansion Grants Act 1978, I present the annual report of the Export Development Grants Board for 1981-82.
PUBLIC SERVICE BOARD
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- Pursuant to section 22 of the Public Service Act 1922, I present the annual report of the Public Service Board for 1981-82.
TRANSPORT OF SLAUGHTER CATTLE IN AUSTRALIA
Mr HUNT (Gwyder-Minister for Transport and Construction)-For the information of honourable members, I present a report published by the Bureau of Transport Economics on transport of slaughter cattle in Australia.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF SPORT
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Homes Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report of the Australian Institute of Sport for 1981.
ALLEGATIONS AGAINST MEMBER
Mr HAWKE (Wills)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr HAWKE-Yes.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr HAWKE-I am indebted to you, Mr Speaker. I preface my statement by indicating the resolution I made before I became a member of this Parliament that I would not say in this Parliament of anyone outside the Parliament anything that I was not prepared to say outside this House. It is in those circumstances and against that background that I refer to remarks that were made in

the Victorian Parliament last evening by Mr Morris Williams, the Liberal member for Doncaster. I have not as yet had the opportunity, for reasons which will become clear in what I have to say, of seeing the Hansard of what the member for Doncaster is reported to have said. The circumstances in which I have become aware of the statements by Mr Williams are that just after II o'clock last night I was telephoned from Melbourne by a reporter of the Sun newspaper and was subsequently approached here by a reporter of the Age. I understand that the two newspapers concerned have this morning in Melbourne run the story to which I am about to refer, but in the early editions which we have here the reference is not made.
As it is reported to me, Mr Williams said, in the context of suggestions that had been made that members of the Liberal Party may be embarrassed by the outcome of the Costigan investigations, that members of the Australian Labor Party will be embarrassed. He made particular reference to me and said that I was associated with one of the Mr Bigs of organised crime. He referred to what he was pleased to describe as a well known transport tycoon who has often referred to the fact that he is a great friend of Robert Hawke. He said that the Mr Big was the white knight referred to in the Costigan report. This morning I contacted the Speaker--
Mr Scholes-Who?
Mr SPEAKER-The interjection came from the honourable member for Corio, not from the Chair.
Mr HAWKE-I am indebted to him for his assistance. This morning I had discussions with the Speaker of the Victorian Parliament in an attempt to have read to me from the provisional Hansard the exact words that were used so that I would be in a position to do justice fully to what was said. The Speaker of the Victorian Parliament informed me that he had spoken with Mr Williams. As the regulations are there the Speaker is not able to make available these initial proofs without the permission of the member concerned. Mr Williams refused to give that permission. For that reason-Mr Williams's refusal to give permission-I do not have available the proof of the Hansard.
Let us stop, in dealing with the matter of the member for Doncaster going ahead in a mealymouthed, cowardly way--
Mr SPEAKER-I interrupt the honourable gentleman. The purpose of a personal explanation is to make clear where there is a misrepresentation and to correct it. So far the honourable

Allegations against Member

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1249

gentleman has not indicated to me the nature of the misrepresentation.
Mr HAWKE-Mr Speaker, I have read out--
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Mr Speaker, I am aware of the nature of the misrepresentation. I believe the honourable member for Wills should be given total opportunity to make his point in his own way.
Mr SPEAKER-Under those circumstances the only way in which the matter can be processed is for the honourable member for Wills to ask for leave to make a statement as distinct from a personal explanation.
Sir James Killen-I suggest that the honourable member follow that course.
Mr HAWKE-I am indebted to the Prime Minister and to the Leader of the House. I so seek leave.
Leave granted.
Mr HAWKE (Wills)-In those circumstances I want to do away with the mealy-mouthed cowardice of the member for Doncaster in the Victorian Parliament, Mr Williams, who, while identifying the person he has in mind, has not had the courage to name him. In the fashion for which I hope I am known I want to come straight to the point on this issue and name the person to whom, by cowardly innuendo, the member for Doncaster has referred. Clearly, he is referring to Sir Peter Abeles. He does not have the guts to name the man but refers to him as a leading tycoon in the Australian transport industry. He is saying of Sir Peter Abeles that he is one of the Mr Bigs of organised crime and that he was the 'white knight' referred to in the Costigan report. I will come to the question of what has happened so far in this Parliament on this issue in a moment.
It is for Sir Peter Abeles and not for me to make whatever statement and to take whatever action he wishes. I am not in any sense seeking to speak on his behalf other than to say here, on the floor of this House, as I will say anywhere, unequivocally, and as I have had cause to say before in circumstances in which some of the more disreputable sections of the Press of this country recently-I refer most particularly to the National Timeshave by miserable innuendo sought to draw conclusions in this matter, that Sir Peter Abeles is a personal friend of mine. I have never, and will not now or in the future, seek to deny that fact because it is not in my nature to deny friendships that I have. Never at any time in my association with that gentleman, which to my recollection now goes back to 1970, have I ever had any cause

whatsoever to have any suspicion-not one piece of evidence-that he is in any way associated with organised crime. I hope all honourable members on both sides of the House know of my reputation well enough to know that, if I did have any such inkling or basis for belief, I would take action accordingly. I say this not to defend the gentleman but simply to point out that, in respect of my knowledge of this man, I have not one piece of evidence.
I will come to the question of what the Costigan report does or does not say in a moment. Honourable members will recall that at page 1162 of yesterday's Hansard record the Prime Minister referred to a letter from the Royal Commissioner, Mr Costigan. The letter quoted by the Prime Minister states:
My dear Prime Minister,
I have been asked by an officer of your Department to indicate whether in any of the confidential volumes of my reports there are mentioned any knights in Sydney, Melbourne or Brisbane or elsewhere. As you will understand from my letter dated 6 September it is my firm view that the details of those reports should not be made public either by way of tabling in the Parliament or by piecemeal disclosure. Consistent with that view I believe there are dangers in responding to individual requests of this kind.
The letter concluded:
Nonetheless I think it appropriate that I should indicate in this case that there are no such knights mentioned.
My concern is in regard to this creature, Williams. I am simply making my personal position clear in regard to any lack of knowledge whatsoever. it would be a matter of total surprise to me if there were any foundation for the scurrilous suggestion made by this gentleman. I refer to what is before the Parliament-the proposition that no knight is mentioned there and, by definition, insofar as the allegations against me are concerned, there is no evidence to show that Sir Peter Abeles is involved. So that this matter can be made perfectly clear let me establish in the minds of members of this Parliament and, through them, the public, the role and the position I adopted in this Parliament in respect of the Costigan report. I remind the House that the third interim report of Royal Commissioner Costigan was the first one to be made public. At the request of the Royal Commissioner, as I understand it, the first two interim reports were not made available. The third interim report was tabled in this House by the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) on 25 February. I had the honour and the responsibility of leading the debate on that matter for the Opposition. I refer the House to page 668 of Hansard of 25 February 1982. I led the debate for the Opposition by saying:

1250 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Allegations against Member

This third interim report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, this slim document, is potentially one of the most explosive papers to be tabled in this House.
That observation, I suggest, has been weU borne out by subsequent events. But my concern in regard to this matter is to remind the House of my concluding remarks when responding on behalf of the Opposition. I referred to the request for additional powers that the Royal Commissioner included in that third interim report. Honourable members will recall, in particular, that he wanted an amendment of section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, the secrecy provision, to enable him further to proceed in this matter. I concluded my comments in this way:
The Opposition regards the secrecy provisions of the Act as of fundamental importance. We support those provisions; we are committed to them. But we appreciate the very careful way in which the Commissioner has asked for very limited and careful amendments so that he will be able to achieve the noble purpose that he has outlined in his reports. We appreciate that the Government is going to look at this, but on behalf of the Opposition we flag that we will be considering i~, of course. We indicate that, for the reasons so cogently outlined by the Royal Commissioner, these proposals w~ich he brings forward so responsibly, so carefully and so cIrcumspectly, should meet with the unanimous approval of a House which is concerned with trying to create a more equitable and fair burden of taxation in this community.
I led for the Opposition in the debate on this matter. The thrust of what I said was to urge the Government to give the Royal Commissioner whatever powers he requested so that as a result of his investigations anything in the way of tax evasion or anything associated with it could be exposed. Far from trying to stand in the way I led in trying to ensure that the Royal Commissioner should have whatever powers were necessary in this regard. If this Royal Commissioner should ask the Government for any further powers, the Government and the Parliament should give him those powers. Any other royal commission or any other avenue of inquiry which is available to investigate the tax evasion industry and any associated criminal activities should be given those powers so that this industry and any associated criminal activity can be pursued. Let those investigations go where they may and let the results be what they will. All I can say is that in respect of anyone I know there will be no embarrassment as far as I am concerned. If it turns out as a result of any investigation-on the evidence available this is not the case in respect of Sir Peter Abeles, who has inferentiaUy been named; there is no such evidence-that Sir Peter Abeles or anyone I happen to know is associated in any way with these matters, I wiU not have embarrassment; I will have sorrow.

I chaUenge this miserable creature-Morris Williams, the Liberal member for Doncaster in the Victorian parliament-to come outside the privilege of parliament and say or in any way insinuate that I have any association with organised crime in this country. If he does not let him remain damned for the contemptible cur that he is.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-by leave-I learned early this morning of the aUegations that had been made involving the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and Sir Peter Abeles. I sought to find out what had happened and what had been said. I condemn absolutely what was said in the Victorian Parliament on this matter by Mr Williams. I have the Hansard transcript and I will read part of it; then it will be seen why I condemn what he said so vigorously. I hope that aU honourable members of this Parliament will join in that condemnation. The Hansard transcript states:
Robert Hawke is also associated with another one of the Mr Bigs who I am sure is the white knight referred to in ~he Costigan allegations. A well known transport tycoon, he IS a great friend of Robert Hawke and is always talking about what a great man he is.
When the Costigan report comes out, the Labor Party will have nothing to be proud of because prominent members of the Labor Party will have their names printed alongside the names of other people in tax avoidance.
I agree overwhelmingly with what the honourable member for WiUs has said. I cannot state, with the same ferocity, my agreement about the extension of powers of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union because that is a matter for government and I have no personal views on it. However the Government has exhibited its determination to clothe Mr Costigan with the powers that are necessary. Again I mention the legislation for the Special Prosecutor which this Parliament will have an opportunity to debate a little later today. We believe that this wiU be a significant addition to the capacity of governments to meet organised crime which the traditional methods have so far failed to do. As I mentioned at Question Time, it also paraUels very much what Mr Costigan suggests in chapter 10 of his report which was tabled a day or two ago. The aUegations that were contained in the words which I have read out are, as far as I know, totaUy false. There are no knights mentioned in the unpublished version of the Costigan reports. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard in fuU-I read out only part of the letter yesterday-the letter that Mr Costigan wrote to me at the request of somebody from my Department.
Leave granted.
The letter read as follows-

Allegations against Member

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1251

ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE FEDERATED SHIP PAINTERS AND DOCKERS UNION
Commissioner: Mr. F. X. Costigan Q.c. Secretary: Mr. G. Hutton
G.P.O. Box 2620, Melbourne, 3001 Telephone: (03) 529 2244 8 September, 1982
The Rt. Hon. Malcolm Fraser, C.H., M.P., Prime Minister, Parliament House, Canberra, A.C.T., 2600
My dear Prime Minister,
I have been asked by an officer of your Department to indicate whether in any of the confidential volumes of my reports there are mentioned any knights in Sydney, Melbourne or Brisbane or elsewhere.
As you will understand from my letter dated 6 September it is my firm view that the details of those reports should not be made public either by way of tabling in the Parliament or by piecemeal disclosure. Consistent with that view I believe there are dangers in responding to individual requests of this kind.
Nonetheless I think it appropriate that I should indicate in this case that there are no such knights mentioned.
Yours sincerely,
Frank Costigan, Royal Commissioner
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-That sets that part of the matter straight. I think that what has happened this morning might serve as a sober reminder to a number of honourable gentlemen in this Parliament and to people in other places. We have before us a royal commission that was established by this Government with the previous government in Victoria. It has uncovered a maze of crime and corruption of a kind that must appal all honourable members of this House. Uses have been made of the reports, in particular of the unpublished parts of the reports, which have led to the Royal Commissioner writing two letters to me in an attempt to correct implications that were being drawn or made as a result of the unpublished reports.
Mr Dawkin/-You asked for one of them.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I asked for one of them and the Royal Commissioner very readily gave it. I suspect, and this is not offered in any defence whatsoever, that if the headlines and the reportings that were appearing yesterday about knights had not been evident, Mr Williams may not have made the statement he did. I do not offer that as any defence whatsoever because he had no means of knowing what was in those unpublished reports. Unlike the practice in this Parliament, the Leader of the Opposition in Victoria has not been given access to the unpublished reports or had not been up until this morning. Therefore there could have been no secret alleged information available. I say with all seriousness that this particular incident, unpleasant as it has been

and beneath the contempt of honourable members of parliament as it is, will nevertheless have served a useful purpose if all members of parliament cease to try to draw implications from the unpublished reports in relation to other people. It is obviously a game that more than one can play. Whether it is done by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) or whether it was done by Mr Morris Williams, I condemn it utterly.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley--Leader of the Opposition)-by leave-I want to make a response to the matters which have been raised and discussed this morning. I endorse the irritation with and repudiation of those statements of Mr Williams as expressed by my colleague the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke). In a general sense I endorse the views which were put forward by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). However, in the tail end of his comments he made allusions which were quite clearly directed towards me. They referred to comments that I had made in recent times. I think that we ought to put this in some sort of context.
The first thing is that when I have made a reference to what is contained in the Costigan Royal Commission report on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, I have done so on the basis that I have read those reports and I know the facts which are disclosed in them. When I make an assertion in relation to them. I make it on the basis of those facts and my knowledge of those people who are referred to. That is the first point. I parenthetically observe that if the Government wants to enlarge this into a general debate, I am quite happy to accommodate it this morning. But if not, I will leave my observations to the next point.
How did this matter develop in the Parliament whereby it occurred that I made references to what is contained in the unpublished volumes of the Costigan report? I remind honourable members, because it is said that a week is a long time in politics and as a little more than a week has transpired since certain events took place in this Parliament they may have forgotten, that on 26 August in this Parliament at Question Time the Prime Minister sought to misuse the Costigan reports as a basis of an attack upon the Australian Labor Party because of the affiliation of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union with the Labor Party. What he sought to do is quite characteristic of the man. He sought to introduce dirty pool rules, the only rules he understands in this Parliament or outside it. He came into office by the adoption of those rules and he has proceeded in Parliament and out of Parliament as the most prominent public figure in this country

1252 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Allegations against Member

according to those rules. He has never deviated from them, but there is one quite characteristic reaction from him when he adopts these rules and he is treated to a bit of his own behaviour in return. He adopts a stance of high dudgeon, he adopts offended virtue and none of them sit comfortably on his shoulders with his record here or elsewhere.
Let me tell honourable members what happened in the House on 26 August. Up until then there had been no reference to what might be the contents, or what are the contents by allusion in the non-published documents of the Costigan Royal Commission report. This is reflected at page 965 of the Hansard record of 26 August 1982 if the Minister for nothing wants to find the page. Let me quote what the Prime Minister had to say on that occasion. He stated:
Against that background~
Having referred to the Costigan report-
I think many members of this House will want to question why the Australian Labor Party is committed to certain policies, such as the right of unions to regulate their own affairs free from government or judicial interference. Is that not a right that the Painters and Dockers Union would usurp to the full? Is that not a right which, if it were given to the Painters and Dockers Union by the Australian Labor Party, would be abused to the detriment of the wider Australian community?
He went on to develop this quite spurious but totally provocative point of view. It is a tactic to which he often resorts. If he wants confrontation, if he wants to show the community that he is a tough guy and can punch with both hands and kick with both feet-on the standards he uses he kicks mostly with the feet-I tell him now that he will get it back because we will not cop it. If that is the way he wants to run affairs in this country that is what he will get. I told him that if they are the tactics he wants to adopt he will get an equal measure in return. Exactly, I said:
If the Prime Minister seeks to associate the Labor Party with the Painters and Dockers Union in the way in which he is about to, I will find myself no longer bound to the confidentiality in relation to the two volumes of the report of the royal commission inquiry in relation to the Painters and Dockers Union and will disclose associations that certain other people have with certain other organisations.
We do not want any sanctimonious humbug from the Prime Minister on this. He is the man who sets the standards generally in the community, standards that have been corroded and eroded by the baseness of his motivation since he has been Prime Minister. We saw a classic example of that in the Parliament on 26 August. I agree with the sentiments which have been expressed by my colleague the honourable member for Wills. Similarly I agree with the more decent principles embodied in the expressions of the Prime Minister. I repudiate, however, his attempt to go beyond that and to

suggest that he is the embodiment of virtue and proper conduct in this place and elsewhere. I scarcely need dwell on a justification of that point because his standards are well known outside in the community.
I repeat: We have been involved in what is the nastiest debate this country has seen, and for two reasons. Firstly, there has been disclosed successively day after day, like a black series of the Perils of Pauline for the Liberal Party, a massive organisation operating and having operated in this country, committed to evading taxation properly payable under the law, and evading that responsibility by criminal means. That means, very simply, that what we have been saying for years, which has been scorned by Government members, especially the Prime Minister, was well and truly established. What is more, it was established that ordinary wage and salary earners in this country-ordinary families and their households struggling to live while the great tax rip-off is going on through Government policies-are being ripped off in their pay packets also because these crooks were evading their tax liability in the community and pushing the burden of cost on to ordinary, decent families. That is the abhorrent standard that has been established under the Fraser Government.
The second reason this debate got under way was that the Prime Minister sought to impugn the standards of decent members of the Labor Party, not only in the Parliament but also outsideordinary, decent, respectable, morally upright people who are in the Labor Party because of their faith in the beliefs and commitments of the party-by the spurious and nasty way in which he sought to distort the findings of the Costigan Royal Commission report in relation to the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. He jammed that on to the Labor Party in a totally dishonest way in connection with some imagined interpretation of industrial policy he brought forward. In those circumstances, it is appropriate to remind him that those tax crooks of whom I spoke have numerously among their number senior officials of the Liberal Party.
It is well known from reports in the newspaper today that I have taken steps on behalf of the Labor Party in relation to the affiliation of the Painters and Dockers Union. I challenge the Prime Minister to take similar steps in relation to those officer bearers of the Liberal Party who wax fat and wealthy from tax evasion and tax avoidance. The white collar masterminds, the crooks, are in the Liberal Party ranks. One does not have to go to the Costigan report to find that out. One can pick up the McCabe-Lafranchi report-the

Personal Explanation

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1253

most devastating series of disclosures that we have seen in the history of this country. Look at all the official office bearers of the Liberal Party who stud the lists of that report. We were reminded this morning by one of my honourable colleagues that already the great practical advantages of having people skilled in tax evasion directly from the ranks of the higher echelons of the Liberal Party are that they are paid benefits from an instrumentality administered by the Government. The Australian Industry Development Corporation is into tax avoidance, just like the South Australian branch of the Liberal Party is into tax avoidance and just like the Western Australian Liberals have been deeply implicated in tax evasion.
J repeat what I have already said: Both the McCabe-Lafranchi report and the Costigan report deal with only one promoter. What about all the other promoters? What about when we get to Sydney and Melbourne which have been the main focuses of that sort of activity? We heard this morning in this sanctimonious style adopted by the Prime Minister that he felt justified that no criminal action had been taken in more than 4,000 instances of bottom-of-the-harbour tax evasion schemes estabished in New South Wales simply because relatively minor breaches of company law in New South Wales had apparently not been proceeded with. I do not know whether they have or have not. I do not know the detail of that. I do know, from having contacted the office of Mr Walker, the Attorney-General in New South Wales, that all of the information has gone on to the Government, that tax evasion through bottom-of-the-harbour schemes involves not just hundreds of millions of dollars but probably thousands of millions of dollars in New South Wales alone. In one year the amount of tax evaded by one organisation was in excess of $450m. The Prime Minister comes here this morning and says: 'Well, they didn't do anything about relatively minor breaches of company legislation in New South Wales. Therefore, we don't think we should take any action when thousands of millions of dollars are being ripped off the Australian taxpayers'. That is a totally dishonest approach on the part of the Prime Minister. His sanctimonious attitudes will not wear. They will not influence anyone here. I repeat: If the Prime Minister wants to extend this debate I would be happy to accommodatehim.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a brief personal explanation.

Mr SPEAKER-Does the right honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Yes.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The fact is that the Prime Minister wishes to make a personal explanation. It has never been the practice of this House to drown out a man wishing to make a personal explanation. I ask honourable members to accord the courtesies which are the traditional practice of the House.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I thank the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) for the generosity of his remarks. It needs to be said that in answer to that question and in any points that I have made in relation to the report of the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union I have referred to the published documents of the report and I have said that it would be wrong in relation to unpublished documents to draw conclusions about personnel of any political party because I do not know the membership of any political party of any of the people mentioned in the unpublished reports. That is on the basis of having read the documents quite carefully.
The point I was seeking to make in that answer to the question, of course, was that the long standing and traditional policy of the Australian Labor Party to place the conduct of unions and management of their affairs free from government or judicial interference is one which would obviously be abused by the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union of Australia and one which is shown to be a complete nonsense as a result of the habits of the painters and dockers. I am glad that the Leader of the Opposition now has accepted that by moving to expel the painters and dockers. I am glad he has come to accept the view I have been expressing in relation to that union for a considerable period.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-by leave-The main cause of the provocation in this Parliament focuses on one issue. I can put this issue into :1 nutshell. It is simply this: The Australian community no longer wants to tolerate the odium and the humiliation of the Fraser Government and of all of the inequity that goes with it in its association with tax evasion and tax avoidance. If the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) wants to be sanctimonious on this I have only one thing to say to him: Accept our challenge; go to the polls now. Call an election now and allow the Australian people to scourge the dishonour of the Fraser Government from office.

1254 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

/

Grievance Debate

BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Bill 1982.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Bill 1982.
GRJEVANCE DEBATE
Primary Industry-International Labour Organisation--South West Tasmania:
Wilderness Area-Unemployment-Tasmanian Apple Industry-1982-83 Budget--Small Business
Question proposed:
That grievances be noted.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (11.27)-Today in the grievance debate I want to raise some of the problems of Australia's great primary industries but in particular the failure of the Government and the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) to come to grips with the rural issues that are so important in this country. Australian agriculture in the 1980s faces a crisis. There is a crisis of confidence in the ability of governments to act effectively in the best interests of our primary industries. Of course they have no confidence in this crisis and scandal ridden government. This is a crisis in confidence, particularly confidence in the present Government in terms of its capacity to listen to or even to act in any of the industries' interests. It is a crisis in confidence in the present Minister to ever innovate, initiate or anticipate. The present Minister is very good at kicking heads but he is not much good at putting forward policies that meet the needs of primary industries in this country.
We have only to look at some of the background. Farm costs are spiralling, world markets are becoming more restricted and the so-called specialist political party for country interests, the National Country Party, has even removed the word 'Country' from its name in some States. Of course, the Liberal Party, with some of the things that it is putting forward, is hitting at the very basis of the marketing arrangments of primary producers throughout this country. Again I would like to read into Hansard the resolution of the Federal Council of the Liberal Party of May 1982. It was moved by a close relative of the Prime Minister. That resolution states:
That this Federal Council believes that Marketing Boards, with powers of compulsory acquisition, levy and monopoly marketing, are contrary to Liberal philosophy and supports the existence of Marketing Boards, private sector or Government-owned, established by statute or otherwise, provided that--
no Board has the power of compulsory purchase; no Board has a statutory monopoly on sales;

no Board has the power to exact a compulsory levy from purchasers;
no Board has the power to determine the variety of goods produced;
the administrative and marketing expenses, in the case of statutory Boards are met from the commission on sales;
no Board should have an inspectorate with powers of entry, search or siezure of commodities without warrant.
This hits very directly and very basically at the Australian' Wheat Board. Also, if it were implemented, it would affect very deeply all the activities of the II major Commonwealth statutory marketing boards that deal with primary products. What has happened over the last few years? Both the Liberal Party and the National Country Party or the National Party-whatever name it goes under in each State-have jumped off the sheep's back a long time ago and into the ore truck. That is where they thought all the gains were going to be. If we look at how the policies have been directed by successive Liberal and National Country Party governments it is clear that mining and manufacturing industries are the ones that have been enhanced. Their policies have been directed to upgrading those industries. Of course, the much-touted resources boom that we have had thrust down our throats during the last two or three elections only resulted in more problems for the rural sector; and even in the management of the investment we got from mineral development in this country, as the Reserve Bank's latest document said, the benefits were squandered. As a study by the Bureau of Agricultural Economics showed, the impact of the resource investment in Australia over the past decade cost 66 per cent of agricultural growth in that time.
In the 1970s we lost 30,000 farms and 45,000 farm employees. We lost 100,000 jobs in country towns. Agricultural growth declined. The real value of farm production fell. The sheep flock fell from 180 million to 130 million. The beef herd is down from 33 million to 24 million. The production of apples, as the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) knows, is down by one-third. Milk production is down by 29 per cent. In the mid-1950s Australia had 160,000 farms. Today we have something like 170,000 farmers. We are losing our best agricultural land to urban development. We are losing soil and land to land degradation processes. There has been no response from this Government on that; it has got right out of soil conservation, which has led to land degradation. We are selling our land to foreign interests. The provision of credit for farmers is down.
A lot of this is understandable, given the realities of international markets and the situation the economy is going through, but the farmers feel forgotten and, more importantly in political

Grievance Debate

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1255

terms, it is quite apparent that the coalition Government takes the farmers for granted. The Country Party is neither national nor country and, of course, now it wants to compete with the Liberal Party for conservative votes in city seats. Mr Chapman, the Minister of Agriculture in South Australia, said:
It is amazing that two people, the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Anthony, and the Minister for Primary indutry, Mr Nixon, being two Country party members of the coalition, should have lost touch with the rural community to the extent to which they appear to have done, or that they should be such light weights in the outfit at the level that they have not been able to convince the Prime Minister and his treasurer to give the rural community a fairer deal.
That comes from a Liberal, not from the Labor Party. If agriculture is to be thrown on its own resources and to be totally exposed to international economic and corrupted or manipulated market forces, it must at least expect that governments will compensate the sector for some of the impacts caused by internal domestic policies. Farming organisations, the National Farmers Federation in particular, have been pointing to the impact on the farming sector of the direction of the manufacturing industry protection policies of this Government over the last decade and earlier. The National Farmers Federation has estimated that in 1975-76 protection cost each sheep, cattle and grain producer something like $11,000 a year. The New South Wales Livestock and Grain Producers Association estimated the cost of protection to be $250 per producer per week. According to the BAE protection costs the average farmer $50 per week, with the total cost of protection amounting to $450m in 1981-82.
What has been the coalition's response to that? I understand fully the reasons that all governments adopt policies of protection for manufacturing industry, but this Government is trying to have it both ways. The 1980-81 annual report of the Industries Assistance Commission states that the average effective rate of assistance for the manufacturing sector remained largely unchanged over the period 1974-75 to 1980-81. Action by the Government to reduce protection has been largely illusory and it has reduced it by only one percentage point. Again we understand that, but the Government continues to try to take credit for the 25 per cent across the board cut that occurred under the Whitlam Government. The rural sector can at least expect this Government, if it will not initiate or participate, to respond to some of the forces being placed on the rural sector.1t does not matter which issue one looks at this Government drags its feet. Let us consider the drought. I said some of these things during my

speech on the Budget the other night. As late as 18 August the Minister for Primary Industry said:
The Commonwealth does not need to make a commitment to help drought affected farmers, because its commitment is already through the natural disaster relief arrangements.
In an AM interview on 24 August the Minister for Primary Industry said:
There is no need for additional measures. The present measures are open-ended.
Of course, then the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stepped in and thankfully did something about the drought. But the Minister was quite happily kicking the heads of the Victorian and New South Wales governments, which again he indulged in today, rather than looking at the drought and its impact on farmers. He even abused Mr Dick O'Brien, of the New South Wales Livestock and Grain Producers Association drought committee, and said that he should be better informed as a farm leader.
Let us look at some of the industries that this Minister and this Government are responsible for. They did nothing about the beef industry until they took a panic measure in 1977. They have had ample warnings over the years of all the problems of the beef industry and it was not until the meat substitution scandal that they ever did something about marketing reform and looking at the processors. That scandal did more damage to the beef industry and Australia's trade than any other single event in the history of the beef industry. All this Government did was drag its tail; it never acted and it did not know which way to go.
Let us consider the dairying industry and the cover-up that is going on over Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd. The Minister has had since 28 April a report from the Auditor-General on Asia Dairy Industries. It is my information that he has been advised by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) that that report should be tabled, but what has he done? He has done absolutely nothing. The Minister says that the proposal to grow sugar on the Ord River is not a Commonwealth matter, and the coalition parties are trying to get evidence for both sides. It says one thing in Western Australia and another thing in Queensland. That sort of thing just will not do. It is not farm leadership. We cannot have it both ways.
In the live sheep dispute the Minister was again prepared to kick heads but not to look at the real issues involved. Whether one looks at the fruit canning industry or some of the horticultural industries, the best thing that this Government can ever do is send a reference to the Temporary Assistance Authority when it is no longer decently

1256 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Grievance Debate

responsible to refuse such a reference. We can take nearly every industry-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr ROCHER (Curtin) (11.37)-From time to time it is desirable to question Australia's participation in international forums. Today I want to take up the time allocated in this grievance debate to talk about some aspects of the activities of one of the major bodies established by the United Nations Organisation, namely, the International Labour Organisation or the ILO. The ILO is one of the oldest specialised agencies in the United Nations system and its history goes back to 1919. Its original purpose, according to its constitution, was to contribute to the improvement of working conditions throughout the world. That was and remains a very broad brief. Participating countries are represented by government, employer and worker delegates at all levels of the ILO's governing structure, and that representation may be truly said to be tripartite in character.
In more recent times the political activities of the Organisation itself and of delegates to conventions leave open to serious doubt the value of Australia's active membership of the International Labour Organisation. In expressing my opening thoughts in these terms I am mindful of a recently reported statement made by the President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Mr Dolan. In a report to his executive Mr Dolan is said to have strongly condemned Eastern bloc and Arab countries for turning the ILO into a political forum. He is quoted as saying:
The Russians-if there is a speaker they don't like, they adopt an attitude of bashing the table so that he can't be heard.
I understand that the ACTU has decided to ask the Commonwealth Government to seek the cooperation of other participating governments in keeping politics out of the ILO forum. It is heartening to know that a union leader of Mr Dolan's stature, a man who is a member of the governing body of the ILO, has initiated action which seeks to put things right in that organisation. Politics as practised within the ILO is not confined to behaviour of the type described by the President of the ACTU.
I have no doubt that the admission of the Palestine Liberation Organisation to observer status in 1975 has influenced the behaviour of some Arab delegates. The presence of the PLO, and the use of the International Labour Organisation as a platform for the Soviet propaganda campaign to split the Western alliance, gives rise to serious

doubts about the efficacy of the world body. Moscow has continued to urge meetings of the governing body to promote the involvement of the ILO in disarmament issues. The reaction of the worker representative of the United States of America probably encapsulates the feelings of those who regard these matters as being outside the charter of the ILO. He said:
The real issue at stake was whether or not the ILO was to become an arena for rhetorical political debate on a topic which the organisation could do little to influence and which would distract its attention from issues of basic concern to the workers, which were the main business of ILO.
It must be appreciated and understood that efforts have been under way for some time to curb political abuses at successive conferences. What must be disturbing, however, is that there has been very little success in that direction. These examples of the impotence of the ILO pale into relative insignificance if we look at its record of selectively applying its concern for human rights. Some of its key conventions on human rights are: No. 87 on freedom of association, adopted in 1948; No. 98 on the right to organise and bargain collectively, passed in 1949; No. 105 on forced labour, passed in 1957; and No. IlIon employment discrimination, passed in 1958. The most elaborate machinery exists for policing observance of these key conventions and for reports to be filed regularly by the responsible Committee of Experts on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations. This Committee has earned great respect for its impartiality and reports on violations in two categories: Firstly, observations which deal with long standing cases of failure to apply relevant standards; and, secondly, direct requests to which offending governments are asked to reply in their next reports.
Without going into chapter and verse, if only because time will not allow it, the rate of full implementation of ILO findings, arising out of the deliberations of the Committee of Experts, has declined sharply over recent years. While the Soviet Union and its eastern European satellites have ratified conventions No. 87 and No. 98, recent events in Poland finally must have convinced even the most obdurate doubters that Soviet type trade unions are not representative bodies and that freedom of association does not exist in the Soviet bloc. To accommodate Soviet delegates, a requirement for observance of convention 87 guaranteeing freedom of association was suspended for years because the ILO is powerless to secure observance by any of the major communist countries. The sum total of all this is that while those countries retain a full voice in proceedings and have ratified important ILO conventions, it has had no effect on Eastern bloc labour practices.

Grievance Debate

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1257

We in Australia continue to pay lip service to the ILO despite all of this as well as the ratbaggery of the type to which Mr Dolan referred. It must be apparent to even the most naive of us that as long as nations can continue to deny freedom of association and to use compulsory labour on a large scale, the end result of our costly membership of the ILO will be selective application of findings and a doubtful ability to influence standards in the rest of the world.
There is a whole raft of matters currently under consideration by the ILO, which must scare the daylights out of the governments of free world countries. Among them are political attacks on Israel and other targets of opportunity. I might say that the threatened expUlsion of Israel from the ILO, if it came to pass, would be intolerable. The advocacy by the ILO for authoritarian solutions to social and economic problems must be anathema to democratic countries such as ours. Policing methods needed to enforce ILO standards are generally inadequate. There is no reason to believe that where they are sufficient the findings are effective. This is due to the intransigence of Eastern bloc countries. These matters and others deserve the critical attention of Australia's delegation. If it does not already happen, the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations (Mr Macphee) should be personally involved and concerned with Australia's role in the ILO. The Minister should meet with labour and management representatives as well as receive advice from his Department.
As a matter of immediate importance we should be looking to have the ILO's Committee of Experts investigate suppression of Poland's Solidarity movement. The Polish Government should be called on to explain the divergence of its actions from its obligations under the ILO conventions which it has ratified. Alternatively, an investigation by the ILO governing body's Committee on Freedom of Association should be sought. This alternative course could eventually result in a report condemning Poland, as happened in the case of Czechoslovakia some years ago. In the meantime the credentials of the Polish delegates should be challenged. A resolution condemning the suppression of Solidarity should be introduced and pursued to adoption. In short, the Soviet concept of trade unionism should be challenged by and within the ILO itself.
I urge the Government to consider its instructions to its delegates to the ILO in the light of the increasing politicisation of the agency. Furthermore, the Government should meet with and try to influence Australia's delegates to use their

powers of persuasion to have the ILO concentrate on the real reason for its existence.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mrs CHILDS (Henty) (11.47)-The wilderness area of South West Tasmania belongs to all Australians. It is a national treasure and warrants full protection. This Government should establish a full, independent, expert and open Federal-State inquiry to resolve the question of the wilderness of South West Tasmania and its related issues. If steps are not taken now to resolve the issues relating to the wise use and preservation of the area this nationally significant resource will be in grave danger of losing forever those qualities which the citizens of today and tomorrow deserve to enjoy. The area must be protected.
The decision to build a dam in South West Tasmania is based on limited evidence. The decision values economic factors far above long term environmental consequences and completely ignores alternatives. The economic justification for the planned hydro-electric project seems tenuous at best. The dollars required do not appear to give a good return in terms of either electricity generated or permanent jobs created. While some countries in the northern hemisphere are using their research and capital investment moneys allocated to power generation creatively, Australia seems to be sticking to old methods that may not be appropriate or viable in the future environment.
In this House on 23 February this year, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), in answer to a question, asserted that the Tasmanian Government clearly had the resposibility for decisions concerning the development of the Gordon River power scheme. As the Melbourne Herald very correctly and very clearly pointed out on 25 February, that statement by the Prime Minister was wrong in principle and in law. The Fraser Government has rightly recognised the south-west of Tasmania as one of Australia's environmental treasures and has nominated the area, along with the Great Barrier Reef and the Kakadu National Park, for inclusion on the select World Heritage List. The area has also been placed on the Register of the National Estate. By these actions the Government now has a clear moral responsibility to ensure that the beauty of the rivers is preserved for posterity. On 9 June 1979 the Prime Minister said:
No decree of Government can turn back the clock or save a lost species or a lost wilderness. This is why a Federal Government has a national responsibility to make decisions on any

1258 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Grievance Debate

issue that affects our heritage. This is a responsibility that our Government has accepted.
Clearly, the Government has not accepted this responsibility when it will not act to stop this vandalism in Tasmania.
Mr Groom-When are you coming back?
Mrs CHILD-I lived there and I will be back in January and February. I suppose it is naive to quote what the Prime Minister says as he never fulfils his promises, means what he says, or says what he means; but for him to try to wriggle out of the responsibility for this disaster is just humbug.
The Prime Minister is on record as saying that in this wilderness area Australia has an irreplacable asset. The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) is alleged to have written a letter in which he points out that the Liberal Party supports the Lower Gordon power scheme. The Melbourne Age editorial of 25 August 1982 points out that, if this is a fact, the Prime Minister should come out publicly and say so. If it is not true then he should disown the Minister for the Capital Territory, or at least the statement attributed to him. It is an indisputable fact that not one of the five Liberal Tasmanian members of this House has lifted a voice in defence of protection of this unique area. Tasmania is indeed unfortunate in its choice of members.
The Hydro-Electric Commission is already slicing into the area to construct a 70 kilometre access road to the proposed dam site. We now learn that national park status of a 1,600 hectare section of the Gordon River scenic reserve has been revoked to allow work to begin on an alternative access route running right through this beautiful area. We were assured that the Hydro Electric Commission would not intrude upon the reserve. We cannot accept its assurances. It cannot be left to individuals and the Tasmanian Wilderness Society to fight for the survival of the wilderness. It is a national treasure. According to the Canberra Times of 7 September 1982, 24 of the world's leading archaeologists and anthropologists have said that Australia's international reputation is threatened by this action, and they have called for Federal action to save the wilderness area.
Professor Mulvaney says that archaeological discoveries of 1979 are of world anthropological significance. Among the discoveries was evidence of Aboriginal habitation of caves 15,000 years to 20,000 years ago, indicating man's southernmost presence at the time of the last ice age. Mr Paul Mellars, lecturer at Cambridge in archaeology, said that the importance of the region in scientific, cultural and human terms must surely transcend

short term interests of economics and political pressure. Surely the Prime Minister must listen to these voices of reason? In this House on 28 April this year, on the same subject. I quoted from the Age of 25 February, and I conclude with that quotation:
Mr Fraser must be joking. His claim to the Federal Parliament on Tuesday that the proposed Gordon-below-Franklin Dam in south-west Tasmania was purely a State responsibility, was wrong in principle and wrong in law. The Prime Minister has gladly accepted the praise for placing south-west Tasmania, including the Lower Gordon and Franklin Rivers on the register of the National Estate. His Government has now also nominated the area as one of the rare environmental treasures to be placed on the World Heritage List. These actions clearly place a moral responsibility on the Commonwealth to do its best to ensure that the timeless beauty of the wild rivers is not wantonly destroyed. To try to wash one's hands of the issue in these circumstances is a humbug.
I thought the Age comment was very well written.
We need strong national leadership on this issue. As the Prime Minister says, the area is an irreplaceable asset. Nothing should be able to jeopardise it. The Prime Minister now has the constitutional means, via the words of the Attorney-General (Senator Durack), to stop the building of the dam. He should find the strength and the honesty to do so, even if honesty has not always been his long suit.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (11.55)-The honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) referred to South West Tasmania. I believe that area will be the subject of many debates in this House, so I do not intend to dwell on it today. It suddenly seems to have attracted a heck of a lot of interest from a lot of people. I wonder how many people have been there. I wonder how many people realise the state of the economy of Tasmania. I wonder how many people realise that at the last election the people of Tasmania-even though the facts have been distortedoverwhelmingly supported the construction of that dam. Many people in Tasmania firmly believe that the construction of the dam is in the best interests of the people of Tasmania and the future of Tasmania. I will enter into that debate at a later date.
The matter I wish to raise in today's grievance debate concerns the talk in Australia today about what should be done for young people, how they can be helped with employment opportunities, et cetera. When we get to the nitty gritty, to the really nasty issues, I am afraid that a lot of people run away very fast. A fortnight ago a young gentleman who had been in the Royal Australian Navy for five and a half years came to see me. He had decided to get out of the Navy. He started to look for employment in Hobart, Tasmania, but found it very difficult. The honourable member

Grievance Debate

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1259

for Braddon (Mr Groom), who is in the House at the moment, would agree with me that opportunities for employment in Tasmania are very limited. It is very difficult for our young people to get jobs. Sometimes, unfortunately, many young people leave and come to the other big island, called Australia. That aside, he applied for a job as a deck hand on a supply vessel working out of Hobart and supplying the Esso company, which is seeking oil around the coast of Tasmania. His application was successful, and he then found that he had to become a member of the Seamen's Union of Australia. That union would not accept him as a member. It said, virtually, that it was a closed shop, and we all know what a closed shop is. The union would not accept him; membership of that union is usually reserved for its friends, relatives or anybody else associated with it.
To cut a long story short, the young man did not get the job because he could not become a member of the union. It should be remembered that he served this country for five and a half years as a member of the armed forces. He is only a young fellow but the union would not accept him. The job was given to a person in Melbourne who was brought to Hobart to take the job. I mentioned this matter on a television program in Hobart, but I could not attract any attention to it. No, it is a little bit nasty, a little bit gritty for people to become involved with it. People talk about other job losses where the issues are simple, when they can get up and say something without any repercussions. I indicated at that stage that I would bring this matter to the attention of the House. I do so today to indicate to the people of Australia that things are occurring in which they must become involved. They should not just leave matters of this sort to the politicians. If a union is unfair enough to say that someone cannot join the union, that the union wants to bring one of its members from Melbourne to take the job, what chance do our young Tasmanians have if they want to go to sea, as many Tasmanians have in the past and will probably do in the future?
Mr Groom-It is very serious.
Mr GOODLUCK-It was a very serious affair. The other matter upon which I wish to touch concerns apples. A lot of people refer to Tasmania as the Apple Isle. To me the name 'Apple Isle' is a great hook. We are referred to as Apple Islanders and people say that the Islanders have rosy cheeks. It is a hook which the other States in Australia do not have. The people involved in the tourist industry and in government have me nonplussed. They have changed the name from the Apple Isle to the Holiday Isle, and the Treasure Island. They have even put the words Holiday Isle

on the number plates of Tasmanian cars. They had a marvellous hook and they have thrown it away.
As all honourable members know, the apple industry in Tasmania has had difficulties for various reasons. I mentioned during Question Time today the discontinuation of the Tasmanian Apple and Pear Marketing Authority. Running through my mind is the fact that those in the apple industry cannot get on together. We have two groups at the moment, the bigger growers and the smaller growers, who want to go their way, but in so doing they are destroying the industry and destroying their ability to produce first class apples to place on the world market, at prices competitive with those of New Zealand and South Africa. They have an opportunity to do this. I believe that they will produce 4 million cases next year. But they are starting to fight. When they fight they will ruin the industry and themselves. It is all very well for one group to come to a politician such as me and say: 'If you support us we will support you', and for the other group to say: 'If you do not support us we will not support you'. It is useless for groups such as that to come to me and say those sorts of things. I would like to think that those groups could get together again and make the apple industry the industry it has been for many years. It is terribly important to the economy of Tasmania. We are losing industries hand over fist because of transport and power problems. Jobs are being lost, and we need to keep the industries we have. We need this industry because it is part and parcel of Tasmania.
I return to the very important question of tourism. If Tasmania is called the Apple Isle then these other things can be hooked up with it. It can be called the Apple Isle with the Casinos or the Island of Treasures. Those sorts of names can be used. If they continue on their present path and fight each other they will ruin the industry, firstly, and, secondly, ruin Tasmania as the apple isle. The Government must become more involved. The Percival Publishing Co. Pty Ltd-a very good firm-produced a booklet which, on page 17, refers to the Huon Valley. The honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones)-a good member too; not a bad fellow-mentioned the Huon Valley when talking about power. The booklet states:
After Huonville and its remarkable valley, long famous for apples, the road follows the river through Franklin, Port Huon, Geeveston, winding up through the beautiful Glendevie Valley before approachng Dover.
That booklet was not allowed to be distributed to the tourist industry of Tasmania because it mentions the word 'apple'. They said that the apple has to be taken away as a symbol of Tasmania.

1260 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Grievance Debate

Mr Barry Jones-Who said?
Mr GOODLUCK-That is negative thinking. Everywhere I go-
Mr Barry Jones-Is that the State Government?
Mr GOODLUCK-The previous State Government, not this one. I think the present State Government is involved too. Everybody wants to forget about the apple. In this world one has to have a hook, and the State Government is forgetting that hook. That will be disastrous for Tasmania and for people who want to go there because they will have no specific hook.
We have heard a lot of innuendo in this House. I start to wonder what we are all about, if honourable members do not mind my saying so. We are all individuals. When somebody infers that we are all dishonest-
Mr Barry Jones-Implies or infers?
Mr GOODLUCK-I ask the honourable member to wait just a second. We allow people to infer that because we are Liberals we are not family people or workers. We allow those types of accusations continuously on the part of the Opposition. I have a bit of respect for the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). I thought he was a pretty straight, decent sort of fellow, but this week I changed my mind. He inferred that we are all crooked, that we are all involved in tax evasion and tax avoidance and that we do not all tell the truth. I take that as a reflection on my character. The honourable member for Braddon and other members in this House take that as an offence. I repeat: I took offence when my Whip tried to hold me down the other day when the Leader of the Opposition referred to my friend the honourable member for Bass (Mr Newman) in a certain way. We allowed him to get away with murder; and we take it. We should start fighting back a bit. If we have principles, and know that we are honest and decent we should not allow that fellow to infer the slur across everybody. That is what innuendo is all about. One does not need to say it; one has only to infer that we are all crooked and then it starts to rile. I take offence at that. He is twice my size but I would take him on any time.
Mr Groom-Who?
Mr GOODLUCK-The honourable member knows to whom I am referring-the Leader of the Opposition. If the Leader of the Opposition continues to infer that we are all crooked I shall consider it a reflection on me, on my family and on a lot of other decent Liberals I know in Australia, and specifically in Tasmania. I warn him that I take offence, and I will continue to take offence.

If my Whip tries to hold me down I will take him with me.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (12.4)- During this grievance debate I will dispassionately and objectively deal with some of the very serious implications of the recent Budget. One thing which links this Budget probably more effectively than anything else with the Budget introduced by this Government in 1977-78 is the fact that the claim has been made-the claim can be substantiated-that this Budget in shonky. It indicates that the Government, to a greater extent than ever before, has reduced financial management of this country to a political basis. General economic management of Australia is placed in very serious jeopardy. The Government has replaced objectivity with expediency and a cynical manipulation of the figures in the Budget.
First of all I should like to draw attention to the way in which responsible people in this community have attempted to distance themselves from the way in which the Government presented its Budget. The first person to whom I refer is none other than the Secretary to the Treasury, Mr John Stone. In evidence before the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure during its inquiry into taxation expenditures on 26 May this year, Mr John Stone, the Secretary to the Treasury, in answer to some penetrating questions by the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris), said:
. . . the content of the Budget Papers is the responsibility of the Treasurer, and it is his decision as to what those papers contain.
Mr John Stone further said:
I am simply making a flat and simple statement that the Budget Papers tendered to the Parliament are tendered by the Treasurer. They are his responsibility; they are his Papers. He has officials prepare them under his direction.
I want to emphasise that-
He has officials prepare them under his direction.
Mr Stone went on to say.
Therefore the content of those Papers is his decision . . .
The timing of that statement by Mr John Stone is very significant because it came fairly shortly after an infamous occasion in the dying hours of the previous session of the Parliament. A leading member of the Opposition was suspended from this House when he attempted to expose the details of the crook, phoney and shonky Budget introduced in 1977. Honourable members and the community will well recall that occasion. A shonky Budget giving significant tax cuts was introduced. The Treasurer at the time, now Sir Phillip Lynch, a matter of moments afterwards confessed to the media that the figures in that

Grievance Debate

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1261

Budget were rubbery. They were rubbery indeed. They were rubbery to the extent of being crook because the Government was preparing for an election. The election was held and a matter of weeks afterwards the Budget was reversed; the tax concessions were withdrawn. But the Government won the election on that shonky Budget. In the dying hours of the last session of Parliament the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) attempted to draw the attention of the Parliament and the nation to the shonky nature of that Budget and was suspended from the House. What did the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) say in connection with a question asked on that occasion? He said:
Whatever is done by Budget Cabinet is done by Budget Cabinet as a whole and is a Cabinet decision.
He went on to say:
Let me repeat that decisions taken in relation to Budgets are taken by the Cabinet as a whole, and that is it. There will not be any discussion of these Cabinet processes in the House.
I wish to draw attention, in the short time available to me, to significant areas of the Budget which are shonky. Let me first identify those people on whom the Prime Minister has placed responsibility in the first instance for accepting that Budget-and determining the nature of the Budget that would be presented. The Cabinet Budget Committee consists of these people who in the first instance have to accept the recommendations of the Treasurer in relation to the details provided: The Treasurer himself, Mr Howard, as Chairman; Sir Phillip Lynch, the Minister for Industry and Commerce; Mr Nixon, the Minister for Primary Industry; Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle, the Minister for Finance; and Mr Fife, the Minister for Aviation. They are the Government Ministers who take the primary responsibility for that shonky Budget. In the words of the Prime Minister, all members of Cabinet take ultimate responsibility for that shonky Budget. Let me deal with some of the shonky areas in this Budget which the Parliament is in the process of considering. In connection with tax avoidance losses, the Treasurer, in his Budget Speech, said:
. . . the Commissioner of Taxation has informed the Government that this financial year it will not be necessary to make adjustments to projected revenue collections to allow for tax avoidance losses in the way that has been done in the last several years.
I intend to pursue that matter further at a later, more appropriate stage, but let us look at the context in which that statement was made. The Budget Papers disclosed the Treasurer's belief that there was no need to make any allowance at all in this year's Budget for revenue lost through tax avoidance. Let us look at the figures over the

last few years. I ask any member of the Parliament and any member of the Australian community whether he or she would be prepared to endorse the position that has been adopted by the Treasurer, by Budget Cabinet and by this Govern-. ment as a whole. These are the tax avoidance figures for the last few years. In 1979-80 the provision for tax avoidance by individual non-pay-asyou-earn taxpayers was $16Om. The next year it was $170m and last year it was $220m. What has the Government done about it in this Budget? The provision for tax avoidance has suddenly disappeared. The nation knows that the tax avoidance industry is rife but suddenly the provision has disappeared although last year it amounted to $220m.
Mr Scholes-The Treasurer says it doesn't exist.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-The Treasurer said it was dead. However he refused to respond to a challenge to him to indicate that as a result of his undoubted success-in his own words-in killing the tax avoidance industry it would no longer be necessary for any amending tax legislation to come before the Parliament. He was not game to commit himself in that way because he knew that the position that he was presenting to Parliament and the nation was shonky.
Let us look at the allowances that have been made in the last three Budgets for tax avoidance by companies. In 1979-80 it was $130m; in 1980-81 it was $120m; and last year it was $80m. I know that the amounts are coming down but suddenly, overnight, as in the other case, the allowance disappears. What have we had in addition to all of those notorious, infamous, shameful disclosures about company tax avoidance over the last days and weeks? Only this morning another disclosure was made in the Sydney Morning Herald. In addition to the recently published details that have come out of the McCabe-Lafranchi and Costigan reports, now uncovered in Sydney, and on a previously unimagined scale, is the number of companies involved in company stripping and bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. It is approaching 4,000 companies. Only 923 were disclosed in Victoria so the figures are getting better. Now about 4,000 companies in New South Wales are involved. In a single year one group alone was involved in tax evasion amounting to $450m. How dare the Treasurer and the Government suggest to the Parliament and the nation that tax avoidance is dead; that no provision needs to be made for it in the Budget! I said at the outset that I would show that the Budget is shonky. I have given the details. I do not have time to go through

1262 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Taxation

the entire Budget at this stage but go through it I will.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (12.13)- Much has been said in this House about the importance of small business to the economy, to employment and to our free enterprise and free market system. My immediate grievance is directed towards those policies which have militated against small business. The latest one is of greatest concern, that is, the change from diesel excise exemption to a rebate system. Certain off-road users of fuel will now have to pay the full price of diesel fuel and this additional cost is one that many businesses will be unable to bear. It could mean liquidation or bankruptcy to many small businesses.
I have received letters, particularly from tourist and travel industries, complaining about these additional costs. Off-shore tourist resorts on the Great Barrier Reef will be asked to pay the excise in spite of the fact that it will be quite impossible to use such fuel on an island resort for on-road use. In such places diesel is used for power generation, tractors, motors, trains and engines. No portion of it is used for public use and as a result there can be no abuse. Additionally, travellers by water, tourist vessels, barges, et cetera, are asked to pay the full amount of this excise.
I am emphatic about this point. The Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) has said that the extra one cent per litre excise will be used on roads to improve the whole road system throughout Australia. Why then should genuine off-road users, the laundries, the power generators, the island resorts, and those operating boats and launches be called upon to contribute to road improvement? This extra one cent will become 2c next year and the anomoly will only get worse. I argue for the full 6.144c to become rebatable because of a huge increase in the cost factor. I argue for a special one cent as a matter of justice and equity. I request the complete reassessment of this rebate system for off-road users, an assessment that was not properly carried out in the first instance by Treasury officials.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It is now 12.15 p.m. In accordance with Standing Order 106, as amended for this session, the debate is interrupted.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

TAXATION
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Government to act on legal advice recommending the prosecution of individuals for conspiracy to defraud the Commonwealth.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number a/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (12.15)-This matter of public importance surrounds an issue which, as my colleagues have said in the past fortnight, is the most serious issue, the greatest scandal, that we have had in Australia since Federation. We have had nothing like it. There has not been an issue or a scandal which could be compared with the evidence that has come to hand to members of parliament and the people of Australia in the last few weeks. There seems to be some confusion on the Government benches about the responsibility of Parliament. We are continually being charged by Government spokespersons that we are putting on trial individuals who may have been named in the various reports, be it the Costigan report or the McCabeLafranchi report. That is not the responsibility of Parliament; but it is the responsibility of Parliament to expose the Government for dereliction of duty.
There is no way that any person in Australia could believe that what McCabe-Lafranchi found out and what Costigan has now found out the Government could not have found out and did find out seven years ago when it came to office. It has failed to take any action against any person in Australia who has been involved in these schemes. We may haggle about the amounts involved but it is significant that not one Government spokesman is prepared to put a figure on the amount by which the Australian people have been robbed. Let us not haggle over it. Let us say that over the last seven or eight years the Australian people have been robbed of $10 billion that should have been paid in taxation but has not been paid because of the dereliction of duty of this Government.
There has been no lack of advice as to what this Government should do. In its early defence on the tabling of the Costigan report the Government said that it could not do anything, the Treasurer

Taxation

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1263

(Mr Howard) could not do anything, and the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) could not do anything because of the privacy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act. What a lot of rubbish! What a lot of rubbish it is to try to hide behind the privacy sections of the Income Tax Assessment Act! The privacy sections of the Income Tax Assessment Act will only hide the names; they do not hide the act or the crime which was there for everybody to see.
What opinions was the Government given? Let us go through them again. In January 1975 Mr Brinsden QC. said:
. . . the promoter and others should be charged with a breach of section 85(E) of the Crimes Act, and that they should be subjected to civil proceedings.
On 25 June 1975 another unnamed counsel said that section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act constituted no hindrance to prosecution. In August 1975 the Commissioner of Taxation advised the Deputy Crown Solicitor:
. . . it has been decided that action under section 86 of the Crimes Act . . . should be commenced against (the three men) as soon as possible.
In early 1976 counsel of the Sydney Bar said that the scheme could be attacked by a criminal prosecution for conspiracy. The Australian Federal Police Report in November 1976 stated:
It is submitted that sufficient documentary evidence is available to prove that three conspirators came to an agreement to affect their financial purposes by unlawful means . . .
There is no shortage of opinions made available to this Government that action should have been taken to stop this massive fraud on the Australian people. Hundreds of people have been involved. We do not have to name them all again; their names are well known right now in Australia. They are riding around in their Rolls-Royces. We are told that some have already left for Switzerland. Meanwhile the Australian people face a heavier and heavier burden of taxation because this Government did absolutely nothing about trying to stop the crooks. As if the Government did not know!
Let us have a look at the company and corporation registrations in Victoria alone. In 1979 a total of 116,000 were registered and 52,000 lodged tax returns. One would have thought that would have told the Government something about what was happening in Victoria. In 1978 a total of 109,000 were registered and 53,000 lodged tax returns. One would have thought there was some evidence there. The Treasurer became Treasurer of this country in late 1977. He tells us that in early 1978 he was made aware of the schemes, but where are the prosecutions to stop all these

schemes that have operated? They operated for years after he was made aware of them. We on this side of the House are told that there is a semitrailer load of advice from the Taxation Office to this Government. Why did the Government not. take action? Just one prosecution could have stopped all this nonsense that was going on around Australia. The Treasurer cannot tell us that section 16, the privacy provisions, of the Income Tax Assessment Act do not allow him to talk to the Taxation Office about the perversion of the tax system that operates in Australia. It did not stop Costigan from explaining to the people of Australia why pay-as-you-earn tax was going up alarmingly and company tax was heading downwards. It was heading downwards because this Government tolerated this absolutely massive fraud on the Australian people. While we are sitting here in this Parliament some of the people listening to the broadcast of the proceedings are laughing their heads off, having made their millions. If one looks through the Australian Accountant magazine of 1979 and 1980, one sees the following advertisements: 'We want to buy companies. It does not matter what condition they are in. Ring us, we will tell you what we can do to help you.' These advertisements were being run in all such magazines throughout Australia.
Let us look at the reports of the Commissioner of Taxation of 1978, 1979 and 1980, complaining about staff ceilings, not being able to carry out the work of chasing up tax evasion and tax avoidance and explaining to the Australian people that he was not allowed to do his job. This Government was imposing staff ceilings on the Taxation Office at the same time as the Commissioner of Taxation was telling it that the Australian people were being robbed of hundreds of millions of dollars. Does everybody in Australia understand what this Government has allowed to go on? Because the Government has decided it is going to stick solid with the Treasurer and the Attorney-General there is only one other option for this Government to take. Let its record and its performance go to the people and let the people decide whether they wanted to be robbed of $10 billion. Perhaps it is more. Let us just say $10 billion and keep saying it over and over again so that when people receive their pay packets in the factories and the offices around Australia they can look at the taxation they are paying and can say: 'We are paying 20 or 30 per cent more tax than we should have because this Government refused to take action over the last seven years against one of the most massive frauds that this country has ever seen.' The Government says that it could not get the information. The Victorian Liberal Government set up

1264 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Taxation

the McCabe-Lafranchi investigation, not the Labor Government. The Liberal Government was not going to make public its report, but the Labor Government did.
Let us have a look through the McCabeLafranchi report. Look at the names and the way in which the companies were swapped over. All the information that is in the McCabe-Lafranchi report was not hindered by section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. That did not stop their investigations. It did not stop McCabe and Lafranchi from telling the Australian people that this Government is absolutely worthless when it comes to dealing with tax evasion or tax avoidance. It has no interest in the subject. It may be that it is because of the influence of people in the Liberal Party that this has come to be. We heard the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) telling us yesterday that irrespective of the noises being made in any section of the Liberal Party the Government was going to push on with retrospective legislation. The President of the Western Australian branch of the Liberal Party tells us this morning that if the Government continues with that he is going to tell us what happened at the Federal Executive meeting of the Liberal Party because we are not being told the truth. It is about time the President of the Western Australian branch came clean. It is all bygones because all the evidence is that the Government does not need the retrospective legislation. Prosecutions could have taken place with the laws the way they already are in Australia.
These people deliberately set out to defraud the Australian public, to keep moneys back by setting up sham directorships and sham companies in order that they would not meet their commitments and their legal responsibilities in paying their taxation. So while they do not pay their $10 billion someone else has to. Malcolm told us when he came to power in 1975: 'We are going to be a fair government. It is going to be a fair and equitable tax system and we are going to have small government.' All the people who were involved in these rotten schemes gave us small government, they gave us $10 billion less of government than we should have had. All the facilities that could have been provided by that money have not been provided because they are driving around the Gold Coast and Melbourne and all such places in their Rolls-Royces or leaving for overseas while this Government sits here as Rome burns. All the money has been lost forever and the Government tells us it is going to get it back. Does any person on the front bench of this Government really believe that the Government is going to get back the money that Australia has been defrauded of? We

do not need Costigan and we do not need McCabe and Lafranchi. All the evidence is that this Government could have done something, but it did nothing. It refused to accept its responsibilities. If it is going to cling to the Attorney-General and if it is going to cling to the Treasurer all 1 can say is: The final judgment must be made by the people of Australia. The sooner the better. Malcolm was very keen--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member persists. He knows better. He will refer to the Prime Minister as such.
Mr YOUNG-We were told that the Prime Minister was very keen a couple of weeks ago to hold an election. The last time he went out to Yarralumla in 1975 he went through the back door. This time he can go through the front door and ask the Governor-General to dissolve the Parliament. There is absolutely no shortage of evidence but the thing that has held this Government back is the entanglement of all the high officials from the Liberal Party who have had their fingers in the till. It is not much, they may have made only a couple of million each. I suppose when one is making donations to the Liberal Party it can be significant. No wonder this Government, every time we raise the question of a system for political donations, says: That is a corrupt system. We are not going to have a bar of it'. Fancy members of the Liberal Party talking about corruption! They are the authors of corruption. They have done more to assist corruption in this country than has any previous government. What do the people in the streets think? They go crook about the carpenter saying: 'I will do a job for you for 50 bucks but you have to pay cash'. The Treasurer says: That is terrible. We have to cut out the cash industry', while his mates in the Liberal Party in Western Australia reap millions by defying the laws of this country which they know this Government is pledged not to carry out. The laws exist just in name.
What will Costigan find out in 1983? What more is there to come to tell the Australian people about what these people have been doing? No wonder my colleague the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) asks about the passport situation. Why would someone not want to whizz off overseas if he had made $100m out of the Australian people? When this Government gets thrown out of office some of those people will go to gaol. Under a Labor Government those people will be prosecuted. The Government can have a branch of the Liberal Party and National Country Party at Long Bay gaol the way it is going. Harry Miller will be the promotional organiser and

Taxation

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 1265

Keith Gale will be the accountant. Members of those parties will all be out there. If Doug Anthony would like to visit Long Bay we will give him plenty of opportunity. He will be able to go every day of the week and see someone different. That is what will happen. When this Government is exposed as a result of this massive fraud which has been imposed so indecently upon the Australian people it will be thrown out of office. John Howard, Senator Durack, Malcolm Fraser~the whole lot of them are going to go because of their dereliction of duty. They have used the painters and dockers in the Liberal Party only as the enforcement agencies. When the painters and dockers find out they have been paid peanuts while the other mob have been paid millions they will not be too happy. Perhaps some of their wrath will -be turned upon the exploiters of this system, the people who have used them to make their millions while they paid them in tens and twenties. As I said at the outset, this is the most serious crime, the most serious dereliction of duty from which the Australian people have ever suffered. It is going to bring this Government down~and the sooner the better.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley~ Minister for Communications) (12.30)~I suppose that what we have just heard is one more instalment of the comic relief by the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) in this Parliament. Sooner or later the Australian Labor Party had to bring him in to bolster its flagging fortunes on this issue. There is no doubt~I will have more to say about this later~that the debate in the country on this issue has taken a very significant change in the last 24 hours. It has become very apparent to the Australian people what a shameful performance they have seen from the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in this Parliament. We have seen a breach of the very basic principle of the presumption of innocence. The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) has been equally a victim of that quite unprincipled breach of a very fundamental principle. I certainly align myself with everything that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said this morning on that issue.
I make the point now, in case time runs out later on, that what we have seen from the Leader of the Opposition is a wholesale leaking, as he would maintain, of what is contained in unpublished volumes of the Costigan Royal Commission report. Let the Australian people have no doubt that this was what the Leader of the Opposition was about. Let us look fairly and honestly at the words he has used. I will not refer to the substantive allegations that he made. Let us look at

the introductory words that he has used on those occasions when he has sought to drop hints and encourage speculation about what might be contained in the unpublished volumes of the report. Firstly, at a Press conference in Brisbane, he stated:
However, we also observed, as Costigan does in one of his reports which hasn't been published _ _ _
What does that mean, other than that: 'We, the Labor Party, have noticed, as Mr Costigan has noticed in the unpublished reports, and this will become very apparent to people if and when they see the unpublished reports'. There is no doubt that that is what he meant. There is no doubt that when he made similar statements in the Parliament he was seeking to encourage speculation and guesswork as to what might be contained in unpublished volumes of the Costigan Royal Commission report.
It should be understood that this is not just a quibble by the Government. It is a very basic principle of our system of justice that courts and royal commissions should be allowed to conduct their affairs in the way in which they believe they should be conducted. Mr Costigan is the best judge of the way his royal commission should be conducted. He made a very firm decision, obviously on very sound grounds, that part of his report should be confidential. he did this clearly to protect the innocent and avoid warnings being given to the guilty or the potentially guilty. The Leader of the Opposition, through his hamfisted behaviour over the last few days, frankly has put at risk both of those situations. He has put at risk the innocence of people; he has put at risk the question of whether the guilty and potentially guilty will be brought to justice. He stands condemned. That point should be clearly understood.
Let us return to the basic question of tax and the matter that was raised by the honourable member for Port Adelaide in his matter of public importance. Let us deal with a few of the points that he made because it can be seen that none of them has any substance or foundation whatsoever. One of the points the honourable member made in criticising the Government was that it has failed to take action against anyone person engaged in any of these schemes. That is an unfair summary of the Government's performance with respect to stamping out taxation avoidance and evasion. It is quite unfair and unsupported by the facts and the public record. The honourable member should be ashamed of himself for making such an unsubstantiated generalisation. It has no substance whatsoever.

1266 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Taxation

Let us look at the matter in context. This has been said before but it deserves to be said again. Tax avoidance was rampant under the Labor Government. It was admitted that the tax avoidance industry started and had its very youthful early years under the Labor Government. That Government did nothing and we can establish that it did nothing by looking at the volumes of statutes passed by the Parliament in those years. Even Mr Crean and his colleagues admitted publicly that a scandalous tax avoidance scheme known as the Curran scheme had started and obtained currency. He said: 'We will legislate'. Others who followed him in the position of Treasurer said: 'We will legislate', but none of them did. It was left to this Government to legislate to outlaw the Curran scheme and it is to this Government's credit that it did so. It is to the credit of the present Treasurer (Mr Howard) that he has behind him a very commendable record of introducing legislation to stamp out tax avoidance in this country. Frankly, I think it was to the discredit of the Labor Party just the other day to refuse leave to the Prime Minister to table in this House details of the legislation which has been introduced in the life of this Government to stamp out tax avoidance. But the public should know and have no doubt that since the present Government came to office a barrage of legislation has passed through the Parliament to stamp out tax avoidance and evasion in this country. It has been very successful. If Labor Party members stopped fulminating and talked to a few people who know something about taxation, they would be told that the taxation avoidance industry in this country has shrivelled and has been substantially removed and destroyed.
Mr Hawke-But not dead.
Mr N. A. BROWN-It is certainly not dead, as the honourable member says, but it has been substantially reduced as a result of legislation introduced by this Government.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! Honourable members on my left who persist in interjecting overlook the fact that the honourable member for Port Adelaide made an emphatic speech and was heard in silence. I suggest that in the interests of honourable members and the Parliament in general they refrain from interjecting or I will be required to deal with them.
Mr N. A. BROWN-Before moving on, I make the basic point that the previous Labor Government, knowing and admitting that tax avoidance was rampant in this country, did nothing to stamp

it out. The present Government has introduced, passed and enforced successfully a whole range of legislation to deal with many parts and aspects of tax avoidance. I repeat that I agree with the honourable member for Wills that tax avoidance has not been stamped out completely.
Mr Miiton-$15,OOOm!
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for La Trobe.
Mr N. A. BROWN-That is why legislation will probably continually be needed; that is why the Government is introducing new legislation; that is why the Government is establishing an office of the Special Prosecutor; that is why the Government has made it perfectly plain that it will continue with the utmost resolution to stamp out tax avoidance as far as it is possible for any government to do. We will leave no stone unturned in the relentless search and attempt to stamp out this evil pastime and practice. Let there be no doubt about that whatsoever. Members of the Labor Party are absolute hypocrites on this matter because they did nothing whatsoever about it.
A number of other matters should be clearly understood. I take another point which the honourable member for Port Adelaide made. He referred to an opinion obtained from Mr Brinsden, QC., in Perth. This has been the basis of a lot of the argument which we have heard in this place in recent days. It may interest the honourable member and the House to knowalthough this has been mentioned in the Senate, I do not know whether it has been mentioned in the House as yet-that the papers were, of course, sent to Mr Gleeson, QC., an eminent Sydney barrister. What was his advice? Is it his advice that this matter is an open and shut case and that it was ready to go to the courts five years ago, or however many years ago it was? No, that is not his advice. His advice is that the case is not ready and was not ready to go to the court and in fact it is not the open and shut case that Mr Costigan apparently believed it was. I do not know--
Mr Barry Jones-It was an open and shut drawer.
Mr N. A. BROWN-The honourable member is an idiot. He should contain himself and listen to some common sense.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will withdraw the reflection on the character of the honourable member.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I withdraw. It should be simply and clearly understood that the case was not as open and shut as Mr Costigan believed it to

Taxation

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1267

be or as open and shut and as ready to go to the courts as the Labor Party seem to have believed during the whole currency of this debate.
The situation with respect to this matter has been canvassed at great length. The Government's position has been made perfectly clear. Quite unprincipled attacks have been made and previously today on the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) and on the Treasurer. Those charges have been replied to. There is no point in beating around the bush about this. We do not seek to excuse the delay that occurred. There were obviously imperfections in the work of the Perth office of the Crown Solicitor's Office. There is no question whatsoever of that. But what is the test? The test should be to ask: What does the Government do when it knows about the problems that exist there? The Government has acted promptly on that matter. The Labor Party should be fair enough to admit that. It is obvious that in an area of administration there are laxities. Those matters should be investigated and rectified. That is being attended to. It has been announced already that, with the assistance of the Law Council of Australia, a well-qualified solicitor from Melbourne is investigating the office. He will give advice to the Government and the Crown Solicitor's Office on what reforms and improvements should be introduced to make that office work efficiently. At the same time, let us not forget that that office and other offices handle many cases. They have handled them very well. They have had a great and distinguished history of success in litigation that they have conducted. So, let us not wipe off the Crown Solicitor's Office simply by pointing to this one transgression. We see that there was laxity. We say that that is being rectified. We will not stop until it is completely rectified.
It was apparent also that new legislation was needed. Despite the assertions by all of the amateur experts in this field, none of them seemed to acknowledge the basic fact-I suppose that they do not know enough about it-that if one is going to prosecute someone for conspiracy one has an uphill battle. It is very difficult to get a conviction for conspiracy. The problems of evidence are almost overwhelming. One has to make absolutely sure that there is a very strong case before one starts a prosecution for conspiracy. It was for that reason, amongst others, that in 1980 we introduced very tough legislation. This was criminallegislation. It was the first time that the rigour of criminal law was brought into the taxation field. Although tax avoidance was rampant during the Labor Party's time in office, there was no attempt to introduce the sanctions of criminal law

into the taxation field. The Liberal-National Country Party Government did that. We were much tougher on this matter than any government in the history of this country and probably any government in the Commonwealth. That is' our proud record.
Mr Campbell-Why don't you do something about it, then?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Kalgoorlie.
Mr N. A. BROWN-Criminal sanctions were introduced in 1980. Let there be no doubt about it at all, they have been successful. That form of tax avoidance has virtually vanished.
Mr Young-Where are all the offenders? They have disappeared to the Gold Coast.
Mr N. A. BROWN-There may well be offenders, as the honourable member for Port Adelaide says. We have introduced legislation which we will debate today, I hope, to establish a special prosecutor. The Special Prosecutors Bill will make provision for the establishment of more than one special prosecutor. Every assistance and every resource necessary will be given to special prosecutors. The force of the law will know no bounds. It will not stop until we are completely successful in this field.
The Government has nothing to be ashamed of or embarrassed about so far as this matter of public importance is concerned. It is nothing more than a rehash of the same old story. The Government has defended itself vigorously and, I believe, correctly and on very sound grounds. Where there has been laxity in administration we are acting. Where there are deficiencies in the law those deficiencies will be plugged immediately. Where there is a shortage of resources they are being provided. There is a need for a special prosecutor and we are acting. The Government should be commended on its resolution in these matters.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Immigration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizen showeth:
That we protest at breakdowns in our Restrictive Immigration policy which, many senior members of our parliament had vigorously supported in their past promises to the Australian people.

1268 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Petitions

We urge the Government to accede, not only to the wishes of the majority, as expressed in all public opinion polls, but also to act in accordance with their own statements, e.g.:
I. "We want one Australian people, one Australian Nation."-Mr McMahon.
2. "The avoidance of difficult social problems following an in flux of people having different standards of living." ALP policy 72.
3. "I believe we should do all in our power to prevent the build up of ethnic groups within Australia."-Mr MacKellar.
4. "Our policies reflect the firm and unshakeable determination of the Government to maintain a homogeneous society, a society that is essentially undivided and free of avoidable tensions."-Dr Forbes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Harris and Mr Spender.
Petitions received.
South West Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in South West Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a national issue and therefore Tasmania should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCohen.
Petition received.
Slaughter ofSeal Pups
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Robertson respectfully showeth:
That the present hunt for harp seals in Canada is carried out in a cruel and inhuman manner.
That the population of harp seals has not been clearly shown to be increasing.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formally call on the Canadian Government to end the harp seal hunt and use its constitutional powers to halt the importation into Australia of products derived from the harp seal, Pagophilus groenlandicus.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCohen.
Petition received.
National Estate Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the lack of effective Federal environmental protection legislation and urge that suitable legislation be enacted immediately.

Your petitioners are concerned that National Estate areas such as South West Tasmania, the Great Barrier Reef and the Western Australian Jarrah Forests cannot be fully protected until adequate legislation exists and is enforced. Your humble petitioners therefore call upon the House of Representatives to ensure that all provisions of the Heritage Act and the Environment Impact of Proposals Act are fully complied with in respect of National Estate Areas. In particular your petitioners call upon you to adopt the recommendations of the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on the Environment on South West Tasmania. Your petitioners believe that this is a national issue and must be resolved by the action of the Federal Parliament.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCohen.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned electors of the Division of. . respectfully showeth: The Old Age Pension is granted, according to the Constitution of the Land, Federal Parliament and the people, conditionally to all dtizens who were non-serving persons in the Forces, on reaching 65 years of age.
We of the Defence Forces, past and present, are entitled to the above mentioned pension five years earlier, i.e. at 60 years of age.
An unconditional pension is granted to people who did not risk their life and limbs at any war.
We wish to ask the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, why, we ex-Defence Forces are not entitled to a no means test at 65 years of age?
This means that a non-serving citizen, on retirement at 65 years of age, only has to wait five years to be free of the means test, as against the veterans waiting 10 years for the same privilege.
Those people who are interested, regarding this matter, and wish to draw this subject to our present Federal Government's attention, please sign below.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you, our Honourable Member, will bring this matter to the Minister for Veterans' Affairs attention.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cohen.
Petition received.
Broadcasting Licences
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Family Radio Ltd represents the largest single interest group in the community-i.e. Christians-who do not have a voice in public broadcasting commensurate with their representation.
That prime time access to existing broadcasts by christian groups is virtually non-existent and access at other times is fast disappearing.
That, by comparison with other capitals, Brisbane is entitled to at least one more category'S' FM broadcasting licence.
That there appears to be no prospect of the release of further category'S' FM licences in the near future for Brisbane.

Petitions

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATlVES 1269

That satisfactory fulfilment of the aims of family radio and its expansion can only be achieved by broadcasting in its own right under licence.
That family radio has a responsibility to the large support groups which have contributed substantially to its development, to achieve the aims in broadcasting and community work for which it was established.
That there is an urgent need for the kind of service and support that family radio can provide to other community groups through the particular type of integrated programming proposed by the company under a full-time licence.
And that pruned Government resources are obviously insufficient to advance the development of public broadcasting as originally intended.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will support family radio's application for a broadcasting licence and will enable more category'S' FM licences to be made available in Brisbane.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
A~stralian Postal Commission
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens undersigned respectfully showeth:
I. That Australia as a sparsely populated continent requires the maintenance of a high quality postal service as a vital means of communication.
2. That the Australian postal service truly meets the needs of all Australians.
3. That any proposal that Australia Post's monopoly power to carry letters for reward be diminished will destroy the concept of the national postal service.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the powers of the Postal Commission to carry letters for reward should be strengthened to ensure that the national postal service is retained in the interests of all Australians.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Steele Hall.
Petition received.
Telephone Exchange, Lithgow
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Telecommunications Commission to close the Manual Assistance Telephone Exchange at Lithgow will place in jeopardy the existing services to telephone subscribers in the district by:
I. The loss of a local emergency '000' service being given to non-metropolitan telephone users in emergency conditions.
2. The loss of any local knowledge of the town and district being available to telephone users if this service is moved to a distant centre.
3. The loss of a local and personalised service provided especially to elderly and handicapped people.
We the undersigned believe that Telecom Australia should be instructed to seek the views of country telephone subscribers before proceeding with the closure of the manual assistance telephone exchange.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Honourable House will call on the Government to half the closure pending a full and open Parliamentary inquiry into the needs and desires of affected subscribers and the full economic and social effects of the closure on this district, rural telephone subscribers and Telecom Australia employees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received.
Government Spending
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in 1978 the United Nations Secretary-General called upon all nations to allocate 0.1 % of defence spending for work on peace through arms control and disarmament; to date, Australia has not responded positively to this call.
That defence spending in Australia this year is estimated at approximately 4 billion dollars.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Australia allocate 0.1 %of defence spending for work on peace.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Australian Parliament assembled. This humble petition of citizens of Australia showeth that:
Members of the Community are concerned and alarmed at the increasing levels of direct and indirect taxation.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the increasingly inequitable distribution of these taxes through the Social Wage.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the apparently uncontrolled increases in interest rates and the shrinking access to loan capital.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the neglect of pension levels and the absence of real relativity with average wages.
Members of the community are concerned and alarmed at the diminishing government spending on Health, its consequential effect on the quality, cost and availability of Health Services and the absence of meaningful expenditure for the prevention of disease and injury.
We the undersigned citizens of Australia by this humble petition respectfully pray that the Australian Government introduce tax indexaton on personal income tax scales and the tax free threshold.
Introduce:
I. Broadly based health tax exempting small wealth holdings.
2. Capital Gains tax exempting owner occupied homes. 3. The closing of tax loopholes which enable company and high earner tax avoidance. 4. A resources tax or excess profit tax.
The Australian Government raise the single pensions and benefits to 30 per cent of average weekly earnings over the next three years.
The Australian Government institute wider controls over interest rates charged by all lending institutions and pass legislation which will allow for a fixed percentage of all available

1270 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Cotton Research Bill 1982

loan capital to be held in reserve for the purpose of owner occupied home loans.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
COTTON LEVY BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (12.47) - I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide for the imposition of a levy on cotton produced in Australia. The levy has been requested by cotton growers and is intended to be used in financing a research scheme. The related Cotton Research Bill 1982 contains provisions for the collection of the levy, its payment into a trust account to be created for the purpose, and all the measures necessary to implement the research arrangements. The levy will apply to all raw cotton produced. For this purpose, leviable cotton is the cotton fibre separated from the cotton seed in the process of ginning.
The operative rate of levy is to be initially $1 per unit of 225 kilograms which, in industry terms, is $1 per bale. The levy rate may be changed by regulation up to a maximum of $3 per 225 kilograms. Changes may be made only after consideration of a report from the growers organisation, that is, the Australian Cotton Growers Research Association. On behalf of all growers the Association has request that the levy apply to cotton production from the start of the 1983 harvest. The Government accepted that request and it is for that reason that the Bill provides for the levy to be imposed on all cotton produced on or after 1 March 1983. The levy is payable by growers but in practice will be paid on their behalf by the processors, that is, the three organisations which gin all cotton produced in Australia. They are in Queensland, the Cotton Marketing Board, and in New South Wales, the Namoi Cotton Cooperative Ltd and Auscott Pty Ltd.
It can be expected that the amount of levy collected in 1982-83-that is, on cotton ginned in March, April and May 1983 will approximate $200,000. This year, in an exceptionally favourable season, cotton production is close to 600,000 bales. The indications are that production is not likely to expand significantly in the next few years. I commend the Bill to honourable members.

Debate (on motion by Mr Barry Jones) adjourned.
COTTON RESEARCH BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (12.50)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is the implementation of a Cotton Research Scheme along the same lines as other rural industry research schemes. Its provisions include necessary arrangements for the collection of the research levy imposed under the Cotton Levy Bill 1982. It brings into being a Cotton Research Trust Account from which cotton research will be funded. It establishes a committee which will recommend research programs and the disbursement of funds from the Research Account. The Bill should be read as one with the Cotton Levy Bill 1982 and is to become operative on the same day as it. The levy is intended to apply to all cotton produced from the start of the next harvest season in March 1983.
Cotton growers have sought the implementation of the research scheme and have signified their agreement to payment of the levy. For practical and administrative reasons, however, payments to the Commonwealth will be made by the processors, that is, the three organisations which own the cotton gins. The processors will be entitled to deduct the amounts of levy from their payments to cotton growers. Levies will be payable in the month following the month of ginning. As they are received into revenue like amounts will be paid into the Cotton Research Trust Account. The Government has undertaken to match on a dollar for dollar basis expenditure of industry moneys from the Research Account. Any expenditure for research from the Account will be subject to ministerial approval on the recommendation of the Cotton Research Committee to be established by the Bill.
The Research Account will have in it two separate accounts. Into one will be paid amounts equal to levy received plus Commonwealth contributions. The other will be credited with interest on investments, proceeds of sale of assets and produce, donations and, if any, penalty incurred because of delays in levy payments. Such moneys will not be matched by the Commonwealth. Their disbursement will be subject to the same conditions as the industry and Commonwealth contributions.

Cotton Research Bill 1982

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1271

The Cotton Research Committee will have 10 members of which five will represent growers and the others will represent respectively, the Department of Primary Industry, as Chairman, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, Australian Universities, the New South Wales Department of Agriculture and the Queensland Department of Primary Industries. As is customary, membership will be subject to ministerial appointment. The Bill provides for grower representatives to be selected and appointed by the Minister from a list of names submitted by the growers' organisation. It is intended that the five appointees will include at least one member representing the growers who deliver seed cotton to each of the three processors. In Queensland the sole processor is the Cotton Marketing Board. The others, in New South Wales, are the Namoi Cotton Co-operative Ltd and Auscott Pty Ltd.
The Bill provides for the appointment of deputies. There are customary provisions requiring disclosure of interest by members and deputies. Remuneration entitlements of both are to be determined by the Remuneration Tribunal. The Committee will have the responsibility of formulating and submitting to the Minister for Primary Industry recommendations as to a program of research and levels of expenditure from the Research Account. As is the case with other research schemes operative for a number of rural industries the purposes for which moneys may be expended are scientific, economic or technical research and associated activities. These include research training and dissemination of information. In carrying out its responsibilities the Committee will be expected to establish effective means of determining cotton research needs and priorities in all the detail that is necessary and, in the course of time, no less effective arrangements for review of its own activities and the conduct and outcome of research funded on its recommendation.
The Cotton Research Scheme which is being implemented reflects established policy of the Government in fostering research funded jointly by the Commonwealth and industry which will help overcome problems, raise productivity, contain costs or improve quality to the benefit of the industry and of the economy as a whole. The cotton industry has contributed voluntarily to research for the past nine years, starting with a levy rate of 25c per bale which has been increased to SOC in 1975, to 70c in 1979 and the present maximum of $1 per bale in 1980. That in itself is acknowledgment of the value growers have seen in augmenting from their own resources research carried out by CSIRO, two State departments and

tertiary institutions. There are continuing challenges in coping with problems of seasonal conditions and the incidence of pests and diseases. Continued success in selling to selective markets influenced by rapid technological change in spinning machinery requires increasing attention to fibre quality. The scope for additional research is indeed considerable. Cotton has become Australia's fifth largest agricultural export crop, shipments in 1981-82 being valued at $117m. The industry's production and export potential will undoubtedly be enhanced and the industry will be helped to use its resources even more effectively as the benefits of further well directed research become available. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Barry Jones) adjourned.
Sitting suspended from 12.56 to 2 p.m.
AIR NAVIGATION LEGISLATION (VALIDATION AND INTERPRETATION)
BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Fife, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) (2.0)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill which is purely a machinery measure seeks to correct an error concerning references to the Secretary to the Department of Aviation arising from one of the orders made under the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 consequent upon changes in the machinery of government made on 7 May 1982. The circumstances I will now outline were brought to my attention during the last sitting week of the House and have given rise to the need for this legislation. Sub-section 19B (3) of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 provides that where reference is made in a provision of an Act to an office that is an office of permanent head of a department and the office has been abolished, the Governor-General may, by order, direct that the provision shall have effect as if there were substituted for that reference a reference to such an office as is specified in the order made by the Governor -General.
The Department of Transport and the office of Secretary to the Department of Transport were abolished on 7 May 1982. On that date an order was made pursuant to sub-section 19B (3). It proyided that, where any provision of an Act, or an instrument-including rules, regulations, and by-laws-made, granted or issued under an Act, being a provision administered by the Minister for Aviation, contained a reference to the office of

1272 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

Secretary to the Department of Transport, it shall have effect as if there were substituted a reference to the office of Secretary to the Department of Aviation.
Section 9 of the Air Navigation Act 1974 was excepted from this order because it contained provisions of a transitional and validating character in relation to past actions. However, this exception should not have been applied to sub-section 9 (3), which deals with future actions. Subsection 9 (3) provides inter alia that after the commencement of the section in the application of regulations or other instruments in force before 1 March 1975, any references to the Director General of Civil Aviation or to the Secretary to the Department of Transport and Director General of Civil Aviation shall be read as including a reference to the Secretary to the Department of Transport. Following the machinery of government changes made on 7 May 1982 a reference in that sub-section should have been altered so as to include a reference to the Secretary to the Department of Aviation. While an order made by the Governor-General under sub-section 19B (3) of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 on 26 August 1982 altered those references as required, this latter order only applied prospectively. Validating legislation is required in relation to the exercise of the powers and functions by the Secretary to the Department of Aviation from 7 May 1982.
This Bill also validates any act or thing done by any other person or body in reliance on, as a consequence of, or in relation to, the purported exercise of the above mentioned powers or the purported performance of the above mentioned functions by the Secretary to the Department of Aviation. This Bill also provides for certain references now appearing in regulations or other instrument in force or subsisting under or for the purposes of the Air Navigaton Act 1920 before 1 March 1975 to include a reference to the Secretary to the Department of Aviation. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr N. A. Brown, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (2.6)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
On the first day of the Budget session I tabled in the House a copy of my statement of 4 July last

announcing the Government's decisions on the principal recommendations of the Committee of Review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission-the Dix Committee. The Bill now before the House and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982, which I will shortly introduce, seek to implement those decisions referred to in my statement which will require legislation. Introduction of these Bills provides the means for a cognate debate to take place on both my July statement and the provision of those Bills.
I believe it important that legislation establishing and controlling the activities of the national broadcasting authority be separated from legislation which regulates the provision of commercial and public broadcasting and television services. This Bill will provide a legislative 'home' for the ABC. It should also make that legislation more accessible to those in the community with a particular interest in the charter of the ABC, its structure, powers and responsibilities. The introduction of this Bill honours the Government's undertaking to remove from the Broadcasting and Television Act the provisions for the establishment and management of the ABC. I would hope that at some appropriate time the legislation establishing the Special Broadcasting Service can be similarly treated.
As my public statement last month was comprehensive in reporting the Government decisions, I do not intend here to add substantially to those matters which were the subject of that statement. What I seek to do now is to draw to the attention of honourable members the major features of the legislation, and to refer to some provisions of the Bill where an additional explanation might be helpful to a better understanding of the provisions of the Bill. I draw the attention of honourable members to clause 2, which defines the commencement dates for various provisions of the Bill. Except for clauses 5, 6 and 8, Parts I to III and clauses 34, 57 and 70 of the Bill comes into operation on the day on which the Bill receives royal assent. Certain clauses in other parts of the Bill regarding creating and abolishing positions in the service of the Corporation, the preparation of annual estimates of expenditure and the making of regulations and rules also come into operation on that date. Other provisions of the Bill come into operation on a date to be fixed by proclamation.
The clauses in Part II of the Bill which deal with the establishment, functions and management of the Corporation, and which will not come into operation on royal assent, are those which

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1273

establish the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, specify its charter and define the duties of the Corporation Board. The practical effect of the particular commencement provisions is that the Board of the new Corporation will be legally established from the date of royal assent, and action to appoint the non-executive directors of the Corporation can then be taken. When the Board is properly constituted in accordance with the Act, it can then proceed to consider the appointment of a managing director of the Corporation. When those actions are complete the remaining provisions of the Bill, and the porovisions of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill, would be brought into effect on a date to be fixed by proclamation. This latter action will effectively abolish the present Australain Broadcasting Commission and terminate the appointments of present members of that Commission.
Clause 6 of the Bill defines the charter of the Corporation. This charter is a significant expansion on the functions of the ABC as they now appear in section 59 of the Broadcasting and Television Act. There are aspects of the proposed charter which I consider have a particular importance in determining the programming policies of the ABC.
The Corporation will be established to provide, within Australia, innovative and comprehensive broadcasting and television services of a high standard as part of the Australian broadcasting and television system. More specifically, it is to provide broadcasting and television programs which contribute to a sense of national identity, which inform and entertain and which reflects the cultural diversity of the Australian community, as well as broadcasting and television programs of an educational nature. Paragraph (b) of sub-clause 6 (I) authorise the Corporation to provide services for reception in other countries, while paragraph (c) is a positive statement of the Corporation's role to encourage and promote the musical, dramatic and other performing arts within Australia. For the first time, there would be legislative authority for the ABC to provide programs for overseas audiences through the Radio Australia Service. In the statement. I tabled earlier in the House, I mentioned that the funding of Radio Australia in the future would be through separate line items in the Budget.
In providing services within Australia, the Corporation is required by sub-clause 6 (2) to take account of the services of commerical and public

broadcasters, the standards approved by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal for other broadcasting and television services, and the responsibility of the Corporation to provide a balance between programs of wide appeal and specialised programs. I hope that all honourable members will see the provisions of this clause as a proper expression of the functions of our national broadcasting authority for the present and for the foreseeable future.
The charter of the Corporation is perhaps the most important aspect of the Bill now before the House. For the first time, legislation will provide a framework within which the ABC will be able to plan the development of its services and determine its future direction. The Corporation would be required to seek a balance in its radio and television services between programs of wide appeal and the specialised programs which other broadcasting and television licensees would not normally provide. One of the attractions of our broadcasting and television system IS the diversity of program choices offered. There are some aspects of the duties of the Board of the Corporation in clause 8 which I believe should be highlighted. It is proposed that the Board have a duty to maintain the independence and integrity of the Corporation and to ensure that this independence and integrity are not affected by the performance of any service, or the provision of any facility for the Corporation, or by the acceptance of any gift, devise or bequest made to the Corporation. Paragraph (c) of sub-clause 8 (I) places a duty on the Board to ensure that the gathering and presentation of news and information is accurate and impartial according to the recognised standards of objective journalism.
The independence of the ABC is one of the principal virtues we all espouse in defending the continuing need for a national broadcasting authority. It is sometimes said that the ABC can never be truly independent while it is dependent for funding on Budget appropriations. I have never seen the reality of the argument that Government funding of the ABC implies subservience to the Government's will. Any government that tried to cripple the ABC by needlessly withholding funds would quickly lose community support. I believe, however, that the duties of the Board enunciated by the Bill will greatly strengthen and enhance the role of the Board in what has always been a very contentious area. From comments made by honourable members over the years, and from reactions I have received from the general community while Minister for Communications, I believe that these provisions would have wide support.

1274 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

Clause 11 requires the Board to establish an Australian Broadcasting Corporation Advisory Council and authorises the Board to establish advisory councils in relation to any State, Territory or region of Australia. The functions of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Advisory Council are to advise the Board on broadcasting and television programs of the Corporation, either on its own initiative or at the request of the Board of the Corporation. The functions of other advisory councils are to advise the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Advisory Council on programs in that State, Territory or region, as the case may be. The intention of these arrangements is that advisory councils at State, Territory or regional level will provide a range of advices to the National Advisory Council to assist it in advising the Corporation Board on programming matters. The clause also authorises the Board to establish advisory committees to furnish advice to the Board on particular matters. The types of advisory committees which the Board could reasonably be expected to appoint are committees on such matters as music, educational, science and religious programming. National committees now exist for these purposes and have made invaluable contributions to the development of the services provided by the ABC.
Part III of the Bill establishes the structure of the Board of the Corporation and the method of appointment of the managing director. The Board shall comprise between seven and nine directors, one of whom is the managing director. Nonexecutive directors are appointed by the Governor-General as part time members, and provision is made for the Governor-General to appoint one non-executive director to be Chairman and one non-executive member to be Deputy Chairman of the Board. The tenure of office of a non-executive director is a period not exceeding five years, with eligibility for reappointment. Subclause 12 (5) set out the matters which the Governor-General shall take into consideration in appointing a non-executive director. Clause 13 provides for the managing director to be appointed by the Board for a period of five years, with eligibility for reappointment for periods not exceeding five years.
The other provisions in this Part of the Bill relating to remuneration, leave of absence, resignations, disclosure of interests and termination of appointments, as well as provision for acting appointments, conform to principles embodied in legislation establishing other statutory authorities. Provisions regarding meetings of the Board are set out in clause 22. The Chairman is required to convene such meetings of the Board as he considers

necessary for the efficient performance of its functions, but there is a requirement that the Chairman convene a Board meeting if he receives a written request signed by a majority of nonexecutive directors then holding office.
The powers and duties of the Corporation are detailed in Part IV, with clause 25 stating the Corporation's general powers. While these powers are similar, for the most part, to those vested in other statutory bodies engaged in business activities, there are some provisions which require explanation. Paragraph (g) of sub-clause 25 (1) authorises the Corporation to accept gifts, devises and bequests and to act as trustee of moneys or other property vested in the Corporation on trust. This power is qualified by sub-clause 25 (3), which precludes the Corporation from accepting-the performance of any service or the provision of any facility for the Corporation; or any gift, devise or bequest to the Corporation, except in connection with the exercise of particular powers of the Corporation. The powers referred to are those in clause 28 concerning the Corporation's powers to establish and maintain orchestras, bands and musical groups, and to arrange for public concerts; the powers in clause 29 authorising the Corporation to publish certain literary material and sell films and sound recordings of its programs and public concerts; and provisions in sub-clause 31 (2) regarding the broadcasting or televising of certain announcements or programs. Sub-clause 25 (3) is expressed, however, as not precluding the Corporation from:
(a) accepting services, facilities or moneys from the Commonwealth, a State or Territory, or one of their authorities; or
(b) entering into an agreement or arrangement with a bona fide producer of broadcasting or television programs, cinematograph films or sound recordings, public concerts or other public entertainments, or a bona fide publisher of any literary material where the agreement is to share any expense or risk associated with the production, distribution, sale or presentation of those matters.
The decision not to introduce corporate underwriting or sponsorship for ABC programs was widely supported. The Dix Committee did report, however, that the ABC had accepted some services or facilities from other organisations in the production of particular programs. While the financial value of this support was not great in relation to the total ABC expenditures, a continuation of that practice could be seen as leading to an erosion of the independence of the ABC in programming matters. The overall effect of clause 25

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1275

in relation to the acceptance of external assistance is that the Corporation could not accept any form of assistance from private organisations except where that assistance concerns the Corporation's powers to promote music of high quality, or to act as an entrepreneur in publishing certain material and in the making and sale of films and sound recordings.
It is important not to restrict unnecessarily the Corporation in accepting assistance if no issue of principle in relation to programming independence is involved. The costs involved in bringing orchestras, musical groups and artists of world renown to Australia are a substantial call on the finances of the ABC. If people or organisations wish to defray some of these costs, or perhaps to support actively a State symphony orchestra, the acceptance of such assistance should not compromise the programming independence of the ABC. It is important to bear in mind that clause 8 imposes a duty on the Board to ensure that the Corporation's independence and integrity are not affected by the acceptance of this external assistance. If, for example, the ABC wished to acknowledge that a particular person or organisation had given support to a concert or musical event, the Corporation Board would have to ensure that that acknowledgment is done in such a way that it could not reasonably be seen to be a breach of its responsibilities under this clause.
Sub-clauses (I) and (2) of clause 27, on news and information services of the Corporation, largely restate the present provisions of the Act, but extend the requirement to provide these services to television stations. Sub-clause 27 (3) permits the Corporation to use news agencies and other sources for news and information of current events both within Australia and overseas. For reasons which are somewhat mystifying, the latter proposal has been criticised as a threat to the ABC's ability to provide an independent news and information service. The present restriction on the ABC using agencies as a source of domestic news for its radio broadcasting services is shrouded in history and is well documented in the report of the Dix Committee. The Government sees the present law as a needless restriction on the freedom of the ABC. Reasons given in the 1930s for this provision have no validity in the I980s. I stress that the Bill leaves it to the Board to decide whether the use of such news agencies would enable the services of the Corporation to be improved.
I draw the attention of honourable members to clause 30, regarding children's television programs. This clause introduces a new conceptthat the Corporation Board may SUbmit children's

programs to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal for classification. In the, other Bill I will be introducing, there is a provision requiring the Tribunal to include in its annual report details of programs submitted by the Corporation for this purpose. There is a genuine concern in parts of the community about the effects of television programs on children in that sensitive period between six and twelve years of age. Cases no doubt will arise where the Corporation may consider it is in its own interests to have the Tribunal classify a program intended for viewing during the period set aside for children's programs. The purpose of this clause is to enable the Corporation to seek such a classification and for the Tribunal to respond.
I now turn to refer briefly to the more significant changes proposed by Part V of the Bill, which deals with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Service. Sub-clauses 32 (3) and (4) provide for the matters to be taken into account to determine the relative efficiency of officers for promotion, as clause 37 provides that the only criteria for promotion is the relative efficiency of the officers concerned. Sub-clause 39 (2) provides that the only ground of appeal against promotions is the greater efficiency of the officer making the appeal.
Clause 33 authorises the managing director to appoint officers and engage such temporary employees as he thinks necessary, and to determine their terms and conditions of employment. In exercising powers conferred on him by the Bill, the managing director is required, by sub-clause 10 (2), to act in accordance with any policies determined and any directions given to him by the Board. Sub-clause 33 (4) empowers the managing director, with the consent of an officer, to declare that officer to be an unattached officer, the position held by that officer then becoming vacant. There is no similar provision in the existing legislation relating to the Service of the ABC, and this has caused administrative problems in cases, for example, where Commission officers are posted overseas.
Clauses 34 and 35 enable the Board to create any position in the Service, determine the classification for that position abolish any position in the Service, and to reclassify any position by raising or lowering the classification. The Board is not required to consult with or seek the approval of the Public Service Board for these purposes. The provisions of clause 38, regarding the promotion of officers who complete courses of training for special positions, are similar to provisions in the Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1982, which is now before the Parliament.

1276 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

Clause 41 deals with the establishment of promotions appeal boards. The clause provides for the establishment of such appeal boards as are required, whereas the present legislation permits the establishment of only one such Board. This has caused delays in hearing and determining appeals. Sub-clauses (9) to (II) deal with circumstances where a member of a promotions appeal board ceases to be a member or ceases to take part in consideration of an appeal then being heard. The provisions in clause 42 regarding the determination of appeals are, again, similar to provisions in the Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1982.
Clauses 46 and 47 would re-enact the current provisions in the Broadcasting and Television Act where an officer or temporary employee refuses or fails to comply with a direction with respect to work that he is performing or is to perform. Division 4 of this Part of the Bill, which concerns redeployment and retirement of officers and employees of the Corporation, substantially reproduces the provisions of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1981. Redeployment and -retirement of its employees would be matters solely for the Corporation to determine, and would extend only to the possible redeployment of employees of the Corporation. Clause 58, which establishes a Tenure Appeal Board for the purposes of this Division of the Bill, provides, in sub-clause (10), for circumstances where a member of the Tenure Appeal Board ceases to be a Board member or is unable to take part in the determination of an appeal, after the appeal has commenced.
Part VI of the Bill, on the finances of the Corporation, contains unexceptional provisions relating to the moneys of the Corporation, the application of moneys and the preparation of annual Estimates. Clause 71 increases to $500,000, or such higher amount as might be prescribed by regulations, those contracts which are subject to approval of the Minister. That clause also authorises the Corporation, with the approval of the Minister, to enter into so-called lease-back contracts or arrangements in relation to real or personal property.
Part VII of the Bill deals with the technical services of the Corporation. The clauses in this Part are a significant re-definition of the responsibilities of the Corporation and of the Minister for the provision of technical services, resulting from the decision that the Corporation own and maintain its own transmitters. The subject of transmitter sites and equipment on those sites is rather complex. In many cases, transmitter sites are owned by the Commonwealth and contain facilities such as towers, aerials and buildings which are shared

by private organisations and other Commonwealth authorities. In other cases, ABC transmitters are on land which is owned by a private organisation or another Commonwealth authority, with sharing arrangements for the use of some facilities for ABC purposes.
Without pursuing a technical explanation of reasons for particular clauses of the Bill, I might just say that the purpose of these provisions is to vest in the Corporation the ownership and maintenance responsibility for transmitters which provide the Corporation services, with the Minister remaining responsible for the provision and maintenance of associated facilities on Commonwealth-owned transmitting sites which also provide services to other organisations. Where a Commonwealth transmitting site is used and will continue to be used solely to provide services of the ABC, the Minister may take action to transfer ownership of such sites to the Corporation.
Similar principles are embodied in clause 77, dealing with the use by the Corporation of satellite systems. An earth station accessing the satellite system may serve the needs of several Commonwealth authorities and/or other organisations. In such cases, the Bill provides that the Minister may provide a satellite earth station for use in connection with the operation of a transmitter of the Corporation. In other cases, the Corporation is responsible for providing, operating and maintaining satellite earth stations required to provide its broadcasting and television services.Where the Corporation shares with other users facilities provided by the Commonwealth, the Bill requires, in sub-clauses 76 (7) and 77 (3), that the Corporation pay to the Commonwealth the cost of operating and maintaining the facilities used by the Corporation.
Clauses 79 to 102, which comprise Part VIII of the Bill, concern the investigation of certain complaints about programs of the Corporation. Clause 80 establishes the Office of Commissioner for Complaints, with functions to investigate written complaints that a broadcasting or television program of the Corporation was inaccurate, unfair or biased; that there was an unwarranted intrusion into the privacy of a person in obtaining material for that program; that the program constituted an unwarranted invasion of the privacy of a person; or that the program was otherwise offensive.
By clauses 87 and 88 the Commissioner is appointed by the Governor-General and holds office for such period, not exceeding five years, as is specified in the instrument of appointment. The

Broadcasting Corporation Legis/ation

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1277

Commissioner is not required to investigate a complaint if he considers that the complaint is frivolous or vexatious or was not made in good faith, or that the complainant does not have a sufficient interest in the subject matter of the complaint. Clause 82 details certain procedural matters in relation to investigations by the Commissioner, and clause 83 sets out the powers of the Commissioner to require a person to furnish information or to produce documents and other records. By clause 84 the Commissioner may examine witnesses on oath or affirmation, and clause 85 empowers the Commissioner or a person authorised by him to enter premises of the Corporation for the purposes of this Part.
While the Commonwealth Ombudsman may refer to the Commissioner program complaints received by the Ombudsman, clause 97 provides that nothing in this Part of the Bill affects the Ombudsman's powers under the Ombudsman Act 1976. The intention of these provisions is to relieve some of the pressures on the Commonwealth Ombudsman by providing an alternative authority to investigate, in the first instance at least, complaints about programs of the ABC. The Government believes also that the creation of a statutory office with a specific authority to investigate such complaints will increase the community accountability of the ABC. Clause 106 extends the membership of the Joint Consultative Committee, as now specified in the Broadcasting and Television Act, to include representatives of staff associations.
Clause 107 permits the Corporation Board to make rules on a range of matters. Its principal application will be in relation to issues concerning employment in the service of the Corporation, which are now required to be prescribed by regulations under the Broadcasting and Television Act. Sections 48, 49 and 50 of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 apply to such rules. All rules would be required to be tabled in both Houses of the Parliament and would be subject to disallowance by either House. An explanatory memorandum will be available to honourable members and will give further details of the precise provisions of this Bill, to avoid taking unnecessary time in elaborate explanation of the detailed provisions of the Bill.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I have attempted to traverse in this speech only those clauses of the Bill in which I considered honourable members would have a particular interest. The Bill is somewhat complex. It not only deals with the restructuring of one of the most important Commonwealth authorities, and defines its new functions, powers

and responsibilities, but it also modernises legislation relating to the service of the Corporation and details the arrangements relating to the technical services required by the Corporation.
I am one of the vast majority of Australians who have been informed and entertained by ABC programs over the years. I believe that we all cherish, in our own ways, the ABC as an institution. We criticise it sometimes because, as it is a public authority, we believe we have a right to do so. Much of the criticism is unreasonable, but I imagine that those who have long work associations with the ABC have come to live with this. I believe that this Bill will provide the means for the ABC to take up its challenges with a new vigour and purpose. Any uncertainties about its charter, its responsibilites and its powers would be resolved. I am in no doubt that those who serve the ABC will employ their vast talents to ensure that the ABC sets standards of excellence which others will find it hard to emulate.
This matter started with a very thorough investigation of the ABC by the Dix Committee of Review. I must take this opportunity to thank Mr Dix and the members of his Committee for the valuable work they did. The Dix report is a very valuable document, probably one of the most valuable to have been produced in the Commonwealth in relation to broadcasting, television and related matters. It is indeed a very significant document, and I commend the Dix Committee for the work it did. Likewise, I believe that the Government is quite entitled to say that its analysis and acceptance of the Dix Committee's recommendations and its attitude with respect to those recommendations where we felt a different decision was called for is an approach which has been characterised by some basic principles, the most important of which is that the ABC should be a strong and independent body. I believe that the decisions the Government has taken, which I understand have wide support in the Opposition, will establish the ABC as a new, responsible and independent body with its own charter, knowing where it is going. This will be to the great benefit of the Australian people. I cc..mmend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING CORPORATION (TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AND CONSEQUENTIAL
AMENDMENTS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr N. A. Brown, and read a first time.

1278 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Broadcasting Corporation Legislation

Second Reading
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications) (2.40)--1 move:
That the Bil! be now read a second time.
As its title suggests, this Bill is complementary to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. The purposes of the Bill are to establish arrangements for the transfer of assets, rights, liabilities and staff of the Australian Broadcasting Commission to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, and to amend provisions of the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942 and other legislation as a consequence of the establishment of the new Corporation to replace the former Australian Broadcasting Commission.
This Bill will come into effect on the day fixed by proclamation for the commencement of those provisions of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill which establish the Corporation, specify its charter and define the duties of the Board of the Corporation. By clause 6, the Chairman, ViceChairman and other Commissioners of the Australian Broadcasting Commission cease to hold office on the date on which the Bill comes into effect, but the corporate identity of the former Commission is preserved. Under clause 8, the powers, rights, liabilities or obligations of the former Commission continue in respect of the new Corporation. Clause 9 is the saving provision for legal or other proceedings instituted by or against the former Commission while clause 9 (2) preserves any investigations being undertaken or proposed to be undertaken by the Commonwealth Ombudsman under the Ombudsman Act 1976.
Clause 11 continues the employment of officers or temporary employees of the former Commission as officers or temporary employees of the new Corporation. Sub-clause 11 (5) protects the rights of the general manager of the Commission, in the event that he is not appointed as managing director of the Corporation. Clause 12 continues in the Corporation those positions which existed in the Service of the former Commission, and clause 13 deals with provisional promotions which have not been confirmed before the new legislation becomes effective.
The next major provisions of the Bill are in clause 20 which concerns the transfer to the Service of the Corporation, of officers and employees of the Telecommunications Commission who have functional responsibilities for the maintenance of transmitters of the national broadca-sting and television services. Sub-clause 20 (2) provides

that the Chief General Manager of the Telecommunications Commission and the managing director of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation may declare, by notice published in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette, that work or class of work previously performed under the control of the Telecommunications Commission will, on a specified date, be performed under the control of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Before publication of such a notice, sub-clause 20 (3) authorises the Chief General Manager of the Telecommunications Commission to notify an officer or employee who is engaged in work to be subject of such a notification, that the officer or temporary employee may elect to be transferred to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Service.
Where officers or employees of the Telecommunications Commission elect to transfer to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Service, sub-clauses 5 and 6 ensure their rights of appointment to positions within the new Service without loss of salary and generally to preserve leave and other entitlements which they had accrued as officers or employees of the Telecommunications Commission. Part III of the Bill is concerned with consequential amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942. By clause 24, the Broadcasting Tribunal is required to include in its annual report particulars of television programs for children which the Corporation referred to the Tribunal for classification under section 30 of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Act 1982.
There are certain provisions in the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942 which now apply to both the ABC and the Special Broadcasting Service. As the Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982 now sets out the specific provisions for the Corporation it is necessary to maintain the application of the corresponding provisions in the Broadcasting and Television Act to the Special Broadcasting Service. These matters are dealt with in clause 27 in relation to publications and recordings; clause 29 concerning the provision of studios; clause 30 on the broadcasting and televising of matter in the national interest; clause 32 on exemption from taxation; clause 33 on responsibilities of the provision of technical equipment; and clause 34 on electricity lines to transmitting stations.
Most of the remaining clauses are to delete references to the present Commission and substitute references to the Corporation in provisions of the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, the Copyright Act 1968, the Parliamentary Proceedings Broadcasting Act 1946 and the Telecommunications Act 1975. To assist honourable members

Special Prosecutors Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1279

there is an explanatory memorandum to this Bill. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.
SPECIAL PROSECUTORS BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 8 September, on motion by Mr N. A. Brown:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (2.46)-The Special Prosecutors Bill 1982 was introduced into the House only yesterday. The Government has requested the co-operation of the Opposition so that the matter can be dealt with today. We are prepared to co-operate with the Government's wishes. However, let me make a few observations. The Bill will provide for special prosecution and it appoints special prosecutors who have clear authority and independence, so it said. The real reason is said to be the massive taxation frauds that have now been discovered, called bottom-of-the-harbour schemes and other titles. It will also be a method of ensuring recovery, by civil remedies, of the enormous amount of money that has been lost. It is no exaggeration to say that it runs into billions of dollars. It certainly could be as high as $15 billion.
The task of the special prosecutors will be in relation to breaches of laws both of the Commonwealth and the Territories. They will also be able to conduct prosecutions for offences against the laws of a State where the prosecutor receives the appropriate appointment under the relevant State law. In view of the disclosures in both the McCabe-Lafranchi report and the Costigan report I think it is very clear that the existing law has always been adequate. That point was emphasised.
The real issue now is that the Government is perhaps trying to create the impression that it needs this special law. We have no objection to it but we should not be misled into thinking there was a gap or a need to pass a law to enable prosecution. It looks very much as though we have shut the door after the horse has gone. There was no need to adopt the strategy of introducing the Bill yesterday and having it passed today so that it can go to the Senate. Certainly we may need some independent Commonwealth prosecuting agency, but this is only a political response to the Government's political dilemma. Once the prosecutions start, because there will be so many of them, one can envisage that the courts of this land will be bogged down for a long time indeed. This comes back to the question that we have been raising in the course of the debates of recent days as to what

went wrong with the Attorney-General's Department, particularly the Crown Solicitor's Division, both in Canberra and the States, and what was wrong with the Department of the Treasury and the Treasurer (Mr Howard). We make no apology for demanding the resignations of the Ministers involved because of the ineptitudes shown. The fact that there will be prosecutions does not guarantee that we will get the criminals if they have already left the country; nor does it guarantee that we will get the money.
Let us look at the background of some of the matters which were certainly known. I refer to the Joint Management Review of the Crown Solicitor's Division. I repeat what that Joint Management Review found, over two years ago, when that information was given to the Attorney General. It stated amongst other things:
(a) ineffective officers are left in supervisory positions. (b) in respect of the tax avoidance cases, the officers con-
ducting these cases are relatively inexperienced in taxation law.
To think that we now have to bear the brunt of that negligence is quite unforgiveable. This morning I asked the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) if he could just limit it to negligence. If one relies on that in respect of a few public servants, about the best one could do with them under the Public Service Act is to sack them. But when I look at the fact that billions of dollars have gone, and in some cases there seems to have been some conspiracy between those who got the benefit of not paying taxes and the public servants who did not properly discharge their duties, whether it be due to ineptitude, negligence or whatever, I cannot for the life of me fail to notice that never, at any stage, was the Solicitor-General involved in any of these matters. He is the second law officer, an admirable man, a man who is used to practising in the courts. The charter of a Solicitor-General is to conduct litigation on behalf of the Government and to advise the Government in respect of the law. Why was this not done over a period of years? Mr Byers has undoubted ability. I cannot, for the life of me, understand why a Government is ignoring the fact that never, at any stage--
Mr Ruddock-Sorry, that is not so. The Attorney-General mentions clearly in his speech that the opinion of the Solicitor-General was sought.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable gentlemen will proceed.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I was waiting for that interjection. Honourable members will notice when it was given. That is the point. It was the July statement. Let us make that very clear. I

1280 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Special Prosecutors Bill

do not want to delay the House too long but the honourable member has now opened it up. In the June statement of the Treasurer he made it very clear that all the evidence had shown that there were not sufficient grounds for a prosecution. In his statement of July this year, he says: 'Of course, I do advert to what I said before. I have now received advice from the Solicitor-General that the prosecution in a particular case could proceed'.
I do not want to delay the House by having to answer interjections. It is very clear from the Costigan report on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union and the McCabe-Lafranchi report that evidence always existed. It is clear from Costigan and McCabeLafranchi that the Solicitor-General is exempt. He was never involved. The people who are involved are certainly those in the Crown Solicitor's Office and certainly the Treasury and the Taxation Office because revenue was not collected.
Mr Ruddock-It was sought.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-No, it was not sought but the Attorney-General has a responsibility--
Mr Ruddock-It was sought.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-It was not sought in respect of these matters. It was admitted in July this year as having been sought in one case. I make that very clear because the interjection casts the aspersion that the Solicitor-General did not know the law. I make this point: If one has a series of public servants who are not in practice-which is the problem-and if there are other factors and the remedy to be suggested that they be dealt with for negligence, I suggest that it would not be a bad idea for the Solicitor-General also to get involved in the prosecution, not to hound public servants but to see whether there was not some method of giving some reward under the Secret Commissions Act. Honourable members should not just look at the fact that there was negligence or ineptitudethat is obvious-but whether anybody got some ill-gotten gain under the Secret Commissions Act. It is not much good telling us now that these people retired because of ill health or something of that nature. If we are talking about crimewhich we are-and we want to get the criminals we also have to see whether anybody else got some benefit. We should not just treat it on the basis that the best thing to do is to sack them. If they got money by way of secret commissions they should be dealt with under the Act. That would require certain advice to the Government. But nothing has been done about that.

The point that I want to emphasise is the proposal to have this independent Special Prosecutor. The Bill is interesting. Clause 6 (I) states:
The functions of a Special Prosecutor are-
(a) in respect of such matters or classes of matters as the Attorney-General . . . published in the Gazette.
I do not know whether leaving it to the Attorney General is altogether the most intelligent result for the nation in view of what has already happened. Clause 6 (2) states:
The institution or carrying on by a Special Prosecutor of a prosecution for an offence against a law . . . or any other Act . . . in relation to such a prosecution, shall not be challenged or called in question . . . on the ground that the prosecution did not relate to a matter specified by the Attorney-General . . .
That might be a bit better. The issue is that we have some concept that the Attorney-General is going to give us some advice as to the classes of matters. The law is very clear and both Mr Costigan and Messrs McCabe and Lafranchi understand it perfectly. It ought to be applied. I think the special prosecutors that we are going to have will be experienced and will be able to readily apply the law. Perhaps the evidence will be a little difficult to get.
I do not want to see this Attorney-General having so much influence over the Special Prosecutor. Unfortunately, the Attorney-General is going to determine the remuneration and allowances of the Special Prosecutor. I see no reason why that should not be done quickly by the Remuneration Tribunal.
In the second reading speech the emphasis was on independence. When we talk about the independence of the Special Prosecutor, if he wants to employ such persons as he thinks necessary to help fulfil the task he must have the approval of the Attorney-General to make the appointments. This really is contrary to the thrust of what the Government is about. Why is the Attorney-General to have such an oversight of this matter considering the miserable results that we have had from him and the difficulties in his Department that I have mentioned? We just cannot have laws saying that somebody else mayor may not do something. The law exists and it should be prosecuted to the utmost of vigilance. In the light of the facts that we now have there is a massive amount of information within what is called the Costigan Royal Commission. I hope that Commission remains. I expect it will, although there is some doubt now. It may be subsumed by what is called the National Crimes Commission. I think that would be counterproductive at this stage.

Special Prosecutors Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1281

Mr Costigan has an enormous amount of material, a great amount of expertise and the ability to analyse material by computer print-out. What better briefing could there be for these prosecutors than to be attached to the Costigan machinery of diagnosis and compilation. It is all there. The help coming from the McCabeLafranchi report is not to be ignored.
Why is this Act so necessary and urgent when in fact it is not? We do not want the people of Australia to be hoodwinked into thinking that something is going to be done to retrieve the situation. At best we want to see that the criminals and those who have avoided tax go to gaol, as they will if they are dealt with. That would deter others from getting involved in this issue.
What has happened to the Government's ability to understand its own law? What about its inability to prosecute that law and in my view, despite what others may think, the complete ignoring of the Solicitor-General's office and the failure to use him? He is the second crown law officer. I again want to remind the nation of some of the problems this area of government seems to have been facing over a long period. Honourable members heard a question was asked this morning by a member of the Opposition who is of Greek origin. It is understandable that he would ask a question about what is called the Greek conspiracy case. I happen to know that some of the matters that were adverted to in the summing up of that case-the accused were all releasedrelate to the administration of this Government. It applies to the whole Government, not just the Attorney-General, because the case ran for a long period. I want to sum up this matter by reading something. Counsel for the Greeks had this to say about this Government's legal representatives:
. . . this nation's legal representatives have today sought to cover their utter humiliation and bankruptcy of spirit, decency and justice by sickening words of self-justification and naked cover up.
This applies to the sort of people who fail to do anything about the cheats and those who were guilty of fraud but apparently were doing everything about some people who have now been found to be innocent.
Mr Ruddock-Who said that? Was it Mr Einfeld?
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Yes, he said it and they were acquitted. Does the honourable member want to say that he should not have said it?
Mr Ruddock-No. I am interested that he said it. I wondered who the counsel was. I thought it might have been Mr Rofe.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-One could not imagine Mr Rofe talking about himself that way. I am astounded that the honourable member cannot understand what I have just said. Counsel made the following point:
Not one word of apology . . . not once a recognition of the tragedy they have wrought . . . not once a voluntary confession of the hopeless failure of this malicious persecution.
What sort of advice was being given to this Government? Why were those people indicted when I understand that no real information had been found at the time they were arrested? Is it not remarkable that crooks in this country can get away for years, but innocent people allegedly getting a pension illegally are hounded, charged and arrested. No information had been found. On what sort oflegal advice was the Government acting? Counsel for the defence made this point:
Not a passing word about the wholesale and profligate waste of $20m of public funds on a fruitless, utterly misconceived personally motivated escapade . . . that would have done Goebbels proud.
Is it not about time the Government got rid of its Attorney-General (Senator Durack) and those officers who allowed this to happen? How can the Attorney-General justify what he is doing now by saying: 'I have really got an efficient Department'? In the case 1 have mentioned a number of people were charged with conspiracy. That course of action failed miserably, even though the Government spent $20m of taxpayers' money and not one ounce of compensation has been given to any of these people. I think it is outrageous. I am certain that the Solicitor-General would never have encouraged the prosecution. He certainly would not have encouraged the launching of it when there was no evidence. It was found, as a result of examination in the witness box, that the only evidence came from a fellow called Nakis, who was granted a pardon and paid $200,000. That was the basis of the Crown's case. Surely, the Government should have a good look at its motivation. What was its legal advice in that case? No worthy counsel would have conducted a prosecution on that basis. Let us look at how the Crown-the same Crown that 1 am concerned might mastermind the prosecution in other cases-acted in respect of those people. The Crown Solicitor was asked to drop charges-this was ignored-throughout 1978 and 1979. As I said, the case collapsed in 1982. But the Crown opposed applications for the return of a passport for one gentleman who wanted to see his dying mother in Greece. Another person wanted to see his ailing brother. His application was opposed.

1282 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Special Prosecutors Bill

Another person wanted to see his wife and children, who wanted their father. His application was opposed.
We understand now that a number of the crooks we are trying to catch have already left the country. A double standard applies. The Crown opposed strenuously, even before the High Court of Australia, an application by the defence for particulars of the charges of conspiracy. What sort of a rotten administration do we have? The Government has trundled in this legislation. We do not oppose it but we question whether it will remedy the defect. There is something rotten throughout the Attorney-General's Department and there is something malicious about its motivation in actions such as this.
It is incredible to think that there could have been a massive reduction in revenue. It shows clearly why the Government had to increase indirect taxation. It had got as much as it could from the pay-as-you-earn taxpayers. It had got less than ever out of the corporate structure, but it made up for this in indirect taxes. It is inexcusable that we had to rely on the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union and the Corporate Affairs Commission in Victoria to find out that revenue was not being collected and that crime was being committed. Unless those two commissions had been established we still would not know of this. Why are we paying officers in the relevant departments? Why do we have Ministers who cannot even lay down instructions as to what should be brought before them and how their departments should be run? Surely the Treasury should have asked why it was losing so much revenue from the corporate sector. Surely it knew, as Costigan says, that criminals were involved. If officers in the Treasury had spoken to the taxation commissioners over a long period surely they would have known that company registrations were high but the particulars returned each year were low. Surely they would know of the opinions on the law that had been given by learned counsel in a number of States. The Government is saying: 'We will start again now and we will bring in a law to establish special prosecutors'. Of course we can have them. We could have had them all the time. Why did the Government go to so much effort in the case I have just mentioned, about which counsel for the defence stated:
. . . innocent victims of the biggest frame up in Australian judicial history. Not a moment of recognition of their anguish!
The Government's actions do not sit together. In the areas where the Government should have been doing something it did nothing. In the areas

where it should have been doing nothing, it hounded people for years and spent at least $20m but did not offer them one cent in compensation. There is a smell of corruption in that case. Counsel for the prosecution was no stranger to the Government. I want to know what advice was given to guarantee the prosecution. The magistrate is to be applauded for suggesting that one of the Government's assistants in the case might be dealt with in another area. Is it not incredible that the Parliament has been asked today to deal urgently with something which is elementary? We will not oppose the legislation but we ask why it has been brought in with such drama. The answer is, of course, that if prosecutions had been launched in 1974-75 when Mr Brinsden, QC., gave his opinions the rot could have been stopped. As the McCabe-Lafranchi report stated, these criminals had a lot of nerve when they knew that the Government was not prepared to do anything. That nerve has led to thousands of frauds which will be almost impossible to process through the courts and the loss of billions of dollars which it will be impossible to collect.
In conclusion, we have no objection to this legislation. We would like to see the Attorney General out of the matter altogether and out of his office. Certainly, we should have prosecutions that are independent and relate to real evidence obtained by Costigan and others. This legislation is a sad admission of Government neglect. It does nothing for the cause of justice. I hope that those right-minded members of the Government will clean out these departments, have a good look at what has gone wrong in the past and, for once, use the Solicitor-General to give them some advice as to how to apply their own laws.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (3.7)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I thank you for the call on this important matter. I rise to speak in support of the Special Prosecutors Bill. I would like, firstly, to welcome the support given to the Bill by the Opposition. I certainly thank the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) for the co-operation offered in ensuring that the legislation receives a speedy passage. I regret to say that that is all I wish to welcome from his speech. I thought it somewhat negative after his initial comments. He was certainly not prepared to acknowledge the Government's very positive response to the report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, of which this Bill forms an important part. The Government has responded quickly and promptly to the recommendations of the Royal Commission which-the Opposition fails to acknowledge this-was established by this Government jointly

Special Prosecutors Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1283

with the former Liberal Government of Victoria. That fact ought not to be forgotten. It was because of the concern that this Government had for the activities of the Ship Painters and Dockers Union, which activities were so clearly revealed in that Royal Commission report, that the Commission was established. The Government's justification for initiating that Royal Commission has been well and truly established by the nature of the recommendations dealing with the Ship Painters and Dockers Union.
I do not intend to canvas that part of the Commission's report. Unlike the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, I do not intend to roam so widely over such a range of matters that one might claim that I am not speaking to the Bill itself. Clearly, this Bill is an important part of the Government's response to the Royal Commission report. It is to ensure that there is appointed a special prosecutor, a person of the utmost capacity and ability who will have the necessary support to enable him to bring to book those people who had been involved in setting up the taxation frauds known as bottom-of-the-harbour schemes. The Government is determined to recover the amounts of tax involved from those who have benefited from the schemes. It is determined to prosecute those people who have been involved in the fraudulent aspects of those schemes. The speedy passage of this legislation will enable the establishment of a prosecutor and an office for that task to be undertaken.
This is not the only part of the Government's response to the Royal Commission report. I mention three other aspects of the Government's response-it is a total response-to this report. In the speech made by the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) we have already had reference to the establishment by the Government of a special adviser to advise on these bottom-of-theharbour cases. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition has tried to suggest that it is a black and white case, that it is quite clear, that there was a capacity on the part of the Government to move immediately in relation to these cases and that in some way the Government has been lacking the conviction and the resolution necessary to bring about these prosecutions. He has even suggested that there may have been some corruption involved in that. I have to say that it is quite clear from the speech that the Attorney-General made several days ago in relation to this matter that this question is not one that is without doubt. Mr Gleeson, Q.c., a very well known and a highly respected Queen's Counsel of Sydney, has already been retained as a special adviser on the cases that

were the subject of mention in the Royal Commission report.
Before this report was a matter of controversy in this chamber, the Government had arranged through the Crown Solicitor's Office to put together the major test case-that is, the case in Perth that, it is alleged, was left in the bottom drawer. The special officer who went to Perth spent 80 hours putting the case together. A brief was delivered to Mr Gleeson, Q.c., for his advice. As a result of Mr Costigan's view and the judgment that has been referred to, Mr Gleeson looked at the question of whether a prosecution could be initiated immediately on the evidence available. The Attorney-General has said that Mr Gleeson advises that further inquiries are necessary before that prosecution can proceed. I think that is a matter that ought to be known. It ought to be understood. The person who has to prosecute the case, the person who will have to go into the court and establish to the satisfaction of a judge that all the necessary elements to achieve a conviction are present, is the person whose advice on this matter should be accepted. His advice at the moment is that, until further inquiries are made, he is not in a position to say with absolute certainty that a conviction could be achieved.
I think honourable members opposite would certainly be of the view, as I am, that it would be almost a catastrophe if a prosecution in this area were launched and it failed through want of evidence. I think it is of the utmost importance that we be assured that when this case goes to court there is evidence available to ensure a conviction. Of course, I think it is to the Government's credit that a special adviser, a person of Mr Gleeson's capacity, has been retained in this matter. That is a very important part of the Government's total response to the Royal Commission report.
The second leg I mention is the independent inquiry initiated by the Government into the professional competence of the Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office in Perth and the supervision of that office by the central office in Canberra. Obviously, that matter has been raised in this House and in other places. It has been of concern to honourable members and the Government. Opposition members who asked questions are not the only people who are concerned about proceeding to a resolution of these matters. The Government is equally concerned. As a result, Mr Tony Smith, was nominated by the President of the Law Council of Australia to undertake this task. Mr Smith is a Melbourne solicitor of high standing and a former President of the Law Institute of Victoria and the treasurer of the Law Council of Australia. Mr Smith will be conducting that very important

1284 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Special Prosecutors Bill

inquiry. I think that was another very important part of the Government's response to this Royal Commission report.
The third aspect of the report, of course, is the foreshadowed intention of the Government to establish a national crimes commission. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) indicated in the way in which he does in these matters, with the utmost clarity and resolution, that even if objections were raised by the States to a cooperative arrangement and even if there were an objection, as has been foreshadowed, from the Opposition to the establishment of a national crimes commission this matter will proceed. There is a determination on the part of the Government to ensure that these people who have been guilty of wrong doings are brought to trial, where that is possible, and certainly held to account for their actions. There is a concern-I hope that it is a concern of both sides of the House-about the nature of the criminal activity that has been revealed by this Royal Commission. Certainly, the Government wants to see this sort of activity brought to an end. We want to establish the mechanisms whereby those who are guilty of this sort of activity are brought to trial and convicted and certainly put out of action insofar as their criminal activities are concerned.
This Special Prosecutors Bill is an important part of the Government's response to the Royal Commission report. I make that point again. One wants to be cautious, I think, about the nature of the schemes that have been uncovered and the statements that are made about the amounts of money that might be recovered. I am not an expert in these matters but I would not like to be saddled with the sort of remarks that were made by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. He said that there was a prospect, if properly pursued, that some $15 billion might be recovered from these schemes. I think a more proper estimate was given in the Budget as to what the Department of the Treasury thinks is the likely outcome of these prosecutions and those made under the further legislation that will be necessary to recover moneys from those who benefited from the results of these schemes. That amount is put in the order of $480m. I might be wrong on that precise figure; I do not wed myself to it but I think the amount that the Treasury has estimated in the Budget could be recovered is of that order. Certainly, one ought not to go around hawking the view that of the order of $15 billion might be recovered from these schemes. I think that is clearly an exaggeration. If the Deputy Leader of the Opposition were in government I think he would find it very

difficult to substantiate where those sorts of figures come from and even more difficult to recover moneys of that order-even when taking similar steps to those that the Government has taken or the further steps that the Opposition might take at some point in the future.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition suggested that the Government had been wanting in its resolution to bring about these prosecutions. He was critical of the Attorney-General and the Treasurer in relation to their resolution in these matters. His criticism was most unfair. I think it ought to be recorded that the Royal Commissioner, Mr Costigan, certainly had regard to the statutory limitations that prevented the Treasurer and the Attorney-General from knowing the detail of the cases in which these bottomof-the-harbour schemes were involved. He made it very clear that the secrecy provisions were a very effective bar to proper ministerial supervision. I think it would be timely for me to remind the Deputy Leader of the Opposition of what Mr Costigan, the Royal Commissioner, had to say on this matter. In paragraph 3.11 of the report on page 25 he stated:
I will have more to say about the desirability of a secrecy provision that has this effect at a later stage in my Report. It is sufficient to say, at this stage, that the secrecy provision has been an effective bar to proper ministerial supervision of the discharge of duty by both the Australian Taxation Office and the Crown Solicitor's Office. From time to time. I have observed comments being made that the secrecy provision does not prevent discussion of what is euphemistically described as "general policy matters". Such an observation was made by way of criticism of Messrs McCabe and Lafranchi, who, it was said, could have spoken to Senior Officers of the Australian Taxation Office about such matters. I have no doubt that the secrecy provisions do not prevent discussion of "general policy matters". However, policy arises out of particular problems and needs knowledge of those problems to be effectively based.
Clearly, the Commissioner knew that the Treasurer and the Attorney-General could not be properly informed or properly advised on the nature of the problem in the Western Australian Deputy Crown Solicitor's Office, and clearly and consciously, having regard to the sorts of comments that have been made about other reports he thought it proper to write into his report something on the question of ministerial rsponsibility. Mr Costigan is an independent royal commissioner. Some people have suggested that politically his associations would be closer to those of the Opposition than those of the Government. I do not offer that as a criticism of the Commissioner. I offer the comment in support of the honourable way in which he as the Commissioner, notwithstanding what one might want if one wanted to characterise him being in the pocket of the Australian Labor Party, had the courage to

I Special Prosecutors Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1285

stand up and say that in no way could the Treasurer and the Attorney-General be held responsible in these matters. He had to say there could not be, because of the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act, effective ministerial supervision in relation to these matters. That is what Mr Costigan had to say. To continue to suggest that in some way the Attorney or the Treasurer were derelict in their duties is most unfair to those Ministers and, I think, is a quite improper use of the Costigan report having regard to the statements made by the Commissioner.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition suggested that when these prosecutions start the courts might be bogged down and demands might be made as to where we went wrong and so on. I would have to say that there can always be delays in relation to prosecutions, in relation to establishing the evidence and getting proceedings before courts. That is not a matter which we are familiar with in the Commonwealth area only; it is a matter that is a problem in all the States of Australia and it is a matter upon which Attorneys-General of various political persuasions have to comment from time to time. Clearly, as far as the Government is concerned, it believes that in this area of taxation fraud the Government needs to have people with the utmost capacity and ability, the best people available, to ensure that these prosecutions are pursued. That is the reason for this legislation. It is also a reason for the clause, which the Deputy Leader of the Opposition criticised, giving the Attorney the right to fix the terms and conditions of appointment of the Special Prosecutor and the removal of that matter from the hands of the Remuneration Tribunal. I think all honourable members, even though they may not be happy at the nature of the fees that can be charged by the legal profession, would at least have knowledge--
Mr Scholes-It depends on whether you are a lawyer.
Mr RUDDOCK-Perhaps some members of the Opposition would like to go back and share in those possible fees. They would at least, I am sure, have knowledge of the nature and extent of those fees. I do not think that, in terms of making a contractual arrangement, it is simply a matter of saying: 'We will put this off and leave it to the Remuneration Tribunal at some future time to fix a fee that is appropriate'. I think we would have great difficulty in engaging the sort of special prosecutor who is needed in these matters if we were to ask him to wait for his fee to be fixed by the Remuneration Tribunal. He would rightly say: 'Before you appoint me I expect you to come to some firm arrangement as to my fees.' The clause as it

stands is appropriate and certainly very necessary in relation to this legislation.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition has commented that the Government in some way has wanted to avoid involving the Solicitor-General in giving advice in these matters. I do not know the nature of all the matters referred to the Solicitor General. He happens to be one man, a very competent man, a man I know and respect, but a man who is asked to advise on a whole range of matters for the Government. When the report of the Royal Commission was tabled in this House by the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown), he stated:
Attention is also being given as a matter of priority to the prosecution of offences associated with "bottom of the harbour" tax evasion schemes which are referred to in Volume I.
In June this year the Treasurer and the Attorney-General took steps to obtain advice from the Solicitor-General in regard to the availability of prosecution action in the particular case dealt with in Chapter 3 of Volume I.
The Solicitor-General, in an opinion delivered later in the same month, advised that certain remedies were open.
It was then stated that advice was sought from other senior counsel. I do not think there has been any evidence offered that the Solicitor-General has been bypassed in these matters.
Mr Lionel Bowen-In June this year.
Mr RUDDOCK-Yes. I thought the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith was suggesting that in some way we doubted the capacity of the Solicitor-General to advise in these matters. I think that is certainly not the case. The Solicitor General is a very respected and eminent Queen's Counsel and his advice has been sought by the Government in these matters.
Merltion was made also of the comments of Mr Einfeld in the Greek conspiracy case. Mr Einfeld, QC., is a counsel in Sydney whom I also know and v~ry much respect. I briefed him on numbers of occasions in matters involving clients when I was practising law. I must say that I thought, from listening to the comments of Mr Einfeld, that on that occasion they were somewhat embellished. One could almost have thought that they were somewhat political in overtones, having regard to the nature of that case. I think the comments ought to be seen in that context. That is no reflection upon Mr Einfeld because, as I said, I regard him as a very competent counsel. However, I think his remarks ought to be seen in that light.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.

1286 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Special Prosecutors Bill

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker. The honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) made two comments on which I would like to set the record straight. Never at any stage did I suggest that the Solicitor-General was lacking in competence, and I think it was reprehensible of the honourable member to say so. I said that he had never been consulted, and the honourable member for Dundas by way of interjection said yes, he had. We both agreed it was this year, in June, which I think was a little late. The other point I wish to make is that I never said that we would expect to get $15 billion from these proceedings. I said that $15 billion has been lost. I went on to talk about that calculation in respect of indirect taxation.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKERDoes the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr RUDDOCK-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker. If I have suggested in any way that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) was disparaging of the Solicitor-General or of his competence I apologise. I will check the greens because I would not have suggested that. I positively assert my own confidence in the SolicitorGenerals competence.
Mr Lionel Bowen-That's two of us.
Mr RUDDOCK-Yes, and I am pleased the Deputy Leader of the Opposition joins with me on that matter.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr STEELE HALL (Boothby) (3.30)-1 would like to refer briefly to several clauses and to put to the Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General (Mr N. A. Brown) several questions on which he might be able to help me. I refer to clause 5 which, of course, is a very short one and which empowers the appointment of a special prosecutor. I would like to ask a very elementary question, I suppose: Why is he being appointed? An immediate response seems to come to mind-we are in the throes of discussing a massive fraud against Commonwealth revenues and a failure over a long number of years of the Attorney-General's

Department to produce the paper work and evidence for prosecutions. I guess we all assume that the support from both sides of the house for this measure to appoint a special prosecutor is to overcome those long years of lethargy.
However, I would have thought that one of the best ways of reforming a department which has been lax would be for that department to reorganise itself and to be deeply involved in the prosecutions which are necessary. It would seem to me that nothing would do more for the morale of that department than for it to pick up the work about which it has been so negligent in the past. Therefore, I would like the Minister to respond, if he would care to do so directly, to why we seem to be prosecuting the peripheral people involved in the deficiencies of the Attorney-General's Department in way off parts of Australia and yet there seem to be no evident measures aimed at the core of the Department, which must bear responsibility for the deficiencies which have arisen. In view of the apparent lack of any action at the core of the problem, and if the Department's work is to be taken over by an outside prosecutor, how is the Department to proceed with honour and with vigour about its work? It would seem to me that this is a distinct vote of no confidence in the Department's ability to rehabilitate itself.
I refer to clause 6 where the functions of the special prosecutor are set out in some detail in five sub-clauses. Does the Minister have information as to how the prosecutor will proceed? We have been informed of impending legislation which will be retrospective. It is not yet through the Parliament and some opposition to that legislation has been expressed with vigour. Is it the intention that the prosecutor will proceed under existing laws? Of course, this is an important question because the contention of the Costigan report is that prosecutions could have proceeded under existing laws. Therefore, I would like to know whether it is envisaged that the prosecutor will proceed in the way in which Mr Costigan said proceedings could have been launched in the mid-1970s or whether he is to rely on prospective legislation yet to be put through the Parliament.
I refer to clause 7. I notice that the directions and guidelines to the special prosecutor are dealt with in sub-clause (1) which, in part, states:
The Attorney-General may, by notice in writing, give directions or furnish guidelines . . .
I know that this is a subject of some delicacy but the Attorney-General's Department was strongly criticised in the Costigan report for not being forthcoming. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his reply to the McCabe-Lafranchi report detailed

Special Prosecutors Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1287

the long years during which nothing of any substance occurred with respect to taking note of the early advice in 1974 that proceedings could occur. It seems to me that the special prosecutor is to be launched with the old, failed machinery. I would like to know how the Minister envisages the reform of the machinery which has failed in the past but which now is to launch these vital prosecutions. I do not ask these questions in the form of strident criticism. Like so many of my electors, I am bemused about this whole question, and I am confused and suffering some revulsion at the political mess which is emerging from it.
Mr Hurford-Hear, hear!
Mr STEELE HALL-May I say to the gentleman from the Labor Party: There is no credit for members of that party in trying to assess individual victims of their criticism for political gain. It is a far greater question than that and the public want it to be dealt with at a higher level than that. I think some of these questions need to be answered on a much wider scale than I have asked them here today. I think it would be a good thing if some of the admissions about this matter which are already on paper are assumed to be so in the current debate so that we can continue with vigour to attack the problem. Whilst we assume that electoral necessity and the revelations which are coming thick and fast will be the spur for action, it is quite clear that the basis for it and the instructions given to the special prosecutor will come from the old machinery of an unreformed department which is responsible for many of the deficiencies which are now outlined. I would like the Minister's opinion about the matter.
Mr Donald Cameron-Mr Deputy Chairman-
Mr Lionel Bowen-We had an agreement about this matter.
Mr Donald Cameron-If there is an agreement, I won't do anything to break that agreement. I was unaware of it and if you would prefer me--
Mr Lionel Bowen-Check with your Whip.
Mr Donald Cameron-He is not around. Are you happy for me to make some brief observations?
Mr Lionel BowenThere's a whole lot of people on this side would like to make some points too.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Jarman)-I call the Minister.
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond ValleyMinister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General) (3.38)-If the

honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) has some comments, I would be quite happy to discuss them with him and to try to resolve particular problems that he has. But I understand that there was an agreement with the Opposition about this matter. I turn to the three matters raised by the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall). I will answer them in the order in which he raised them. First of all, the honourable member asked in effect: Why is the special prosecutor being appointed? What is so special about it? Why is this method being used? The answers to that really are twofold. First, as was said in the second reading speech, the intention is to have the special prosecutor deal with exceptional cases. I suppose that if there is one thing upon which there is a lot of common ground with respect to what are now the so-called bottom-of-the-harbour schemes it is that we are dealing with cases which are exceptional in many ways. It was felt by the Government that an appropriate way of dealing with these matters was in effect by exceptional means, means whereby we would be using-this is really the second reason for following this path-in effect an independent actor or operator in the procedures which we have in mind. The emphasis is to be placed on his independence. Of course, that has been the situation in the United States where, we are told, there has been a degree of success in the involvement of an independent actor in the procedures which are followed with respect both to criminal and civil matters. That is really a twofold answer to the first question that the honourable member asked, namely, that we are dealing with exceptional cases, both civil and criminal, which will be given to the special prosecutor and that, above all, the means is a resort to an independent person. It is important that that point should be made.
I think I put it fairly when I say that the honourable member then said: 'You are resorting to this new means, which may well be justified, but nothing is being done within the Department itself. I would like to make two points with respect to that. The first is that things are being done within the Department itself. I refer particularly to the Perth division of the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor's Office. The Government has made it very plain that it is concerned about delays that have occurred in that office, the effectiveness of the office and the services provided by it to its client departments. Our response has been to invite the President of the Law Council of Australia to nominate a suitable solicitor to carry out a review and investigation of the Perth office. The President of the Law Council of Australia has recommended such a person. That appointment

1288 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Special Prosecutors Bill

has been announced already. One could reasonably expect that he will be starting his work shortly with the result that the efficiency of that office should improve greatly and that it will provide the services which both the Government and the people expect.
I should say that one should not assume that the Attorney-General's Department as a whole will have no part to play in the workings of the special prosecutor in these matters. The Attorney General's Department will in fact be involved, and quite properly so. I draw the attention of honourable members to clause 18 of the Bill which provides:
In addition to persons employed or engaged under section 17, a Special Prosecutor shall be assisted by-
(a) persons appointed or employed under the Public Service Act 1922 whose services are made available to that Special Prosecutor; . . .
Now, as I understand it, the services of officers of the Attorney-General's Department will be made available to the special prosecutor and the Department generally will participate in the whole of the support task force which will be provided to the special prosecutor. We have no doubt that those means will enable the special prosecutor to perform fully and adequately the tasks given to him under this legislation.
The honourable member for Boothby referred secondly to the question of retrospective legislation. He asked whether the special prosecutor would be operating under existing law or whether he would be using or availing himself of some retrospective legislation. The answer to that question is that the special prosecutor will be enforcing the law as it exists. He will be concerned with existing law in the sense that it will be the law that is in existence at the time he is using it. It should be understood that the special prosecutor will not be a law maker. He will not have the power to affect people's rights or liberties; he will be an instrument and his functions will be to initiate or to carry out prosecutions and to undertake, coordinate and supervise civil proceedings. He will not make laws; he will enforce them. He will ensure that the country obtains the result that it wants from the laws that are passed. So in this context there is really no question of retrospective legislation because he will enforce the law as it exists. If the operations of any Act of this Parliament are retrospective in any way-I am not suggesting for one moment that there will be any legislation that can properly be described in this way-of course the special prosecutor will seek to enforce that law also. He will enforce all of the law that has effect at the time.

The third matter that the honourable member for Boothby raised related to directions which are given to the special prosecutor under clause 7 of the Bill. To a large extent the answer to this is part of the answer that I gave with respect to his first question; that is, that the Government is, of course, concerned about the workings of parts, certainly, of the Attorney-General's Department. We have already announced our response to resolve those difficulties. There is no point in my going over the whole matter here again at this stage. Let me simply draw the honourable member's attention to the fact that the directions provided for in clause 7 are to be given by the Attorney-General. The power will not be delegated. The Attorney-General will be fixed with the responsibility of giving those directions. That, as with everything else, is something for which, under the Constitution, the Attorney General as the responsible Minister will be personally responsible.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (3.45)-1 do not intend to delay the Committee for long at all. The response of the Minister for Communications (Mr N. A. Brown) to the matter raised by the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) is very much akin to saying that the Government has appointed a special investigator to investigate the quarantine station at Cocos Island to see whether he can find anything wrong with the Attorney-General's Department.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (3.46)-1 wish to refer to clause 11 of this Bill which relates to remuneration and allowances. The Government has had to prepare the Bill in such a way as to provide that the special prosecutor or special prosecutors will have their remuneration and allowances determined by the Attorney-General. The remuneration and allowances will not be the prerogative of the Remuneration Tribunal. It has been explained to me that this is because the Remuneration Tribunal could not handle the type of remuneration that will have to be set for the special prosecutor or special prosecutors. With so many lawyers in this chamber at the moment-I can see about five at a glance-I think I am unlikely to get very much agreement on this point, but I believe that the law today has become something which is in the reach of the very rich or the very poor, people who can obtain justice via the Commonwealth or through legal aid.
It is my concern that even Mr Costigan, the author of the report that has caused so much concern in this country today, has had to be paid something over $300,000 annually for his services. It has also been explained to me that the type of

Customs TariffBill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1289

person we need to handle this very important task, a quality 'silk', will probably have to be paid $1,500 a day, or the vicinity of $300,000 a year. I express the view that we are probably contributing to these very scales by allowing the full amount paid to silks, to barristers, lawyers, to be tax deductible. When a company has to pay this type of money in defending an action in the courts it is just a business expense against company income. For a person on legal aid the cost poses no problem. I have the very firm view that nobody in the country, other than an entrepreneur or somebody taking great gambles and great risks, is entitled to an income in the vicinity of more than $300,000. I truly hold that view. A Prime Minister is worth in the vicinity of $100,000, as is the Chief Justice of the High Court of Australia, but this Bill is designed to allow the Attorney-General to negotiate the income, the salary, with a person or persons who are to be appointed to do this extremely important work.
As I said at the outset, I am simply taking advantage of the passage of this Bill once again to hammer a point in which I believe most strongly. Whilst I understand perfectly that if the Government were to offer, say, $500 a day the more gifted silks and barristers would not be interested in the appointment because they can get $1,500 a day, I repeat that we are inadvertently contributing to that salary or income level by virtue of the legal aid system, which simply asks limited questions, and by allowing without question the amount of business expenditure that can be deducted through the taxation system. I do not expect anyone even to comment on my view because, as I observed earlier, there are lawyers everywhere in this chamber. I hope that the lawyers will at least think about what I am saying. I know that out there in peoplesville the great majority would be agreeing with Don Cameron, the member for Fadden, at this moment.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr N. A. Brown)-by leave-read a third time.
CUSTOMS TARIFF BILL 1982 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 26 August, on motion by MrHodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill 1982 and the Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1982 as they are all associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate on all three measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (3.53)-The Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill 1982 and the Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1982 are very much complementary to the main Bill, the Customs Tariff Bill, which is why the Opposition has been quite amenable to have a cognate debate. My remarks will apply mainly to the Customs Tariff Bill 1982. A week or so has passed since the Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry~d Commerce (Mr Hodgman) made his second r ading speech explaining to the Parliament the urpose of the Bill. It may be worthwhile my repeating that this Bill is to replace the Customs Tariff Act 1966 with a simplified tariff based on the recommendations made in an Industries Assistance Commission report dated 30 November 1981. If this Bill goes through-I expect that it will and I give notice now that the Opposition will be supporting it-the new Act will take effect from 1 January 1983.
This Bill is long overdue. The present Customs tariff in the main Schedule to the Bill has some 2,500 classifications and about 700 different rates of duties. It is clear that there can be very little economic justification for such a large number of classifications and rates. Indeed, it has been freely acknowledged that the complexity of that 1966 Act to which I referred, as it stands at present, constitutes a barrier to trade. We support our present Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) in his intentions-if not always in the details of what he is doing-when he is moving around the world seeking to ensure that there is no limitation on trade. The basic work done by the Curtin and Chifiey governments in the postwar period-upon which the industrialisation of this country has been based since the Second World War-has led to the increases in trade and the increase in our standards of living that we all

1290 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Customs TariffBill

enjoy. But trade has been a very important element of that. The more we can do to reduce the limitations on trade the better.
Most of the fragmentation and the complexity of the present 1966 Act is related to problems of identification and classification. These have been due to a number of factors. I just want to go through some of them. It has been said that the language of the Act is either commercially or legally imprecise; that the complex rates structure was set often without regard to common commercial classifications. In other words, there has been an enormous retardation of greater productivity because of the complexities of language and rates. The Industries Assistance Commission concluded in its report that because of these problems there was not a widespread lack of understanding of the tariff resulting in many incorrect payments of duties.
The factors which have contributed to this complexity once again have been numerous. I will go over some of them. The first is a desire to provide precise levels of protection to particular goods. The second is the adoption of the domestic classifications to what is known as the Customs Co-operative Council-CCC-Nomenclature in 1965. This is an international nomenclature. Thirdly, anomalies have been created by international trade commitments. Fourthly, there has been a use of certain tariffs for revenue as opposed to protection purposes. We have the infamous example a Budget or two ago where, in order to collect revenue, the Fraser Government put on a tariff of a couple of per cent across the board which still applies. That has been one of the causes of problems. Fifthly, certain tariffs have been used in an ad hoc way by ministerial directions and separate articles directions. Lastly-this just shows how old was the original Act and it gives us some idea of why it has become rather out of date-we have had the conversion to decimal currency and metric measurements. Believe it or not apparently changes have not been made since that conversion took place.
As I said earlier the Opposition supports this Bill-this administrative measure. By incorporating into one principal Schedule-I am now referring to the Third Schedule-as much classification and duty rate information as possible the Bill will considerably simplify the tasks of both the Customs Bureau and the importers. Simplification will lead to cost benefits and efficiencies and thus to greater productivity, which ultimately will flow on to the Australian consumers and taxpayers-we hope. That is the idea anyway. Had we had prices justification machinery looking at some of these measures of course we might

have been able to be more certain that some of these improvements would flow on.
Having stated support for the Bill, I now draw attention to some aspects of this legislation which require at least some questioning on my part. Perhaps the Minister will get his officers to give him some answers if he is to take advantage of the opportunity to reply in the debate at the second reading stage. I do not think we want to go into Committee on this Bill.
The first matter I raise is the fact that the Minister, when introducing the Bill, claimed that it did not generally affect the level of assistance afforded to Australian industry, whereas we find that in one or two cases that may not be so. Whilst the Opposition accepts that there will be certain changes of rates due to the reclassification of some goods and the rounding off of some duty rates, we believe that there are examples where rates have clearly deviated from the accepted-I understand it was accepted-5 per cent range, despite a clear indication from the Minister that assistance was not to be substantially affected. One example which I believe is nost illustrative of what I assert is the tariff reduction on something called isopropyl a1cohol-IPA-from $5.06 a litre to an equivalent of 5c to 10c a litre. IPA is substituted for locally produced ethanol. Even in this Government's use of the English language, which we found in other debates to be a little loose anyway, there is no doubt that there will be agreement that a reduction from $5 to 5c or thereabouts must substantially affect the level of assistance to the Australian ethanol industry. Maybe there is a good reason for this, but I would like to hear about it.
Another area in which the Bill has, we think, strayed from that undertaking that there would not be many changes in rates relates to areas where goods are substantively dutiable at protected rates but virtually all imports are cleared under by-law. By removing this anticipatory protection the Bill effectively usurps the current review of by-laws arising from the Government's decision on the commercial by-law inquiry. I should like a response from the Minister about that matter because the Bill removes protection without a proper and considered review of the issues involved in that by-law inquiry and the Government's decision relevant to it.
I refer now to the introduction of closer economic relations with New Zealand as they are affected by this Bill. I suppose now that we have not had a more definitive announcement that that will not be happening until I July 1983 rather than the target date of 1 January 1983. With the

Customs TariffBill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1291

changes that are made in this Bill and with CER around the corner anyway, even though it may be about six months late, we in the Labor Opposition urge that a harmonised tariff should now be developed with New Zealand. Maybe this might have been an occasion to bring that about. Such a tariff would ensure that the simplification of the Australian tariff system would not be undercut by an incompatible New Zealand tariff.
I state in passing my personal attitude to CER. There has not been anything before us in the way of a Bill or a document for my party to come to a collective decision about it. But my view is that the closer we could have got to New Zealand in 1900, the better. If we could not have done it then because New Zealand did not want to come into the Federation, it would have been better in 1925. When that did not happen, it would have been better in 1950. Certainly there would have been fewer difficulties in 1975. If we can overcome some of the difficulties at the margin, 1983 will be better than waiting until the year 2000 because the longer we leave it the more difficult it will become. Yet I have this intuitive feeling that it must happen. In this part of the world it is ridiculous that a relatively small country such as Australia, with 15 million people, has all these barriers between it and the people who are so close-the three million New Zealanders. The sooner we grasp some of the nettles in this area the better. At the moment there is much more consideration in New Zealand given to these matters than in this country. The Government has been so preoccupied with so many scandals such as the bottom-of the-harbour tax schemes that it has not governed the country properly and brought before the Parliament to a greater extent the details of the closer economic relations arrangements with New Zealand.
More generally, in line with the Industries Assistance Commission's recommendations, it is urged that a unit be created within the Bureau of Customs to ensure that in all negotiations of trade agreements due consideration is given to simplification implications. Such a unit could utilise some of thosc< officers who have been involved with the development of this legislation. Moreover, this unit could elso ensure that any revisions of tariff would take into account the need for simplicity.
The Opposition is disappointed that the Government has not used the opportunity to move Australia's tariff system out of the printed paper technology era. It is essential that industry be able to have current and accurate information so as to enable correlation between classification and current usage. I mentioned that this Bill is an improvement over the 1966 Act, but it would be

good to go that stage further. I have already stated-indeed, I think the Government would agree-that one of the main motivations for passing a Bill such as this is to try to cut down the bureaucratic paper-pushing and the difficulties inherent in operating a system such as this so that we can have greater productivity and the benefits that flow from it.
The Bureau of Customs has already utilised a computer network to enable expedient duty processing. However, the opportunity ought to be taken sooner rather than later to develop the necessary computer software so that business can accurately correlate classifications with current usage. It is suspected, though, that given the Government's present commitment to a rundown public sector, Australian business will have to wait until my party, the Australian Labor Party, is elected to government very soon before such a facility will be made available. If we all must go on living in an age of deprived public sector services, and that is an age we are suffering at the moment because of the ideological attitude of the Fraser Government, it is hoped that the Government will ensure that sufficient copies of the new Act will be distributed so that people in the community will very soon get the necessary printed information even if they cannot plug in on a computer to get it even more readily. At present, apparently, it is virtually impossible for the general public or business to obtain a copy of the legal tariff together with a complete set of amendments.
This Bill simplifies the processes. It is long overdue and, accordingly, I repeat that we in the Opposition support it. However, we hope that it will not be a one-off exercise and that a continuing commitment will be made to ensure that all these processes are simplified. We also urge that the Government sympathetically consider any objections raised by business that the Bill significantly varies levels of assistance afforded on certain goods. I raised one example. We urge this because, as has been illustrated, there are examples of assistance being substantially affected. No doubt, when the Bill begins operation certain producers will realise the true effect of the Bill and will seek to have the rate of assistance readjusted. I have sought, with the means and the time available to me, to be out in the marketplace to talk to tariff consultants and such people to see whether difficulties would be created. So far people have not come out of the woodwork with any great examples, but I found one or two which I have drawn to the attention of the House.
Finally, I remind the House of what I had to say about closer economic relations with New

1292 REPRESENTATIyES 9 September 1982

Customs TariffBill

Zealand and my belief that that development makes it essential that we consult New Zealand to ensure a compatible tariff system. I hope some of these remarks will be taken in a positive way and will help to develop policy in the future. I hope also that this Bill will have a speedy passage because it certainly moves in the right direction.
Mr LLOYD (Murray) (4.10)-The Government, by ministerial statements and media releases, has given considerable publicity to quicker and more responsive action to investigate and implement action with dumping complaints, both generally and within the Closer Economic Relations Agreement context, and to allow a broader definition of 'domestic industry' to include growers or producers as the domestic industry, rather than just processors, which was previously more narrowly interpreted. I want to draw to the attention of the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman)-I am glad he is at the table at the moment-what seems to be the less than advertised performance of the Government, or the departments that act on behalf of the Government, on these matters. This has caused considerable concern to grower organisations, and to myself as a representative of agricultural industry, and other members of the National Country Party such as the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher) and the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher), and has resulted, in my opinion, in a reduction in the Government's credibility with many people.
First of all I refer to the greater ability for growers of a processed product to make a separate application to processors for the initiation of a dumping complaint. In general terms, I believe that this has been an important reform by the Government and I compliment it on it. Under the old arrangements we had a situation in which a processor could also be an importer and therefore it did not bother him from where he got the product. There are some most unfortunate examples of Australian canning companies having their name in bold print on the label and the consumer thinking that it is an Australian product, but in small print on the bottom of the label is 'Product of Taiwan' or some other country.
Also, to a multinational company which has canneries or processing works in more than one country and uses a system of cheapest product sourcing and transfer pricing, once again it is immaterial in which country the product is grown. We could have a situation in which a processing company is quite genuine in wanting to stop an imported processed product, but because of blackmail by supermarket chains which threaten loss of shelf space for that company if it proceeds

with its complaint, the company is too frightened to do anything. We all know of such examples.
Finally, we have conflict between growers in Australia of a fresh product and the importers of a processed product, and there is no processor in Australia to take any action. I want to give the example of two current cases which I believe indicate that this new definition is less than satisfactory. First of all, the amount of cheese coming in from Europe-particularly the European Economic Community, but Europe generally-is increasing dramatically. It has more than doubled in the last three years or so, and it is acknowledged that the subsidy paid on the cheese coming in from Europe equals about $1,000 a tonne. It is also acknowledged that proving dumping is not just a matter of proving that a product is selling at less than the normal selling price or some other interruption or interference with the normal commercial selling system. Injury has to be proven as well. The Australian Dairy Farmers Federation, in the belief that under the new definition of domestic industry it would be able to make that complaint, proceeded to do so. It was told that it could not, that it had to be the Australian Cheese Manufacturers Association which made the complaint. Fortunately, the Cheese Manufacturers Association has taken up that complaint and anti-dumping action is proceeding. However, I believe that the principle is there nevertheless. The producers of the milk from which the cheese is made should have had the right, under the new definition, to lay that complaint.
My second example relates to tomatoes, which are also coming in from Europe at present and are equally heavily subsidised. If the complaint is against whole peeled tomatoes it is considered that the grower organisation can make the complaint but if the product is tomato paste it cannot. If I am wrong I would be pleased to be corrected, but that is certainly the impression the growers have. Somehow or other, whole peeled tomatoes are close enough to raw tomatoes-but paste is not. I think I know enough about the manufacturing process in canneries to say that that is a rather spurious difference. If the growers were complaining about importation from Europe of frozen pizzas, of which a major constitutent is cheese or tomato, I could understand that being seen as too far away from the original product for a complaint to be made by the producer. However, I suggest to the Minister at the table that he look again at the new definition of 'domestic industry' in relation to producer organisations and allow it to be interpreted on a broader basis. I believe this would give greater satisfaction to those who are

Customs TariffBill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1293

involved in the industries. My next point concerns the speed at which anti-dumping action is taken. It is noted that more resources have been provided for this and I have no specific complaint on this matter. All I say is that I am watching, and a lot of others are watching, to see what will happen. The other point I want to make concerns special arrangements with New Zealand in relation to dumping and safeguards. My understanding of the proposed CER arrangement is that in addition to the ordinary code of anti-dumping action there are two additional and special considerations. The first is that prior consultation is necessary, but no longer will we have the 60-day consultation period which applied before, and I commend the Government for abolishing that 60-day requirement. In my opinion, it was abused by many New Zealand industries and to be fair, New Zealanders themselves may have an equal number of examples of Australians abusing the system. I am glad that that provision has gone. The second consideration is, of course, that there is no automatic provision of cash securities. In addition, there are special arrangements for horticultural products because of their seasonal nature. I understand that that is the true definition of 'fast track', but to me that is also a good thing.
The point I want to make is that, overshadowing the ordinary anti-dumping procedures agreed to under CER, if and when CER is instituted, are the safeguard proposals for CER during the transition period. The safeguard proposals go much further than the dumping proposals. Under the safeguard proposals, during the transition period there has to be only a demonstrated threat, not an actual or material threat or material injury. Secondly, the Government can invoke safeguards during that transition period if there is a perceived difference resulting in some form of special competitive edge for one side of the Tasman or the other due to government assistance such as export incentives, stabilisation schemes, et cetera. This safeguard has never been included in dumping actions, and we on this side of the Tasman believe that, generally speaking, because of the greater forms of government assistance on the other side of the Tasman for exporting agricultural industries perhaps we should have had those points included permanently for CER, not just for the transition period.
Following on from that, if! understand the position correctly, the recommended safeguard action can follow only after an Industries Assistance Commission hearing in Australia or an Industries Development Commission hearing in

New Zealand. The point arises because the transition period which will apply to most New Zealand products will extend until 1995, if CER goes as planned. The majority of restrictions on Australian trade into New Zealand come about from import licensing, and that will not be phased out until 1995, whereas product from New Zealand coming into Australia is either basically on Schedule A now-in other words, free of any restriction-or has a tariff percentage, which will be phased out by 1988. Therefore we have a situation where for the seven years between 1988 and 1995 for a whole range of New Zealand industries the New Zealand Government and the New Zealand Industries Development Commission, has the ability to override the ordinary and special anti-dumping procedure arrangements under CER and to provide a significant advantage to far more New Zealand industries than is the case for Australia.
I believe that is an unfair situation first, because it overrides the ordinary dumping arrangements and, secondly, because it is so obviously one-sided. I will give honourable members a specific example of such a threat at present. At present there is an IDC inquiry into the canned fruit industry in New Zealand. A draft report has just been released. In my quick reading of some photocopies of some of the recommendations and comments of the IDC-I will be happy to be shown to be wrong-to me a completely false conclusion is reached by the IDC that the canned fruit industry, that is, the canned deciduous fruit industry in New Zealand, is far more efficient than is the case in Australia. Therefore it is recommended in the draft report that any attempt by the Australian canned fruit industry to export during this transition period, whatever that may be for the industries-I know that is still to be determined for the canned fruit industry under CER-and any attempt to export beyond the exclusive Australian licence reached or agreed to for that product, will be automatically seen to be a threat to the industry in New Zealand and therefore the safeguard provisions will apply. In other words, the industry in Australia is being sentenced in advance. I know that is only the draft report. I acknowledge that my conclusion, from what I have read, may be alarmist. The point I am making is that the potential is there. The potential is there, in my opinion, to be used far more against Australia than against New Zealand.
I am pleased to participate in this debate to draw those points, and I believe they are real and significant points, to the attention of the Minister and the Government.

1294 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Customs TariffBill

Mrs CHILD (Henty) (4.22)-My colleague the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) has covered most of the aspects of the Customs Tariff Bill and outlined those specifics on which we would like some more information from the Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Hodgman). I would like to comment on one area only. On 29 April and again on 3 June last year I spoke at some length on the need to replace the duty on imported wheelchairs with a bounty. I make no apology for raising the matter again. The current duty on an imported electric wheelchair is around $1,000, making the final cost of the chair prohibitive except for those in the higher income brackets. In most cases a wheelchair is a lifeline but like everything else it deteriorates and has to be replaced several times during adulthood. The cost to the user is enormous and the duty prices the wheelchairs right out of reach.
My colleague the honourable member for Adelaide moved an amendment in the House on 2 June to have the duty replaced with a bounty. The Government did not accept the amendment. However, on the same day the Government itself proposed a bounty on the production of certain textile yarns. I just do not understand the reasoning. I do not object to the bounty on the textile yarns, but surely we could also help the wheelchair user by a bounty on imported wheelchairs. I recognise that we must protect our own industry. The existence of a viable Australian wheelchair manufacturing industry is necessary to supply both standard and non-standard units to cater for specific disabilities. The industry must also be protected as it tailors wheelchairs to specific disabilities and maintains an efficient maintenance and parts supply service. A bounty would protect the industry. The removal of the tariff would enable users to import such chairs as are not manufactured here cheaper, especially chairs such as the Amigo and others like it which can be propelled by those who do not have sufficient muscular strength to operate ordinary wheelchairs.
The former Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs reminded me that if the person who has the disability can get from his or her own doctor a certificate to say that the wheelchair manufactured in Australia is not suitable, a presentation of the certificate to the Bureau of Customs will, so he understands, be favourably received by the Bureau. I suppose that means it will waive the duty. I do not accept this as good enough. Last year the Treasurer (Mr Howard)

was good enough to say he would look into the removal of the bounty in the Budget as he believed there was a case to be made for it, but nothing happened.
I believe it is quite shameful for the Government to insist on a heavy duty being paid on essentials such as wheelchairs. I urge the Minister to show some compassion, revoke the duty and replace it with a bounty.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (4.26)-in reply-May I first and foremost thank the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) for the constructive and indeed harmonious manner in which he responded, on behalf of the Opposition, to the Government's initiatives in the Customs Tariff Bill, the Customs Tariff (AntiDumping) Amendment Bill and the Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill which are before the House. The honourable member did say that there were still 2,500 Customs classifications. I am pleased to tell him that a statistical check made by one of my colleagues reveals that the figure has dropped from 2,500 to 2,000. That is a somewhat significant drop. I think the honourable member would agree that the new form of presentation of the legislation, Schedule 3 in particular being the principal one, is worthy of very great commendation. I have already complimented the officers who worked so hard to bring this about. I would also like to compliment the printers because it is set out in extremely good form to read and it is an improvement that will continue.
The honourable member referred with some pride to the achievements of the Curtin and Chifley governments in respect of developing overseas trade. It did not come as a surprise to me that he did not make any comment at all about the performance of the Whitlam Government. But I thank him for his very kind remarks about the activities of the present Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) in his position as Minister for Trade and Resources. He was also very courteous as is the case with the honourable member through an officer of his staff, Mr Burton, to indicate that he intended to raise the question in respect of isopropyl alcohol. In respect of that the honourable member is correct. The Government has, in fact, received representations from CSR Ltd on this question and the issues raised have been fully investigated by the Government. I think it should be recognised that this is a somewhat unique case in that the present duty on isopropyl alcohol of $5.06 per litre as it was, represented a very high level of protection, in fact,

Customs TariffBill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1295

in the order of 1,000 per cent. I repeat: 1,000 per cent. The proposed general duty, as is well known, of 25 per cent on isopropyl alcohol should ensure a continuing competitive advantage for CSR's ethyl alcohol. As I say, this is one of a very few numbers where there have been variations. I repeat, as I indicated to the House when I introduced the Bills, there is not a very substantial variation. In fact, there is a maintenance of the basic structures which existed under the previous legislation.
In relation to the honourable member's comments concerning the recommendations of the Industries Assistance Commission in relation to developing country preferences I point out that those recommendations included reference to isopropyl alcohol and those in fact are currently under consideration. Any amendments to the lAC's recommendations will be announced in due course by the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) and the Minister for Trade and Resources. The honourable member raised the question of by-law. I remind him and the House that the lAC took the view that if all the imports, or most of them, were entered under by-law then the actual rate was the by-law rate. This issue was raised publicly by the lAC for comment. There was no objection at all by industry. This was done well in advance of the reference on the commercial by-law system being sent to the Commission.
The final matter raised by the honourable member for Adelaide, related to Closer Economic Relations. I have to say to him that progress is in fact being made. I emphasise, on behalf of the Government, that it is very necessary to ensure that industry on both sides of the Tasman is not subjected to sudden damaging changes in rates. I suggest to the honourable member that whilst we should make progress as fast as possible there is considerable wisdom in ensuring that in that progress we do not create a situation of imbalance and more seriously a situation whereby industry on one side is prejudiced.
This brings me to the remarks of the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) in what I must say was an excellent contribution to the debate. The honourable member for Murray also had the courtesy to raise some of these matters with me in another arena recently. I feel, in defence to the excellent presentation he made in the House, that I should respond in some detail. First and foremost, I remind him that when we publicly announced a tightening up of the anti-dumping procedures and when it was announced earlier this year that additional staff had been made available as a result of the efforts of the Minister

for Industry and Commerce and the former Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, we made a public commitment that we intended to do what we could, in this very difficult and complex question of law, to ensure that the anti-dumping procedures available would be as efficient, prompt and accessible as they could be. For my own part, I take on board the honourable member's comments in relation to the situation vis-a-vis producers and processors. The Government has, in fact, responded but I take further the honorable member's comments. My frank view, having some previous involvement with both processors and importers, is that what the honourable member said is only too true. Within the company structure the situation may well develop when, for business reasons, the processor prefers to operate in a particular area, as the honourable member has indicated, as an importer. The aside from the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher) about an Australian brand name appearing on the label of a product but an investigation of the small print establishing that the product was made in Taiwan or elsewhere concerns me and I assure the honourable member that it concerns the Government.
I have noted with considerable interest the honourable member's comments in relation to the substantial increase in imports of cheese. I intend to ask exactly why it was that the original application with respect to the commencement of anti-dumping procedures was not accepted. I am not, for one moment, suggesting that the Department erred. It seems to me, as the honourable member pointed out, that the prime producer of the product, that is the milk producer, would have a very considerable interest in anti-dumping procedures. If technical procedures are current in the law I think it is important that the law is changed. I did not detect, in fairness to the honourable member, any imputation of a lack of co-operation on the part of the Department but it too has to work within the legal system.
Mr Lloyd-It co-operated very well.
Mr HODGMAN-I am grateful. That is my impression in the short time. I have had the oppor~ tunity to work closely with the Department. In respect of the current situation involving closer economic relations with New Zealand, I assure the honourable member that, notwithstanding the CER negotiations, we are looking very closely at what is happening in the meantime. I remind him of the answer given in the House in the last sitting week to a question raised by Mr Porter with respect to the timber industry. A senior Customs officer is in New Zealand at the moment investigating a dumping complaint.

1296 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Customs TariffBill

The honourable member adverted to other areas which I also feel are worthy of consideration. It is pleasing to find myself in good company on this matter with the honourable member and members representing rural electorates. My views on Australian protectionism are fairly well known. Usually they incur some criticism from the rural sector but it is appropriate, when I am also making it very clear that the Government as well as the Minister have a concern about the protection of rural industry, that we can stand on an exactly equal footing. I hope to be able within a few weeks to give the House additional information on measures which are under consideration at present to sharpen up, in effect, the anti-dumping procedures. I think Australia can stand alongside any country in the world and clearly demonstrate that it goes into very great detail in investigation before taking the procedures which are laid down in respect of dumping. In other words, we give the accused a fair trial. One concern which I have expressed on several occasions is that in giving that fair trial and going into such detailed investigation sometimes damage may be done which would otherwise be avoided if perhaps we gave very hard working officers a better system of law and regulations under which to operate. I congratulate the honourable member and thank him for his contribution.
It came as no surprise to me that the honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) raised again, as she is well and truly entitled to raise, an issue upon which she has campaigned assiduously for a considerable period. One of the first things that struck me following the ministerial rearrangements in May of this year was the number of letters I was signing, either on my own behalf or on behalf of Sir Phillip Lynch, explaining to people why, on the face of it, a very high duty was being imposed on wheelchairs imported to this country to be used by people who are either temporarily incapacitated or, tragically in many cases, permanently incapacitated. I have more than a little sympathy for those people because for a short time in my own life I was temporarily incapacitated and, in fact, had to utilise a wheelchair. When I went into the matter I found effectively that a decision had to be made on whether it should be looked at as an industry matter or a social security matter. There is no doubt at all the honourble member was frank enough to concede this-that Australia's indigenous wheelchair manufacturing industry simply could not stand on its own two feet were protection not afforded to it. I note the honourable member's comments as to what was said by the Treasurer (Mr Howard)

and the former Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs. I undertake to look again at this matter. I do so on the basis that I believe that the honourable member, along with other members of this chamber and the Senate, have raised matters which warrant at least a further look at the situation. If any further information can be given to the honourable member in respect of the matter she raised I will be very happy to do so.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
CUSTOMS TARIFF (ANTI-DUMPING) AMENDMENT BILL 1982 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 26 August, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
CUSTOMS TARIFF (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL 1982 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 26 August, on motion by Mr Hodgman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
STATUTE LAW (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL (No.2) 1982
Second Reading Debate resumed from 26 August, on motion by Mr N. A. Brown:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1297

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.40)-We are debating the Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill (No.2) 1982. We debated the Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill (No.1) some time ago. The Opposition was able to make a contribution in the previous debate by suggesting that the Bills be numbered. We are happy to see that suggestion adopted. When last we mentioned this matter we were anxious to suggest that the matters in the Bill before us then go to a legislative committee. On this occasion, I understand, the Government thinks this Bill ought to go to such a committee and the Opposition does not because there does not seem to be anything in the Bill worthwhile sending to a committee.
This Bill amends more than 75 different Acts of Parliament, contains 280 clauses and involves 12 Ministers' portfolios. So, apart from making a few observations I should not spend a lot of time on it. It really deals with matters that we do not think are controversial. But there are a few interesting things in the Bill. For example, I am reminded that clause 134 refers to the Department of Housing and Construction. This is a bit surprising because that department no longer exists. Clause 156 amends the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Collection Act. So it should. This clause is a consequence of the meat substitution scandal. By way of adverse comment I say that all that the clause is doing is imposing a $200 penalty on a person who, without reasonable excuse, hinders an officer. I think that when we are talking about the meat scandals and matters of that nature we might have to talk about more substantial penalties than that.
Mr Young-Why not sack a couple of the Ministers?
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I think we have to win an election. A matter that would be of interest to the nation involves the amendments to the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act. Those amendments are technical. We do not oppose them. But we oppose the fact that when the High Court of Australia decided that the Commonwealth could extend its jurisdiction through the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act the Government decided to give its rights to the States. We have no objections to the States having legitimate rights. But it is obvious and logical that they will never act in unison in areas such as this. I think that is wrong. If this nation is to continue to have viability and respectability we cannot have States doing different things and making different arrangements. I think this belittles us, particularly in terms of our representation in overseas negotiations. The Australian Labor Party has always regarded that as a sell-out. I would not want it

thought that because we are supporting this Bill we are in any way supporting the principle that the Commonwealth should not have responsibility in that area. We would want a guarantee that whilst the Commonwealth will not override what are State responsibilities under the Constitution, this area is ours. There is an obligation to consult with State Ministers. We should act in unison as a nation but not give away our rights as though the States represent the nation in six or seven different capacities.
The Bill amends many different Acts. It is hardly worthwhile adverting to them. The changes are all somewhat minuscule. Without delaying the House any further, I say that the Opposition supports the measure.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (4.44)-The Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill (No.2) 1982 makes some alterations to the defence Acts in respect to the effects of disallowance of regulations under those Acts and restoration of the previous provisions which had been replaced by new regulations. I will speak of one matter relating to the fixing and determination of regulations which are disallowable by this Parliament, the effects which this Bill will have on that and the general effects of the way in which the defence Acts operate at the moment. I speak particularly of those areas which relate to the fixing of pay and conditions and the means by which determinations are made with respect to the members of the defence forces.
Salary determinations for some Public Service employees and other government employees are binding unless a motion of disallowance is moved and carried by either House of the Parliament. There is an intermediary in respect of determinations on the pay and conditions of members of the Defence Force. The Parliament's only role is that it may disallow a determination approved by the Government. In this House that is practically ludicrous. Recommendations by the defence forces pay tribunal go to the Minister for Defence, who determines whether they will be allowed or disallowed. If the Minister decides that he will sign the recommendations they then become determinations for the defence forces. They are then and only then subject to consideration by this Parliament.
Unlike in the Public Service and other areas, disallowance in respect of the Defence Force rests with the Minister. He can disallow recommendations merely by not signing them. That is quite wrong. It is a matter which should be of concern to every member of this Parliament. It leaves with the Executive Government the absolute power

1298 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982 Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill

not to grant increases in salaries for the Defence Force for whatever purpose without having to take any action in the Parliament or act in any way parallel to other methods of salary determination for government employees.
In other words, members of the Defence Force are at a significant further disadvantage. Already they do not have any rights to put a case on their own behalf, to initiate action or to have action initiated on their own behalf with regard to their conditions. They have no rights of appeal either. Under legislation they do not have any right whatsoever to have the Parliament consider the reasons for a disallowance. This is a matter for the Minister and the Minister alone to decide. He signs the recommendation or does not. We assume that in practice this is a matter for Cabinet to decide.
The only section of Australian government employees who are affected in this way are members of the Australian Defence Force. They are significantly discriminated against in this and a number of other ways, particularly when an adverse decision or recommendation comes from a tribunal. In the normal course of wage fixing and the industrial relations processes this decision would be subject to appeal provisions or requests for reconsideration.
The only way in which the defence forces can obtain a reconsideration of a decision with which they disagree is for the Minister to refer the matter to the tribunal for review. He may well be the Minister who disallowed the original recommendations and not passed them into law. There is no case where that has happened yet. But there are plenty of cases where dissatisfaction with determinations has existed. The Bendigo signals branch was one such case. Currently in Brisbane also members of the Army engaged in the operation of heavy motorised vehicles believe that they have been treated fairly shabbily by the Government, which has not only reduced their status by more than was recommended but also backdated that reduction by over 12 months. There are no means of appeal, no means by which a hearing can be conducted and no means by which justice can be seen to be done to members of the defence forces in this area.
I will not delay the House any longer. I take this opportunity to place on the record the fact that it is quite improper that a government should provide a means of salary determination under which there are no means of appeal or review. These matters are determined by the Minister alone. This Parliament does not consider whether they should be disallowed. Decisions by the Defence

Force pay tribunal should be subject to the same procedures as those of all other government salary fixing tribunals. If the Government feels that a decision should be disallowed it should come into the Parliament and argue its case.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Viner) read a third time.
OMEGA NAVIGATION FACILITY BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 18 August, on motion by MrHunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (4.53)-The purpose of the Omega Navigation Facility Bill is to ensure the continued operation of the Omega navigation facility at Darriman and its monitoring facility at Carrajung in the State of Victoria. The Omega facility is a navigational system and accords with the policy of the Australian Labor Party. Consequently, the Bill is not opposed by the Opposition. However, the Bill is provocative and in our view unnecessary for, as the Attorney General (Senator Durack) has stated:
There are constitutional broadcasting and navigational powers open to the Government to ensure that services provided by a State Government are continued.
Instead of wasting hard-earned taxpayer's dollars on the preparation of this Bill and the Parliament's resources in its passage, this devious, divided and discredited Government ought to direct all its efforts to developing positive solutions to the economic disaster into which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has led our nation. The Government has brought our economy to its knees with crippling interest rates and crushing taxation of wage and salary earners while on the other hand it has allowed tax cheats to prosper on a massive scale. Now the Parliament's time is being wasted on what I described as this provocative and unnecessary piece of legislation.
The Bill before us now illustrates the Government's total inability to deal with the frightening mess it has made of the nation's affairs as it seeks to divert attention from its lamentable failures. I have already stated that the Opposition does not oppose the Bill. However, the debate does provide an opportunity to review the effectiveness of the Omega navigation system in the light of current technology in navigation systems, to recall the

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1299

manner in which the Parliament was misled in respect of the purchase of land for the Omega site and to consider possible international implications in light of recent international conflict.
Last June the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) and the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) in statements that were obviously statements not prepared by their Departments but rather by political hacks of the respective parties, vainly sort to generate a spurious controversy about the Omega base. That time and effort would have been much better spent in prosecuting the tax rogues who have prospered under their administration. Despite the somewhat extravagant claims made for the Omega facility by both Ministers, the simple fact is that Omega is based on technology of the 1940s and it is likely to be overtaken in both cost efficiency and accuracy by the potential of satellite navigation systems.
It was in 1947 that Professor J. A. Pierce of Harvard University proposed a navigation system that was useful over long ranges by employing very low frequency or VLF transmissions. After experimentation in the 1950s a basic frequency was chosen of 10.2 kilohertz for what is now known as Omega in the 10 to 14 kilohertz range today. Although Omega is the cheapest worldwide earth system it has several shortcomings. One is the near-zone effect that makes Omega virtually useless within 600 miles of the transmitter so that aircraft and shipping movements in and around the south-east of Australia cannot fully benefit from the system. It is thus more useful for international rather than domestic transport.
Solar X-rays can make Omega signals vary considerably. Solar disturbances have an abrupt onset and a slow but variable recovery rate making it virtually impossible to use Omega during these periods, even if the disturbances can be recognised. Nuclear explosions make it difficult and probably impossible to receive Omega signals for several hours afterward in the vicinity. The development of sophisticated and more precise satellite navigation systems and inertia navigation is superseding the Omega system. Still, the Omega system will have a limited application for domestic and international navigation. The cost effectiveness of the system and its operating costs could well become issues of political debate in the years ahead.
I will now refer briefly to the results of inquiries that have been made of airlines and Australian shipping companies regarding their use of Omega and research on current technology of satellite navigation systems. I do not wish to name the companies involved for obvious reasons. The first

Australian shipping company operating in international waters when contacted advised that it had used Omega but had stopped about four to five years ago. It found Omega too inaccurate and upset by thunderstorms. The company thinks the system may work better with the commencement of the Victorian station. In the judgment of the company the satellite navigation system was far superior. The company also thinks it will take about two years to iron out the problems and make necessary corrections following commencement of the new facility.
Shipping company No. 2 operating to the Middle East thought Omega would be of little use on its vessels. Its view was that it would take two to three years to calibrate and to be used in conjunction with other stations and that it would be on an experimental basis for two to three years. The company's view also was that it will be almost obsolete in a few years time. In effect, the company said that Australia was 10 years too late with Omega. It believed that the satellite navigation system was far more accurate, that the micro-chip will make Omega obsolete and there will be a more rapid development of the satellite navigation systems. However, the company said that Omega had a possible use with satellite navigation as a hybrid. In other words, satellite navigation is accurate but not continuous so that one system could then be used to update the other to devise a continuously accurate system.
Shipping company No. 3 was fitting a new vessel for service to New Zealand with satellite navigation, again not Omega. The reasons given were that satellite navigation was accurate up to 100 yards compared to an accuracy of within 2 miles for Omega. Satellite navigation costs between $20,000 and $25,000 per vessel. It has the advantage that it takes the ship's information and automatically updates fix by fix. It is thus able to project the ship's course and is a far better proposition in terms of cost savings and fuel savings than Omega.
Mr Deputy Speaker, with your knowledge of the aviation industry you know how important it is to maintain a straight course. With shipping it is much more the case in terms of operational savings. When a satellite system can be locked into an automatic bridge control or pilot system so that the vessel can then be kept on a course that is as near as possible to the shortest distance between origin and destination, this can result in considerable fuel savings for the operator of the vessel. As I have said the shipping companies have indicated they believe that in the course of their operations the satellite navigation systems with their added sophistication and increased accuracy

1300 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

are more appropriate than Omega. The advice from Sydney Technical College was that Omega helps only overseas users as it uses low frequency, long distance radio waves. The Col!ege also believed that it could well be obsolete in about five years time. It made the point that Omega was used by few aircraft in Australia's aviation industry. I suppose somebody could say: 'You would not be using it in Australia's aviation industry much because there is not a transmitter in Australia. We are using transmitters to pick up signals from external points and you need to receive three signals to really get an accurate fix'. But the fact that only 50 aircraft out of some 6,500 aircraft registered in Australia are fitted with Omega receivers was confirmed by the Minister for Aviation in one of those political Press statements which he put out a few months ago and which I mentioned earlier in my comments.
Mr ShiptOD-You are obsessed by them.
Mr MORRIS-I beg your pardon?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member will ignore interjections. The honourable member for Higgins will remain silent.
Mr MORRIS-I think he adds to the contributions in the chamber from that position. One of the airlines contacted expected that receivers might now be fitted in the more sophisticated general aviation aircraft in use, but most international airlines use inertial navigation systems; and it is inertial navigation systems which are selfsufficient in DClO aircraft and Boeing 747 aircraft. While general aviation may use Omega, or a hybrid of Omega and a satellite navigation system, there is some opportunity for the system still to be used. I understand that on a global basis there are some 11,000 ships and 6,000 aircraft serviced by Omega, and naturally most of those ships and aircraft are located in the northern hemisphere. The navigation system likely to supersede Omega, in my opinion, is the NAVSTAR satellite global positioning system, or GPS as it is called. This is a precision navigation and position determination system which utilises signals broadcast from space satellites to enable users to determine their three dimensional position, velocity and time to extreme accuracy. The GP system consists of three major segments: A space system, a control system and a user system segment. The space system segment is comprised of a constellation of some 18 satellites which continuously broadcast GPS signals. I understand that six of those satellites are in orbit at the moment. I understand that the system is scheduled to be fully operational in the latter half of this decade.

I turn now to the purchase of the land on which this facility is located. Arrangements for the purchase of the land in the electorate of Gippsland, the electorate of the then Minister for Transport and the present Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), were made in the latter stages of 1977. I have said in this place many times that the Fraser Government came to office on the shoulders of intrigue and corruption. It has survived on corruption and its administration, as current reports are showing, is wracked with corruption. Its hallmark has been its total inability to act with integrity, fairness and honesty, and its total inability, even on matters as simple as this, to be frank and honest.
Mr Lloyd-Are you insinuating that the establishment of Omega in Gippsland was a corrupt decision?
Mr MORRIS-No. I will just paint the facts and you can draw you own conclusion.
Mr Lloyd-That is what you are insinuating.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Murray will remain silent.
Mr MORRIS-I am not insinuating anything. I am going to state the facts to you, my friend, and you can draw your own conclusions. If that is the conclusion you want to reach, you can reach it and you are welcome to it. I will just quote the facts to you.
Mr Lloyd-Well, stop insinuating then if you are going to quote facts.
Mr MORRIS-I am not insinuating.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Shortland will address the House through the Chair.
Mr MORRIS-The Minister for Transport in 1972 stated that the choice of sites for the Omega base would be between sites near Nerang or Deniliquin in New South Wales. My understanding is that the outgoing Labor Government had decided that the Omega facility was to be located at Deniliquin. In this chamber on 3 November 1977 in a direct question I asked the then Minister for Transport, now the Minister for Primary Industry, a series of simple questions related to the purchase of 308 hectares of land at Darriman in the Minister's electorate. The details of the question appear at page 2775 of Hansard. I would like to quote from part of that answer. The Minister at the time said:
Four properties were offered to the Department of Administrative Services which handled the matter and I understand that this was the cheapest of the four properties. The price finally agreed upon was not the price Mr McDonald asked for but the price that the taxation valuer recommended to the Department of Administrative Services ought to be accepted.

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1301

I know that implicit in the honourable member's question is a suggestion that I have some personal interest in this matter. Let me assure the House that I have no knowledge of the activities of the Department of Administrative Services. That Department is totally independent of my Department. If the honourable member had had any experience in handling such matters he would have been aware of that and would not be asking stupid questions.

While the Minister was misleading this House with that answer, a similar question was being asked of the then Leader of the Government in the Senate and the Minister for Administrative
Services, Senator Withers, by the then Leader of the Opposition. Senator Withers's reply to the same question was this:

In answer to Senator Wriedt's question I say that the land was purchased. I cannot recall the exact name of the vendor. I think there were two or three vendors. From memory, it involved a family company owned by the same individuals. I cannot recall the price. I have the file in my office and I will provide the Leader of the Opposition with that information after Question Time.

On 4 November 1977 I asked further questions on this same matter of the Minister for Transport. He took them on notice and replied in writing on 8 November 1977. Also on 4 November the honourable member for Chilley (Mr Armitage) asked the Minister several questions about the Omega land purchase, which he partly answered in his usual derogatory style. By 7 November, when I asked further questions of the Minister about his role in the Omega land purchase and the veracity of his earlier answers, he was forced to change his tune, having learned that the Department of Administrative Services files on the land purchase had been made available to the Opposition. I have said that the Minister misled the House with his answer to my question on 3 November 1977 and on at least two other accounts. Let me recap his answer to this chamber. I refer to that section of the answer in which he said:

Let me assure the House that I have no knowledge of the activities of the Department of Administrative Services. That Department is totally independent of my Department.

Mr Deputy Speaker, I refer you to a minute of the
Department of Administrative Services over the signature of Mr E. Wigley, First Assistant Secretary (Property) dated 24 December 1976. The very first sentence of this minute says:

The Secretary-

Meaning the Secretary to the Department of Administrative Services-

had a call from Mr Peter Nixon, Minister for Transport, about the way in which the investigations into the possible sites for the Omega facility were being handled.

The second lastmu:agrapb..of the same minute

says:

,,".,.',

Mr Pat Phillips said that he had recently received a phone call from Mr Bob Andrews, the co-ordinator for the project in Transport who had received a note from Mr Jocabi of Transport-
Mr Jocabi was chairing the Omega committee that was arranging the purchase and construction-
to the effect that Mr Nixon had asked whether a stock and station agent could be appointed to carry out the investigations and negotiations in a way which would avoid revealing who in fact the principal might be. This of course could lead to some obvious undesirable situations.
The facts speak for themselves. I turn to file 876/917 of 7 January 1977 signed by Mr R. T. Ross. The first sentence reads:
Mr Nixon, Minister for Transport, has once again been on to FAS Mr Len Jocabi and it now emerges that the person complaining was a Mr Eppleston.
I do not need to read the rest of it. I turn to another minute-the minutes of the interdepartmental committee meeting on 4 February concerning the Shire of Roseland and headed 'Omega-land purchases'. It reads:
Chairman: L. Jocabi-
Of the Department of Transport-
advised that the Minister-
The Minister for Transport-
was concerned that the public anticipating the site location by Government officers inquiries in certain areas.
He (the Minister) suggested acquiring the services of the local stock and station agent.
I am not making any assertions; the facts are there for the Government member who interjected earlier to draw his own conclusions. They are quotes from departmental minutes in the file that was made available to the Opposition by the then Leader of the Government in the Senate. They speak for themselves. The Parliament was misled. Why was the Parliament misled? It was just an ordinary routine matter, an ordinary routine purchase associated with a project over which the Parliament was not in disagreement. Both sides of the Parliament agreed on the construction of the Omega facility. Why was this necessary? Indisputably, it is clear from the extracts of those minutes that the then Minister for Transport misled the House on 3 November as to the role he played in the purchase of the Omega site. He changed his story when he learnt that the files had been made available to the Opposition.
The second count on which the Minister misled the House was his claim that the price paid for the Omega land was the price recommended by the taxation valuer, and his claim that the land had already been acquired. Let me turn to a paper prepared for the then Minister for Administrative Services on 1 November 1977 titled 'Acquisition

1302 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

of Site for Omega Facility~Victoria'. I will not read it all; just a couple of short sentences. The first paragraph states:
In the event that a question is asked in the Parliament today paragraph 2 below could be a suitable response.
Paragraph (2) states:
The land for the OMEGA installation has not yet been acquired. . . The price negotiated with the owners is slightly higher than the independent valuation provided by the Valuation Section of the Australian Taxation Office.
Now that is not a matter of great moment, but what is of importance is that it shows that the answer given to the Parliament was false. The price that was negotiated was not the price recommended by the taxation valuer, as claimed by the Minister. Further on the statement prepared for the Minister reads:
The exact answer to the question is that the land has not yet been acquired.
That was the advice prepared for the then Minister for Administrative Services, the Minister who was responsible. Again, it shows the role of the then Minister for Transport. That is why I am raising this matter here~because running throughout the purchase of this land is a strand of dishonesty in reporting to this Parliament. The Parliament is entitled to know why that is the case. On the following day, 8 November, the Opposition moved to suspend the then Minister for Transport from the service of the House for having misled the Parliament in respect of all those matters~ the changes in decisions and the inaccuracies that have been reported. My friend opposite can form his own conclusions about his own Minister but the one thing that is clear as a result of this episode is that this Government cannot be trusted to tell the truth even about matters upon which both sides of the Parliament are in total agreement~matters which are not contentious and matters which simply require a faithful and routine reporting to the people of this country. When a person lies to this place he lies to the people of Australia, not just to honourable members.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)~ Order! The honourable member has now proceeded to reflect on a Minister of this Parliament. Prior to that his remarks regarding the misleading of this House could have been of an incidental nature. As he has proposed that the Minister was responsible, I ask the honourable member to withdraw.
Mr MORRIS~I withdraw, Mr Deputy Speaker. The Prime Minister on 9 July 1975 said that 10 per cent of the truth is not the truth; that 50 per cent of the truth is not the truth and that when the Parliament and the people are given

half the truth it is the same as a downright lie. Those words appear in the Hansard for 9 July 1975. I make the point that the Parliament was misled and that when the Parliament is misled the people of this country are misled. I make this point: One of the vendors of the land that was purchased was the firm Great Gippsland Farms Pty Ltd. John McDonald, who was known to the then Minister for Transport, as he admitted, was one of the directors. Another of the directors of that firm whose name appears on the return file lodged with the Corporate Affairs Commission in Victoria on 22 December 1975 is one Leslie Phillip Smart of Ringwood, Victoria. Leslie Phillip Smart was an officer of the Co-operative Farmers and Graziers Direct Meat Supply Ltd and is now a guest of Her Majesty's prison in Victoria as a result of actions relating to the conduct of that co-operative.
I mentioned at the outset that I wanted to receive some explanation from the Government of its role, its policy, in the use of the Omega facility in the event of international conflict. The eight parties to the International Omega Commission are well known and it is obvious that in the recent conflict between Argentina and the United Kingdom the use of the Omega facility would have been available to both parties~one, Argentina, directly as a participant, and the other no doubt by its use of the system and by access to other allies. I said at the outset that the Bill is unnecessary. It is wasting the Parliament's time. I think it would have been better for the Government, if it had any fears for the continuity of this world-wide system in possibly adverse conditions, to have raised with the International Omega Commission the issue of what will happen to this system in the event of armed conflict. As the Minister pointed out in his speech and as is well known Australia's facility will be staffed by Australians. The services can be withdrawn.
What is the Government's policy on this important question of the operation of the Omega facility should hostilities between the United Kingdom and Argentina recur? The Government has been silent on this issue. I think its silence clearly indicates that it would see the facility continuing and being available to Argentine naval forces, to the Argentine defence command if so desired. That is a far more important matter~not the firing of weapons but simply the positioning of vessels and navigation~than the humbug that we have been treated to in the Press statements issued by both the Minister for Transport and Construction and the Minister for Aviation. The time of the Parliament and the resources of the people have been wasted on legislation on which there is

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1303

no disagreement and which in our view is unnecessary. As I said at the outset, we do not oppose the Bill.
Mr EWEN CAMERON (Indi) (5.17)-I rise to support the Omega Navigation Facility Bill. Originally the Omega navigation system was developed by the United States Navy. The Navy was the only United States Government authority at that time with facilities and experience in very low frequency radio transmission. In 1978 the responsibility for Omega was passed over to the United States Coastguard. The system was planned to provide world-wide coverage using eight transmitting stations including one in the Tasman Sea area. The United States Government first approached the Australian Government in June 1967 to bring about technical discussions on the feasibility of building an Omega station in Australia. In March 1971 the Australian Government announced that it had agreed in principle to build a station in the vicinity of Bass Strait. In May 1973 the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence was asked to report on aspects of the proposed Omega installation. The Joint Committee reported to Parliament in May 1975. The following conclusions were reached by that Committee in a majority report:
I. a. The control of an Australian station
It will be possible for the Australian Government to control every aspect of the operation of any Omega station built in Australia, and to ensure that such a station will not be used for communication purposes.
b. The control of the Omega system
The operation of the world-wide Omega system will be controlled by a policy committee (or directorate) comprised of representatives of Australia and the other six host nations. The Committee advocates the eventual transfer of control of the system (but not the station) to an international agency.
2. The defence aspects
The absence of an Omega station in the Tasman Sea area will leave Australia, New Zealand, Antarctica and the surrounding ocean areas without adequate Omega coverage, thus depriving the Royal Australian Navy and the Royal Australian Air Force of full use of the system.
The Committee accepts the explicit statements that have been made that the United States and the United Kingdom will not install Omega receivers in their ballistic missile submarines.
The following conclusions reached by the Committee support those statements:
(a) There are a number of other navigation aids available and currently used by ballistic missile submarines which individually or in combination provide positionfixes with greater accuracy and reliability than Omega gives.
(b) There is virtually no risk of detection when a ballistic missile submarine surfaces in its normal area of operation-the less frequented areas of the oceans. Therefore, the more aCCurate navigation aids which require a submarine to expose an antenna above the surface (such as Transit) can be and in fact are being

effectively used by ballistic missile submarines; hence Omega is not necessary for the effective operation of these submarines.
(c) In the event of a nuclear war the Omega system, with transmitters in seven different countries and subject to the effects of ionospheric disturbances caused by nuclear explosions as well as natural disturbances, would be too uncertain a navigation aid (from the points of view of reliability, availability and accuracy) for use by vessels requiring precise navigation.
As the purpose of the Omega system is well known, the Committee concludes that there is no likelihood that an Omega transmitter built in Australia will be attacked because of a belief that its signals assist ballistic missile submarines.
Australia could close down its transmitter in time of war.
Omega signals could be received by the attack submarines of various nations, subject to restrictions of depth and the surface state of the sea, but this would not increase their existing offensive capabilities.
3. The foreign affairs implications There is no evidence of any ill-will from other nations
towards Australia arising from the possibility that an Omega transmitter may be built. No nation or international organisation has expressed any opposition, directly or indirectly, to the Australian Government due to the possibility that Australia may build a transmitter. Furthermore, there has been little protest against Omega by the citizens of other countries (including those which are already building a transmitter) to the national governments of those countries.
There is some disquiet in Australia that the building of a local transmitter may have adverse effects, but the Committee hopes that its thorough investigations and the availability of its findings will ally these fears.
The Committee believes that Australia's participation in an Omega system which includes seven nations of diverse interests in six different continents should be regarded as an example of international co-operation appropriate to an independent nation.
Participation in this project should enable us to continue to playa useful role in various United Nations and other international bodies, and should not harm our relations with any other nations. In fact, our participation appears likely to be viewed favourably.
That report was signed by John Wheeldon who was the Chairman of the Committee at that time. A minority report was also presented by the Committee. I quote from the first paragraph of that report:
In presenting this minority report, we acknowledge the undeniable navigational value of Omega. However, we hold some doubts about its true cost/benefit and Telative effectiveness to commercial shipping and, in particular, we believe that the Committee's Report implies excessive enthusiasm for the establishment of an Omega station in Australia.
The minority report goes on to express some concern at the possible use of Omega in a time of war and the risk of enemy attack on the installation.
In 1977 agreement was reached with the United States of America providing for Australia to purchase a site and to design, construct, equip, commission, operate and maintain the facility. The United States would meet the land acquisition and establishment costs. Three hundred and

1304 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

fifty hectares of land were purchased at Darriman, Victoria, on the South Gippsland Highway between Sale and Yarram. Construction commenced, with the transmitting tower eventually reaching its full height of 427 metres in January 1982. This is currently the tallest structure in Australia. Buildings to house two radio transmitters, one of which is in use and one of which is on standby, control equipment, air conditioning plant, an emergency standby diesel generator and a public display room were constructed as well as a helix building housing coils to match the transmitter to the antenna. The public display room will be of great interest to those who visit the station.
The facility also includes a monitoring station constructed on a small piece of Commonwealth land at Carrajung, about 40 kilometres by road from Darriman. This station monitors signals from the Australian Omega transmitter as well as those from other countries. It provides data to be used for synchronisation purposes. The station became operational on 16 Au,gust 1982. There will be a commissioning ceremony on 22 October. From that date the public display room will be open on a daily basis.
The Omega system comprises eight stations throughout the world: Australia, North Dakota and Hawaii in the United States of America, Argentina, Norway, Japan, Liberia and La Reunion which is a French island off the east coast of Africa. Each station transmits signals in the very low frequency band over extremely long distances. During each transmission interval all eight stations are transmitting at a different radio frequency. Timing of transmissions, which takes place every 10 seconds, is controlled to an extremely high degree of accuracy by using atomic clocks. Omega receivers fitted to ships, aircraft or land vehicles compare the timing of transmission, usually from three Omega stations, and automatically compute the position of the receiver in latitude and longitude with an accuracy of approximately 2.5 kilometres to 6.5 kilometres.
These Omega receivers, of varying complexity, are available from commercial sources throughout the world and cost from $4,000 upwards. I understand that there are about 30,000 Omega receivers in use throughout the world, of which about 25,000 are fitted to ships and 5,000 fitted to aircraft. One great advantage of the Omega system is that it may be used to fix a position in almost any part of the world at any time of the day or night and in any weather. The Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) has already said, when commencing his second reading speech, that this Bill is intended to ensure that

the Omega navigation facility can be operated free from unnecessary interruption.
The Victorian Australian Labor Party State Conference on 24 April this year decided to oppose the Omega facility. A resolution was passed which recommended to the National Conference of the Australian Labor Party that cooperation by all sections of the Labor Party to Omega be refused. The powerful left wing of the Victorian branch of the Australian Labor Party is strongly opposed to the Omega facility and can at any time influence the party's thinking on this matter. The Premier of Victoria, Mr John Cain, to his credit, has disassociated his Government from the left wing attitude, as has the Federal Australian Labor Party Conference.
One must look ahead in the maintenance of this important navigational aid. As we see so many State and Federal Australian Labor Party members of parliament and candidates for parliament under the influence of the radical left wing, it is of great importance to have this legislation on the statute books. Disruption of the Omega facility could be implemented in several ways. The Victorian State Government could instruct the State Electricity Commission of Victoria to cut off electricity supplies. I find this hard to imagine. However, a standby diesel generator is already provided in the event of an electric mains failure. Other generators could be installed at reasonably short notice if a misguided government took this radical action. Additional fuel storage tanks would be needed. One could imagine, as the result of union action arising out of left wing pressure, the refusal of contractors or employees to supply goods, such as fuel, to the station. One could imagine also a blockade of the entry road to the station organised by left wing factions. Refusal of contractors or their employees to carry out maintenance work on such things as the air conditioning plant or diesel generator could be another option available to the radical left. The station has its own water supply from a bore so this is a service which cannot be interferred with.
The installation is complete and is operating. Its construction was completely paid for by the United States of America. All we need to do now is to protect it from irresponsible actions. The Bill adequately provides power for the Minister to cope with possible actions which may disrupt the effective operation of the facility. There would not have been any need for this legislation other than to combat the continually declared aim of the radical left to close the Australian Omega navigation station. I commend the Bill to the House.

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1305

Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (5.30)-The Opposition does not oppose the Omega Navigation Facility Bill, just as when we were in government we did not oppose but in fact participated in negotiations which eventually led to the establishment of the Omega Navigational Installation. The honourable member for Indi (Mr Ewen Cameron) was at least kind enough to point out that the Federal Labor Party Conference and the Victorian State Government endorsed Australia's participation in the Omega navigation system. Where these ferocious saboteurs are to emanate from, I am not exactly certain. The honourable member for Indi seemed to indicate that they would come from the Australian Labor Party and the trade union movement. This matter has been before the Labor Party, and the trade union movement, for that matter, for the last ten years and there has not been the slightest indication that that type of action would be contemplated by any Labor government at a State or Federal level.
However, this legislation, along with the resolution on the North West Cape Naval Communication Station and the Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill can be regarded as a trio of damp squibs the Liberals have attempted to introduce in this place in order to embarrass the Labor Party on the absurd assumption that we would oppose the propositions put forward. However, certain points ought to be made about the way in which the debate on the Omega Navigational Installation has proceeded in the community to this point. Certain lessons ought to be drawn from it. I think the history of it was glossed over by the honourable member for Indi. His facts were basically correct but they form only the bare bones of the problem we are considering.
From the point at which discussions first began with the United States in 1967 the suspicions of the community in Australia were aroused by the obsessive secrecy and misinformation associated with the installation. As a direct result of that some capabilities were suggested for the navigational aid that that navigational aid was not going to provide. Those misapprehensions could have been readily resolved if the matter had been dealt with publicly and with a degree of honesty. It was not. Persistent throughout these discussions-the second reading speech of the Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) was thoroughly in line with past announcements on the matter-is the assumption that this serves no defence purpose at all, or if it has any defence purpose it is not of very great significance. The Minister's second reading speech states:
In conclusion, the Government's objective is to provide effective navigational aids for the safety of ships and aircraft

operating in and around Australia, particularly those engaged in our coastal and overseas trades. The establishment of the Omega facility is a significant step towards the achievement of that objective, and the purpose of the Bill is to ensure that the operation of the facility is not disrupted.
There has been a tendency to argue, on the one hand that there are no defence purposes at all served, and, on the other hand, almost in the same breath, that if there are any defence purposes they happen to be incidental ones. The matter is not quite so clear cut as that. Some consideration ought to be given to those defence purposes, for a variety of reasons to which I will refer a little later. But the first effect of that has been a concern in the community that this installation was another installation in some way connected with the United States nuclear war fighting capability, in particular that aspect of it associated with sea launched ballistic missiles. I do not happen to believe that this installation is connected with the war fighting capability of sea launched ballistic missile submarines. There was in fact at the time we first considered the Omega installation a much stronger likelihood that the installation would be connected with the nuclear war fighting capabilities of sea launched ballistic submarines than subsequently was the case. At that point sea launched ballistic submarines were seen largely as having a second strike capability and were configured for operations in that context, in which case the navigational fixes they received would not require the degree of accuracy required in circumstances in which they were being used in a first strike capacity.
As the honourable member for Indi would be aware-I suppose the House too is generally aware-what the Omega navigational aid provides for a submarine, through its very low frequency capability, is a navigational fix which, in daytime, has a degree of accuracy of plus or minus about one nautical mile and, at night, plus or minus two nautical miles. That fix is not a sufficiently good fix if the sea launch ballistic missile submarine is attempting to take out an intercontinental ballistic missile silo' in the Soviet Union. If the ballistic missile submarine, however, is targeted on a city it is not a bad navigational aid to provide it with a degree of assistance in that regard. As it happened, there came into use other navigational systems that were found to be more useful in terms of providing pinpoint accuracy for ballistic missile submarines. Unfortunately also the role for which ballistic missile submarines were configured has over the last decade begun to change from a second strike weapon, as opposed to simply a second strike capability to a weapon with certainly a second strike capability because

1306 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

of its invulnerability but also as a result of its accuracy with a first strike option.
However, simply pointing out, as the honourable member for Indi and the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence did, that the aid probably would not be used in ballistic missile submarines and that the denials by the United States Administration that it would be used for those purposes ought to be regarded as valid does not end the value of the installation in a strategic military sense. Whilst the ballistic missile submarines may well not be equipped with Omega equipment, the hunter-killer submarines certainly are so equipped. That point has been conceded by all those involved in the debate. That degree of accuracy of navigational fix is very useful for hunterkiller submarines. One needs to look at the possible roles for which hunter-killer submarines are configured before one dismisses the Omega station from any sort of involvement in a strategic nuclear context.
The fact of the matter is that one of the roles of the hunter-killer submarines is to locate and destroy Soviet ballistic missile submarines. In the process of doing that, a navigational aid which has a degree of accuracy of location for a submarine of one or two nautical miles, is extremely useful. Once within that sort of range, that inaccuracy is not particularly important because the means of detection of other submarines in the submarines can extend well beyond that. If the Omega station operates at its maximum inaccuracy and gives a hunter-killer submarine a mis-fix, if you like, of one nautical mile as it seeks to rendezvous where other means of detection have located a Soviet ballistic missile submarine that is not particularly important. By the time the submarine is anywhere near that location it will detect the other submarine and intercept it. It is not without strategic importance, particularly when one considers the claims by the United States for the effectiveness of its anti-submarine warfare systems.
There is a little understood fact of the strategic nuclear balance but it is a fact nevertheless. The triad of intercontinental ballistic missiles, sea launch ballistic missiles and bombers on which supposedly both the Soviet and the United States forces are based is, in fact, not a triad in both cases. A comparison of the Soviet and American strategic forces is like comparing chalk with cheese. The United States operates a genuine triad, the three legs of which-the submarines, bombers and land based missiles-are of very considerable value in a nuclear war fighting context. In the Soviet case only the Soviet ICBMs are worth a cracker. Whereas the United States will have, at any point of time, up to two-thirds of its

submarines at sea and undetectable, the Soviet Union will have only about eight of its 80 submarines at sea and because of American antisubmarine warfare capabilities all of them will be detectable. The United States is extremely confident that it will detect Soviet submarines. I will quote from a recent submission to a United States Congressional hearing. This does not refer to the Omega system but it does have an implication for the roles of Soviet hunter-killer submarines. A representative of the Department of Defense talked about one of the underwater surveillance systems into which the hunter-killer submarines are plugged, the SOSUS system. The submission stated:
SOSUS has demonstrated a substantial capability to detect submarines patrolling or transmiting through SOSUS areas of coverage. . .
Since the first USSR deployment ofSSBNs-
That is, bailistic missile submarines-
a large fraction of the SSBN deployed force has been subject to SOSUS detection and tracking.
On another occasion another Pentagon official stated:
I am nor free to say what percentage of Soviet submarines we can locate at any given time, but I will say that if war were to break out, they probably would lose all their submarines before they could destroy our fleets.
The reason I quoted that was not to suggest that Omega should be removed from Australia forthwith. It was to make a more general point that I have made in a number of debates in this House. We have an obligation to be fully on top of all aspects of our strategic relationship with the United States to ensure that we are contributing at all times to international stability and also to ensure that our interests at all times are protected. In the case of North West Cape or Pine Gap our contribution to the United States strategic war fighting capability is, of course, immense. In the case of Omega it is a minor aspect and I do not want to give that installation a significance that it does not have. I merely state that at the particular level which I have been discussing these considerations, Omega is of minor significance, but nonetheless of some significance, to the American capability. It is necessary for us all to comprehend that fully. I believe it is particularly necessary for us to comprehend it fully when it is involved in anyway with American anti-submarine warfare capabilities.
An argument is afoot that a high antisubmarine warfare capability is destabilising to the nuclear balance because it threatens the second strike capability of either the Soviet Union or the United States. I have heard it argued that the

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1307

United States should voluntarily abandon its antisubmarine warfare capability. I would not advocate that. Apart from anything else, bashing heads against brick walls is not an occupation which recommends itself to me or I am sure to any member of this House. The United States has vast superiority in this area. That superiority has virtually eliminated, on the evidence presented by American officials to Congress in public sessions, a Soviet second strike capacity that is sea based. It may not have eliminated the Soviet second strike capacity which is land based. That is one of the reasons why the Soviets go hell for leather in trying to place as many ICBMs as possible around the place in the hope that they will not be taken out by the United States in a first strike. The point is that where we are involved-not only with Omega; that is small beer-in areas of the American anti-submarine warfare capability, we ought to be aware of that and take it into account in our dealings with the United States.
The second reason for which I think we ought to be aware of this is a political reason. An alliance relationship is not just a relationship of good friends, particularly an alliance relationship which is not a relationship for temporary purposes but permanent ones. An alliance relationship for permanent purposes, such as we have with the United States, is a relationship which must invariably involve bargaining at some point down the line. Not always will our interest on all issues at all times coincide with those of the United States. Therefore it is very important that we have before us all the time an accurate appreciation, particularly in military matters, of the areas in which we are doing something useful for the United States. Then we will not necessarily find ourselves in a position in which we are unnecessarily pressured, by fear that we are not doing enough to assist our ally, into taking stands or steps that we would not wish to take.
As I have said, we make a massive contribution to the American military establishment. In particular, we make it through joint installations; we make it through activities associated with the American anti-submarine warfare effort in the Indian Ocean. Our participation in that antisubmarine warfare effort is under total Australian control, be it through the Orion P3s, monitoring certain types of maritime communications or Omega which will be totally-at least so far as it affects Australia-under Australian control. We need to appreciate that fully so that when we are asked by the United States to do things at different points of time we can look at those requests with a degree of balance. For example, we were

able to get out of any sense of obligation to participate in the Rapid Deployment Force. I congratulate the Government on that. If we do not have these things to the forefront, then we may well find ourselves being pressured to participate in that sort of organisation.
We also need to make the United States understand our contribution to the American military establishment. It is important to do that because the United States has on occasions, I think, displayed a lack of appreciation of what Australia has done, and continues to do, for it. It is not necessarily the fault of the participants involved if we are not drawing our activities to their attention. I have in mind some evidence I saw which was presented by Mr Walter Stoessel to an American congressional committee before he came to Australia in the middle of this year. I read his statement to that committee with interest. It was his explanation to the United States Congress of why he considered it important for him to be undertaking a tour of the Pacific which happened to include Australia. He talked in some detail about Australian-American co-operation. I would not quarrel with anything that he had to say in his speech about Australian-American co-operation. I would quarrel with what he did not say. In talking about our co-operation he completely neglected to mention the fact that there were joint installations here of substantial value to the United States. He completely neglected to mention that Australians effectively provided most of the American surveillance in the eastern Indian Ocean. These matters received absolutely no mention at all. It was clearly not a factor in his consideration of the nature of the relationship with Australia that Australia performed these services. Those are indeed important services and the United States needs to be constantly reminded of the services that we perform in that area.
As I have said, the installation is one which has some military uses. They are not the military uses that have been claimed for it by some of the opponents of the installation but nevertheless they are important military uses. It does no service to the Australian people, it does no service to our alliance relationship and it does no service to sensible debate on foreign policy in this country to deny that as I believe this Government has persistently done in discussions it has had in the past about the Omega installation. I hope that this is the last time that we debate Omega in this House. I do not see any necessity to do so in the future. However, in saying that, I hope that all honourable members will take on board the fact that this is an aspect not only of our normal co-operation

1308 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

with the United States but also of our military cooperation with the United States. We should take that on board when we weigh up the balance of the things that we do for our ally, and the things that we expect in return and perhaps the things that we may not wish to do for the United States in the future.
Mr CROSS (Brisbane) (S.SO)-I want to express my pleasure that the Omega navigation facility has now been completed. I am sorry that it took such a long time. It has been IS years since the first discussions took place and 11 years since agreement was reached. I criticise the Government again for the secrecy with which this project was considered in the earliest days because it developed discussion in the Australian community about the defence significance of Omega which was, in some respects, quite unreal. One of the purposes of the inquiry by the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, which sat for two years between May 1973, when the inquiry was referred to it, and May 1975, when it delivered that report, was to sift all of that information, to hear the opinions of a whole .range of people, and to place before this Parliament a frank and fair report to allay the fears of the people.
I am not in any way gainsaying what my colleague the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) has just said because it is true that the facility has military significance. Of course, that is true of almost any communication facility when one considers such things as radio and radar, lighthouses, buoys and beacons. Indeed, the hydrographic service of the Royal Australian Navy prepares very accurate maps which are available and on sale to anyone in the Australian community and can be sent overseas. They are used by the vessels that trade with this country and are well respected. Any communications facility has a potential military significance.
I am disappointed, quite frankly, that it has taken Australia IS years to get this very sensible and cheap, if somewhat limited, navigation facility into operation. The legislation is designed to maintain the continuity of that signal in the same way that legislation protects the continuity of the light from a lighthouse or signal from an air navigation system. A whole range of legislation carried by this Parliament over the years provides similar penalties, and indeed in many cases more severe penalties, for people who damage a lighthouse or destroy or damage air navigation facilities or interfere with their operation. /
I agree with the honourable member for Swan when I say that I hope this is the last time we will be debating the Omega navigation facility. The

Opposition is pleased that it is under way. Fears have been expressed about it and again it is a sad thing that Government members try to make party political capital out of debates of this kind. I am sure that no responsible government would cut off electricity or services to a navigation facility, which will certainly prove itself in the future. It is not the first time that something of this nature has been developed by an arm of the Services. A good deal of concern was expressed when the Royal Australian Navy was developing radio with Marconi. It was called wireless telegraphy in those days, and a good deal of attention was devoted to its military significance. We all know the part that radio plays in civil life and in communications for ships and aircraft.
I will leave it at that. I am pleased the facility is under way. I am well aware of the fact that this legislation was introduced in a provocative way, together with legislation on visiting warships and the statement on the North West Cape Naval Communication Station, with a view not only to achieving the objectives of the legislation but also to producing an election atmosphere. It has failed in that respect, it was not necessary in that respect, but the legislation stands.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport and Construction) (S.SS)-in reply-I would like to respond briefly to a couple of points that were made in the course of the debate. Firstly, the governments of Australia and the United States of America did enter into an agreement, or an exchange of notes, I should say, in 1977 agreeing to the establishment and the operation of the Australian station. That agreement has been tabled in this Parliament. It provides that Australia is to be solely responsible for the operation, managing, staffing and maintaining of the facility, and each government is required to ensure the continuous operation of its respective facilities. That is what the Omega Navigation Facility Bill is all about. I do not suppose there would have been occasion to push this Bill into the Parliament but for the fear that services could have been denied to that facility and therefore Australia may not have been able to live up to its obligations to the other parties to this agreement. A number of nations have contributed to this navigation aid system.
An article appeared in the Canberra Times entitled 'Strangle Omega Base: Victorian ALP', and I would like the opportunity to incorporate it in Hansard. It states in part:
The Victorian Government will try to stop the operation of the Omega navigation base in Victoria by restricting its power and water supplies, according to the official journal of the Victorian branch of the ALP.

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1309

'State conference recognised that the base is a Federal installation on Commonwealth land and that this limited actions to prevent its construction and operation by a State Government,' the journal said in its latest issue.
However, the State Government will not, following a resolution carried by national conference, offer any services to the base.
'This should have the effect of preventing its use.
'Restriction of services could include power and water supply.'
That came from the State Secretary of the Australian Labor Party in Victoria, Mr Bob Hogg. It was an irresponsible statement. It is a statement that has been rejected and denied by Mr Cain in Victoria, and it has not had the support of the national conference of the ALP, which in its wisdom took the right decision, I think. It was an irresponsible statement. People need to see this installation-even those people who may have very radical ideas-as part of a navigation system for the benefit of shipping and aviation. The honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) raised a point in regard to-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! Before the Minister proceeds, is it still his intention to pursue the seeking of leave for incorporation?
Mr HUNT-Indeed. I seek leave to incorporate the article in Hansard.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Mr Morris-Is the basis of the request the Minister's statement that legislation is enacted on the basis of the latest report in the Canberra Times?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! As the Chair understands it-
Mr HUNTI did explain that the basis of the legislation was the need to undertake an obligation we entered into to ensure that this facility was able to operate and would not be denied services needed to allow it to operate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The simple matter before the House at the moment is the request for leave to incorporate in Hansard.
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I am seeking clarification. My understanding was that the Minister said that the reason for the legislation before us was that report. I have no objection-
Mr HUNT-That report undoubtedly stimulated a concern by the Government. It felt that if Mr Hogg and those who supported him had sufficient numbers within the ALP in Victoria it could result in that facility not being given the services necessary to enable it to operate.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The matter must be dispatched.
Mr Morris-In other words, the Minister is kowtowing to Mr Hogg?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Is leave granted?
Leave granted.
The document read as jollows-
STRANGLE OMEGA BASE: VICTORIAN ALP
By COLIN BRAMMALL
The Victorian Government will try to stop the operation of the Omega navigation base in Victoria by restricting its power and water supplies, according to the official journal of the Victorian branch of the ALP.
"State conference recognised that the base is a Federal installation on Commonwealth land and that this limited actions to prevent its construction and operation by a State Government," the journal said in its latest issue.
However, the State Government will not, following a resolution carried by national conference, offer any services to the base.
"This should have the effect of preventing its use.
"Restriction of services could include power and water supply."
The ALP State Secretary, Mr Bob Hogg, said yesterday that the State conference had carried a resolution recommending to national conference that all sections of the party withhold co-operation in the operation of the base.
He admitted that the wording in the journal, Labor Star, should have been "subject to a resolution" by national conference, not "following". He also said that he had rewritten the item for Labor Star from an earlier version.
The drawing of attention to the State conference resolution will further embarrass the Cain Labor Government in Victoria, already embroiled in the nuclear-ships controversy.
The Omega base, although it does not have a very high defence role because warships generally use more sophisticated navigation equipment, is considered by left-wing sections of the Labor Party to make Australia a target for nuclear attack.
The Omega system is an eight base world-wide, all-weather system used by ships, aircraft including commercial airlines, land vehicles, and submarines down to 20 metres.
The Australian link, at Woodside, 250 kilometres southeast of Melbourne, is not operational although its tower, more than 400 metres high, was completed in January.
The Victorian branch conference was held on April 24, three weeks after the election which took Labor to power in Victoria for the first time in 27 Years.
It was completed in about 4t hours and very little debate took place on any of the resolutions.
There was virtually no publicity then or since about its decisions.
The vote at next month's national conference could be close. The last time the party's attitude to Omega was debated, there was a majority of only one in favour of it.
However, as Mr Hogg said yesterday in the current political climate he doubted the Victorian resolution would be supported.
Omega was originally proposed in 1967, had the support of the McMahon Government at the time it lost office in 1972, was supported by the Labor Prime Minister from 1972-75, Mr

1310 REPRESENTAnVES 9 September 1982

Omega Navigation Facility Bill

Whitlam, and had qualified support from Mr Hayden when he was defence spokesman but was not given the final go ahead until 1976, by the Liberal Government.
Mr HUNT-The honourable member for Shortland raised another matter. He asked how this installation would affect relationships between countries and he cited the case of the recent conflict between Argentina and the United Kingdom. The fact of the matter is that it is a navigation aid. It is like a lighthouse. It will be there to provide a service to shipping and aviation, as indeed any navigation aid or navigation facility would be available to ships or aircraft generally. I support the view of the honourable member for Brisbane (Mr Cross) that it is a great pity that this installation was not available long ago to shipping and aircraft. I regard as scurrilous the remarks of the honourable member for Shortland against my colleague the honourable member for Gippsland (Mr Nixon), the Minister for Primary Industry. The issues were debated in this Parliament and I am surprised that he brought them in today. It was obviously with the idea of trying to smear and besmirch the name of the honourable member for Gippsland. It is an outrageous thing for him to have done when the issue was debated some years ago in this Parliament. Still, that is the nature of the gentleman. However, my time has drawn to a close and I have nothing further to say at this stage.
Mr Morris-Mr Deputy Speaker, I find the remarks made by the Minister objectionable.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-If the honourable gentleman is seeking permission to make a personal explanation on the grounds of being misrepresented he is at liberty to do so when we have dispatched the question immediately before the House.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.
PERSONAL EXPLANAnON
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I now call the honourable member for Shortland. He can briefly dispatch the matter that concerns him.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-The accusation made by the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt) who is at the table is totally false as he knows. An accurate reading of the Hansard will show that I did not make the allegations or smear as he suggests. I related to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, and to the chamber the

minutes-they have been passed to Hansard-of the Department of Administrative Services. The rest of the information was read from Hansard. If the Minister regards that as a smear of his colleague, all I can say to him is: If the cap fits wear it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.
Sitting suspended from 6.2. to 8 p.m.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 8 September, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr LLOYD (Murray) (8.0)-The revelations of the report of the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union which came at the same time as the Budget reply of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) have meant that the Leader of the Opposition's alternative Budget has been forgotten. I think this is very fortunate for him and his Party because it would be the worst Budget reply by an Opposition Leader that I have heard in my 12 years in this Parliament. In his Budget reply came the second of the Leader of the Opposition's two recent miraculous conversions. The first of these miraculous conversions was his sudden change from opposition to visiting United States of America warships to being in favour of them. This happened after he had a discussion with the United States special envoy. The second conversion was his sudden change from the idea that the appropriate level of the Budget deficit was around $1 ,500m to $1,700m-about the same as the Government's Budget deficit. He found a sudden need to increase this Budget deficit to about double, on his reckoning, the Government's deficit.
Honourable members will recall that media comment in the weeks leading up to the Budget, which indicated that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) would be budgeting for a deficit of about $1,700m, put the Leader of the Opposition in an awkward position. I think to his credit at that time that that was his serious and genuine consideration of the right level of the Budget deficit. In that way actually he was supporting the general economic principles and parameters of the Budget. The media comments led to the need for the Leader of the Opposition to have something considerably different so that he then would be free to criticise the Government. I believe this means several

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1311

things-none of them good-for the Opposition. First of all, it may mean that Opposition members have not done any serious economic thinking in relation to what their Budget would be if they were in government or what would be the correct Budget for this country at the present time. It may mean that they have done that thinking and come to the same conclusion as the Government and then decided, for political expediency, to throw that away and come up with this figure, on their reckoning of the size of the Budget deficit, of about double the Government's figure. This sudden change is reflected in the bad arithmetic and lack of detail in the Opposition leaders speech.
Ken Davidson, an economic journalist for the Melbourne Age who is not known as a supporter of the Government, referred to the Opposition leader's Budget reply as an 'outrageous brand of snake oil'. In this very critical comment on the Opposition leader's Budget reply he made serveral points. He hoped, first of all, that it would not be the basis of Opposition economic policy and, secondly, that the Opposition leader's economic arithmetic was wrong. Thirdly, he thought that if it were implemented it would probably cause increased inflation and, almost certainly, an international collapse of confidence in the Australian dollar. That is the comment of an economic journalist on the Budget alternatives presented by the Leader of the Opposition. The people of Australia, although there would be no point in their showing any great interest in the Opposition leader's speech if they are looking for Labor's economic policy, should be very interested in one aspect of that policy-that is, the policy on a capital gains tax.
Members of the Labor Party lived to regret that they came out openly in support of a capital gains tax during the last Federal election. However, if one reads the same economic journalists following the Australian Labor Party's national conference of a couple of months ago one will see that the general indications are that the Labor Party's interpretation of section 26 of the Income Tax Assessment Act is now so broad that it would be able to implement, by adhering to its policy, a far broader and more severe capital gains tax than was actually its policy in the 1980 election. One might not have much admiration for the economic sense of the Opposition leader's speech but actually it is far better than that of his shadow Ministers. Whatever increased expenditure the Government has announced in a particular policy area, the shadow Ministers and others in the Labor Party have said: 'Well, that is not enough. If we were in government we would have done

more'. Where there has been no increased expenditure on a particular item or policy those Shadow Ministers would have made an increase.
We can look at tax cuts. The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) said in his contribution to the Budget debate: 'Well, the tax cuts weren't enough. They were only fairy floss'. Surely, this is an absurd attitude on the part of a group of senior Labor people who claim to be the alternative government of this country. Do they mean what they say when they make these speeches on the Budget? If they do mean what they say it would result in a Budget deficit of at least $5,OOOm and rampant inflation. If they do not and they became the Government everyone would be saying: 'Look at their broken promises; there are even more broken promises than the number broken by the Cain Labor Government in Victoria. They are treating the Australian electorate with contempt. They are saying, in effect, that they can say anything they like in this Budget debate in order to top the Government and nobody will hold them to their word. That is an absurd situation for senior Opposition members. In fact, the most quotable quote from the Leader of the Opposition's speech was that if Labor were returned to government it would have the most active front bench that Parliament has seen in years. Well, it would certainly be active because the Labor Party would be out-spending the bad years of the Whitlam Labor Government and causing rampant inflation in this country. Honourable members will remember the 35 per cent increase in the size of the Budget in 1974-75. That is what the Labor Party would be active about.
I congratulate the Treasurer for his Budget strategy. I believe he has maintained a noninflationary budgetary position while at the same time providing a stimulus to economic activity and employment creation. He has corrected many family assistance measures which needed to be adjusted because of inflation. I am particularly pleased about the significant tax and revenue adjustments. This Budget has raised the tax threshold, reduced the standard tax rate, introduced the special rebate of $250 for pensioners, increased the spouse rebate by $200, increased the family allowance for first and second children by 50 per cent and increased the permissible earnings for pensioners by 50 per cent. That is what I call target assistance-assistance where it is of most value, to families generally and, in particular, to single income families and to pensioner groups.
One aspect of the welfare measures in this Budget which I believe is of considerable importance in terms of principle and innovation has been

1312 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

largely overlooked. Many honourable members have commented on the family income supplement for dependent children which is available to low income families. It is somewhat similar, I think, to a supplement which the United Kingdom has had for a number of years. The significant point is not the fact that it is the same as the dependent child allowance or that it cuts out at a certain figure. To me the important point is that this is the first time, to my knowledge, since Federation that the Government has said that a family earning income as distinct from being on welfare is entitled to some special assistance because of the income of that family. In other words, we have crossed the dividing line that exists between people who are welfare recipients but not income earners in their own right as a family and therefore deserving assistance, and people who are income earners in their own right and are still deserving of assistance. For better or worse that is a very important change in the attitude of this Government and in this Parliament, too, to income support in this country.
My only criticism of the welfare measures announced by the Treasurer relates to the under 18 years of age unemployment benefit. There has been an increase of $4, from $36 to $40. There are two points about that which I think are wrong: Firstly, I think it is inadequate and, secondly, I think it is unpredictable. I believe the under 18 years of age unemployment benefit should be given on the basis of a percentage of the over 18 years of age single rate of unemployment benefit. In November the over 18 rate will be going up to $64. Even if we say that 70 per cent of that rate is the correct position for under-18-year-old beneficiaries-I think that might be about rightthat would at least lift the unemployment benefit to about $45 for those under 18 years and would make the whole assessment of them more sensible and predictable.
Education assistance is one of the other major areas of catch-up with more generous allowances. For example, the means test level for the secondary students allowance has increased by 44 per cent so that it is now uniform with the level for the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance, which level itself has gone up by II per cent. The allowances themselves have increased by 20 per cent. This will provide a significant encouragement for lower income parents to keep their children in secondary education. One calculation shows that about 50 per cent more secondary students will be eligible for this assistance. I believe that is a very important point. Increasing the TEAS allowance by 20 per cent destroys the Australian Labor Party's smear and fear campaign

that a loans scheme would mean the end of TEAS. So much for that particular furphy that the Opposition was putting around.
In my electorate a high percentage of young people are apprenticed, self-employed or in small business have choosen not to go on to tertiary education. They are envious of the loan scheme. They do not knock it but they are envious of it because there is no similar scheme for young people who are outside the tertiary system. They would love to have a similar type of loans scheme for themselves in their early years of employment and endeavour.
The only criticism I have about TEAS-it is one that the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher) and I, and others, have been making for years and years in this place-is that the Government still does not recognise the greater cost problems that are necessarily imposed on tertiary students, or the parents of tertiary students, when a family lives in the country and the student must leave home to obtain a tertiary education. It may be 10 kilometres, 200 kilometres or 500 kilometres to the nearest tertiary institution. The student does not wish to leave home. There should be a basic non-means tested allowance for the students, or if you like the parents, in the geographically isolated areas which most country members represent or there should be a separate and more generous means test for them. The honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) said in the debate last night-he thought he was making a beautiful winning point-that one of his family was getting the TEAS allowance. The point I am making is that it is damned unfair that somebody who lives in the city should have the opportunity to decide whether he wants to leave home to attend a tertiary institution when young people in the country must leave home to attend a tertiary institution.
I now refer to the support for agriculture in the Budget. There has been considerable criticism by the National Farmers Federation and other farmer organisation leaders that the Budget ignores the rural sector. I believe their comments are unfair, contradictory and hypocritical for the following reason. First of all, the Budget really is only an annual stocktaking or estimate of what assistance measures cost in the year just gone and what they will probably cost in the year under review. For example, last year these calculations indicated that there would be a possible reduction of 20 per cent in these assistance measures. The measures included do not cover all forms of assistance. For example, taxation measures are completely outside these calculations. At that time one headline in the rural Press stated: 'Farmers

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1313

treated badly: Support down 20 per cent.' What has happened this year? This year it is calculated that the amount of support for the rural sector will be up 40 per cent. But there is still no recognition of this by the rural Press. The Victorian Stock and Land magazine-I am not particularly picking out Stock and Land; it is no better or worse than any other paper-carried the headlines 'Farm leaders condemn Budget' and 'Budget: Little for farmers'. There is no mention at all that income assistance measures or support measures in the year under review are up 40 per cent whereas last year they were down 20 per cent. Surely if these people were consistent in calculating whether a Budget was good or bad for the rural sector they would stick to the same principles each year.
They also ignore the fact that most assistance measures for agriculture are automatic through stabilisation or underwriting schemes or natural disaster arrangements. If economic circumstances deteriorate in particular industries government support begins. Of course, the beef industry is the major exception to that safety net arrangement. I hope that this will be rectified within the next 12 months. However, in looking at the major forms of assistance in this Budget it can be seen that the beef industry obviously has received special assistance and attention to the value of approximately $38m more than last year. The main feature is of course the forging of the $23.5m owed to the tuberculosis and brucellosis eradication program. Beyond that there is financial help for the introduction of the new carcass description and objective measurement arrangements. Finally there is a forgiving of any increase in the meat inspection charges, which means that the Government's percentage of those charges will increase from 50 per cent, which is the usual calculation, to 75 per cent this year. Of course, in addition there are 2 major initiatives to assist the rural sector. Once again these are outside the Budget context. For example, announced before the Budget was the accelerated depreciation allowance of 33t per cent for new plant and equipment. I think that what is of equal significance but not highlighted is that second hand machinery will be eligible for 20 per cent depreciation. Other country members and I would have heard criticism time after time from machinery agents about no incentive being given for the purchase by farmers of very good and adequate second hand machinery. Now we have that incentive in the 20 per cent depreciation provision for second hand machinery.
Of importance also are the very generous additional two forms of drought assistance announced by the Minister for Primary Industry

(Mr Nixon). They are automatic and there is no requirement for any form of State assistance. Even if one looks beyond those two forms of additional assistance-the drought fodder assistance and the interest rate subsidy-one will see that in the two previous years, under the core arrangements with the States for drought assistance, the Commonwealth has paid $100m for natural disaster assistance. What makes me wild is that the announcement in the Budget that there would be a rebate on home interest payments over and above 10 per cent was considered by city people and city members of parliament to be wonderful social justice. However a rebate to limit interest to 12 per cent for farmers in necessitous circumstances after liquidating their easily realisable assets was considered a special deal for the farmers and something unfair and rotten. What double standards some of these people have.
The rural Press and some rural industry leaders are contradictory in their attitudes to the Budget. They say that the Government's main sin relative to the rural sector is that it is not adequately pressing for lower protection and that the Budget was not deflationary. The majority of farmers in my electorate, in their complaints to me, have dissociated themselves from this criticism. They quite rightly have requested more protection from what they consider to be unfair import competition or more budgetary assistance to combat what they perceive to be unfair export competition. However, the contradictory argument inherent in the National Farmers Federation's approach is shown by, first of all, its own budgetary shopping list. It criticises the Government for not fully accepting this list but it has been costed at an additional $4,000m. That is hardly deflationary.
Secondly, its argument on protection is selective and inconsistent because, in addition to the point I made concerning farmers in my electorate, it completely ignores the very great level of interstate or internal protection in Australia. That is a significant form of protection on which it is .very quiet. That includes, for example, State government preference and contract clauses, professional organisations' restrictive practices and privately enforced fee scales. What is the Livestock and Grain Producers Association of New South Wales saying about protection for the dairy industry in New South Wales? It will criticise the dairy industry generally in Australia because of its concern about possible imports, but it says nothing about the restrictions on free trade in dairy products or the restrictions on rice areas. For that matter, nor does the National Farmers Federation say anything about sugar. With those comments, I support the Budget.

1314 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (8.21)-1 want to take the honourable member for Murray (Mr Loyd) to task simply on one point. He suggested that the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) gave little or no consideration to providing a serious alternative to the Budget. I think, quite the contrary, that in every speech on the Budget that the Leader of the Opposition has made since he has been in that office he has not only criticised the Government's Budget but also has sought to set out an alternative. That contrasts with the period in which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) was Leader of the Opposition when he repeatedly refused to be precise on what the Liberal and National Country parties' policy would be on any point. We had no alternative from the Prime Minister when he was in opposition. That contrasts with the Australian Labor Party which, through its front bench, has put together the most comprehensive set of policies ever devised by an Opposition in the Parliament.
I want to talk about some of the issues underlying the Budget. As we all know, the economy is in severe recession. That is what the Treasurer (Mr Howard) acknowledged in the Budget Papers. They suggest higher unemployment, higher inflation, no growth, perhaps even declining gross national product this year, the prospect of a decline in real earnings for wage and salary eaners, that interest rates may go even higher, massive increase in the overseas debt and taxes that have never been higher. Who is responsible, one might ask, for this situation? For the Government it is a matter of shifting responsibility from itself. The Treasurer blames the international economy- 'the international recession now hitting us hard'- and once again the trade union movement-'the excessive growth in wages has made matters worse'. However, the Government itself must take the lion's share of the blame. When the Liberal and National Country parties were in Opposition they placed no emphasis on international circumstances. For example, in 1973-74 it was Labor's recession. When the Liberal and National Country parties came to power they gave clear undertakings. They entered into solemn promises without qualifications-jobs for all who wanted to work; inflation would be brought down; interest rates would not rise and would be reduced; growth would be restored to the Australian economy. When it suited them-for example, prior to the last election-they did not express any concern about the penetration of the Australian economy by international capital.

They expressed wild enthusiasm about capital intensive, energy intensive, export oriented models of development. There were then no reservations.
Whatever claims the Government may have had for having an economic strategy now appear to be discredited. This country, which helped to pioneer monetarism within the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, is now the victim of that philosophy. The Government set out to wring inflation out of the Australian economy. Inflation is well above 10 per cent and still rising. It promised to promote growth. Australia is well down in the tables on growth and this year will have no growth at allperhaps even negative growth. It promised to provide jobs for all who wanted to work. This year at least half a million Australians will be on the dole. It promised to reduce taxes. This year income taxes will be at a record level. It promised to reduce big government. This year the Government will take its largest ever share of the community's resources.
The Government has lost all claim to be a government with a strategy. That is why this Budget is reduced to the lowest level of opportunism. This is because the people who run this Government are dominated in the final analysis by one motive-to cling to power at whatever price. They are people devoid of conscience and of principle, motivated only by the base desire for self-preservation. A millionaires' club of wealthy graziers who believe that they have a God-given right to rule, irrespective of performance is wracked by scandal ranging from electoral malpractice through large scale tax evasion down to Customs avoidance. They are all desperate men who enjoy the fruits of office and who will do anything to stay there. They have no interest in policy or in the future of this country except insofar as they believe it has a responsibility to maintain them in power.
This Budget, framed with an early election in mind, is a brazen attempt to buy the Australian people. However, even if one credits the Government with having started off on the monetarist road with some semblance of principle, one must ask: Why has it failed? The Treasurer claimed that few predicted the world recession. This might be credible had there in fact been recovery since 1973-74, but the reality is that the recession has remained for that period with only minor and temporary upturns. The problem is not so much one of prediction as one of finding a way out of the recession. The Government, some would argue, rather than being a victim of the recession,

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1315

has been one of the principal factors in maintaining it. After all, as I suggested earlier, this Government has been one of the principal governments in the OECD to advocate the monetarist way out of recession with extremely unfortunate results.
Monetarism as practised in New Zealand, in Australia, in Great Britain, or in the United States of America has in fact resulted in even sharper downturns than might otherwise have been the case. However, monetarism has failed not only to encourage higher rates of growth; it has also not solved the problems of inflation, unemployment and interest rates. Indeed, in this country one might argue that it has made all those factors much worse. Monetarism has been no panacea. Indeed, in some respects it has underlined the failure of economists to provide any solution to the problems faced by Western economies. In my view, there will be no solution to the economic crisis either in Australia or anywhere else until it is realised that the problems that we in the Western world face flow from much deeper roots than simply setting money supply targets. It is not simply a matter of manipulating a few levers.
The problems faced in Australia flow from shifting configurations of power which are in turn reflected in the Australian economy-for example, the emergence of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries and the enormous influence that that grouping of oil producing nations has had on Western economies and the dominating and increasing power of multinational corporations and shifting investment patterns whereby Australia is forced, not by its own decision but by the decision of those major corporations, to restructure its entire economy. If this Government is right in asserting that it has lost control of the Australian economy and that it is now totally dependent on developments in the international economy, we are in a very serious situation because we have to ask: Who controls the international economy? Does not this really mean that the Government has surrendered to the power of international corporations? Surely this would mean effectively the end of democracy as we know and understand it.
On the other hand, if one does not accept that as a reality, if one wants to reassert national control over the economy, more is involved than the shifting of a few levers of domestic economic policy. The reality is that we are, and are becoming more so, one of the least planned economies in the developed world, and this situation in my view is basic to our difficulties. We have a government which is prepared to surrender to international capital and makes no serious effort to achieve

national control. Thus we have seen the Government, until recently, seize on a model of growth and development which had a number of quite serious consequences for the Australian economy. That is the model of energy and capital intensive, export oriented development as outlined in the report of the Crawford Study Group on Structural Adjustment.
Associated with this model of development are a number of side effects which the Government has failed to anticipate and which are basic to the pessimistic picture contained in this year's Budget Papers. Let us remember the enthusiasm of the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) about so many of these resource projects. Those side effects include the complete dependence of these projects on international markets, now in deep recession; the massive capital requirements of this form of development on both the public and private sectors; all the pressure that has been generated, combined with tight monetary policy on interest rates not thought through and not planned for; the long lead times involved in capital formation before a return can be achieved on a particular project; the pressure on interest rates which flows from the huge demands on capital for the export centre; and the sophisticated analysis required to assist market prospects. It simply was not good enough to rely on the aluminium companies themselves to tell us what would happen through the 1980s. I refer to the need for sophisticated planning mechanisms to ensure that resources were available at a price which would be consistent with a planned and orderly development of the industries concerned; the need to build up Australia's capacity to manufacture the capital goods required for these industries rather than face the huge bill to import the capital goods required in these kinds of industries. The reality is that it is simply not possible to proceed on this path of development without putting effective planning mechanisms in shape.
The distortions which have occurred in the Australian economy are the result of pursuing a course of development which is now exacting an immense price. I refer, for example, to the distortions in the area of wages and salaries as a result of the Government's decision to abandon centralised wage fixation at the same time as it was pursuing a course of development which would mean high wage demands in particular resource areas. The billions of dollars of idle capital result not from high wages but from the unavailability of the world markets for the product as a result of over enthusiastic endorsement of projects. Immense problems flow from States such as Western

1316 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Australia which have economies which are completely geared towards this type of development and for which no realistic alternative has been planned during a period of international recession.
Further, there has been a shift of responsibility to the States. As Budget Paper No.6 shows the Fraser Government has shifted the burden of capital development to the States. The proportion of Commonwealth receipts transferred to the States has declined somewhat in recent years. The decline is more marked if, in addition to grants, Commonwealth advances to the States are taken into account. It is also noteworthy that to maintain outlays as a proportion of gross domestic product since the mid-1970s in the face of a relative decline in total Commonwealth assistance the State and local government sectors have relied more upon increased borrowing and lease type arrangements than on increased revenue raising. That is, the States have been forced into hock while the Commonwealth has reduced its debt in relation to many of those capital projects.
The States and local government have had transferred to them the burden of this type of development at a time of rising interest rates. They now have in the form of these investments much idle capital which is contributing nothing to assist them with their problems of unemployment and underemployment. At Portland in Victoria, an investment of $600m is doing absolutely nothing for the Victorian economy. Hundreds of millions of dollars are going into the Loy Yang power station, a form of development which simply was not planned at a rate and a scale that the Australian economy could stand. This is not to underestimate or ignore the increased burden on the States of reduced funds for health, education, public transport, housing, and much-needed public services generally. The achievement of the Fraser Government has been to transfer the political burden of changing economic structures from itself to the States, which is why all State governments, irrespective of their political persuasion, are now in jeopardy.
There is, of course, an alternative to the policies which are being pursued by the Fraser Government. The Opposition has been seeking to articulate that alternative. There is a need to turn against monetarism as an economic doctrine. There is a need for more refiationary policies which will allow room for growth in the domestic economy. There is a need for genuine policies of redistribution which will effectively reduce the tax burden on wage and salary earners and seek to ensure that capital pays its fair share of taxation. As the Budget papers show, in the period 1972-73

to 1981-82, personal income tax receipts as a proportion of total receipts rose from 43.1 per cent to 52 per cent. It is the Government of honourable members opposite that did that.
The major share of the increase in total personal income tax has been borne by pay-as-youearn taxpayers. While income taxes have increased from 9.5 per cent to 14.3 per cent of gross domestic product, company taxes have declined from 3.8 per cent to 3.5 per cent of GOP. Indirect taxes have been increased massively, especially as a result of the crude oil levy. Taxes which would bring some equity, such as inheritance taxes have been eliminated, and a capital gains tax has not been implemented. Tax evasion has grown into a multi-billion dollar industry. As I think the Costigan report indicates that explains something of the shift in the tax burden. There is a need to change the thrust of taxation in this country to ensure that capital pays its fair share of investment, to ensure that people with capital are encouraged to invest in productive forms of investment as opposed to speculative forms of investment. There is a need to initiate policies which have as their object the fostering of growth and development as opposed to the strangulation of the Australian economy.
These policies are not concerned simply with stimulation. The Australian economy needs to be given a new direction, designed not merely to look after a few big firms but to ensure that the form of development benefits people in the broadest sense and to ensure that we achieve in this country a much more diversified industrial base. This will require planned development. The Opposition is planning the establishment of an economic planning advisory council as well as a new department of economic planning. The Australian economy requires an industry policy which meshes in with the macroeconomic objectives established in a department of planning. It requires in turn that assistance be given to industry-this Government never misses an opportunity to hand out money to business and industry, but that that money is provided in return for assurances that the overall objectives of the Government are being met. For example, while there is a very strong case for industry assistance to the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd, it should not be given if that company is not prepared to ensure that employment levels in the steel industry are maintained and a program of rationalisation and upgrading of the industry carried into effect. We need a selective industry development policy designed to ensure that Australia has a strong and viable manufacturing sector. This will not happen without industry and without planning of its development, without

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1317

established framework concerning which there is a consensus in the community.
Australia cannot stand a continuation of the stop-go lopsided industry policies we have had to endure during the past few years. A stable planning framework needs to be achieved based on agreed objectives and an orderly, planned rate of development. Free enterprise government eschews planning because it does not wish to offend fractions of capital. However, the end result is that industry as a whole suffers because no clear direction is given by government. Economic and industry policy has suffered from Government disinterest in policy questions. The Government does not bring the subject of economic and industry policy to the Parliament for serious debate because it does not know what it thinks itself. It is torn asunder by wets and drys, free traders and protectionists, pork barrellers and States righters. What we need now in a time of difficult circumstances is not propaganda designed to obscure the issues but a genuine debate in which alternative directions are effectively talked out.
Under this Government we have seen the slow a~d certain killing of the Parliament as an effective forum of debate. Because of the authoritarian tendencies of the Prime Minister he has for the most part eschewed debate. There had to be a leadership challenge in his own party room to force some discussion of the economy. He is still, in the context of this Budget, fighting for his own political life. This, of course, is producing the greatest uncertainty and helping to bring down to an even lower level the already sick Australian economy. Meanwhile, each week thousands of people are added to the lists of unemployed. Each day we hear another story of a plant closure and of layoffs across the country. People are unemployed for longer, new age groups are affected, people-especially women-are getting only part time work and more and more regions are affected. The lack of government concern is reflected in the fact that even the figures on unemployment in this Budget are rubbery. The Government cannot even count the unemployed fairly. We are heading for a disaster which has been predicted for years. People lack a sense of hope for the future. People's faith in the political
process is being diminished and enormous burdens are being placed on the welfare and education systems.
In this context all that the Prime Minister can think about is his own political survival. It is sad that it should come to this but he belongs to a generation of born to rule, out of touch, old world rural establishment figures, always overrepresented in conservative Cabinets. They have

to be pushed to one side because they do not understand and do not want to understand this country. They are dangerous because they will always cave in to any interest to suit their own base desires for survival. Whilst they regard themselves as men of stature in fact they have feet of clay and are easily corrupted by power. They are insensitive because their only experience has been that of living with their class and exercising authority. They use the democratic system to their advantage but they are not democrats. Rather they are manipulators, operators, who would sacrifice every political convention, use every connection to fulfil their own ambition to be seen to be powerful and to enjoy the fruits of office. They must be exposed for the danger they do to this nation is incalculable.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (8.41)-We have just heard another speech which has become traditional in this Parliament-a speech of criticism. I have a speech of criticism in some regards also. I am fortunate in being on this side of the House as I am entitled to do that without any fear. During my speech I hope to put forward some solutions. That seems to be the difference between the type of speech that I want to make and the type of speech which has constantly come from the other side of the House since this debate commenced. This Budget, like many others presented in this Parliament, particularly by the Whitlam Government, attempts to provide for the principal desire of most Australians; that is, more government expenditure and less taxation. In this Budget expenditure is up by 13.9 per cent while revenue is up by 11.3 per cent. The gap is filled by the usual method of a deficit-government debt; the free lunch syndrome, otherwise known as the no future lunch syndrome.
Mr Morris-Leave the Western Australian Liberal Party out of it.
Mr TUCKEY-When the honourable member gets a bit taller he can come and talk to me. Australia could probably afford some free lunches if it did not demand morning and afternoon tea as well. Australians might be less inclined tc demand free lunches if they were not continually promised utopia by the policeman who learnt economics but never practised it and, who, of course, now leads the Opposition. He is a man who has no difficulty in double counting, for instance, the financial benefits to the Australian community of the present tax purge. Whilst I do not deny the need for equity it is economic madness to suggest

1318 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

that the Government as well as the private sector can spend all the unpaid tax that is presently being mentioned in this place. Further, it is rather foolish to suggest that the Government will spend it better.
Mr Cunningham-You reckon it's okay, is it?
Mr TUCKEY-I do not care. I say that the Government does not spend the money well. I say that all people should be taxed accordingly.
Mr Cohen-Don't pay tax to the Government.
Mr TUCKEY-No, just make it less tax for everybody.
Mr Morris-Just make the Western Australian Liberals pay.
Mr TUCKEY-I made the point about equity, do not let us worry about it. This Budget should be viewed in the light of what it gives. Contrary to popular belief all Federal Budgets are mostly about giving. An amount of 71.5 per cent of this Budget is refunded in a very obvious and direct way to the Australian community and government bodies. I refer in particular to the expenditure areas of health, education, recreation, housing and social security, where expenditure will reach $21.515 billion-a figure which is only $1.831 billion below the total amount of personal income tax that this Budget expects to raise. This indicates to me that if Australians were to look after themselves in these basic areas income tax would be unnecessary. Honourable members should note further that this sector of expenditure has a percentage increase above the average. For instance, social security expenditure rose by 15.4 per cent against the 13.9 per cent average.
I am concerned at the debilitating effect that this ever-increasing reliance on government is having on our community. I am further concerned at the level to which politicians contribute to this syndrome by presenting government as the beneficial provider and hiding the financial and moral cost to our nation. Consequently I have proposed several measures in my party room which might create a better public understanding of government finance in the community and, I hope, will introduce a higher level of government fiscal responsibility.
There are three stated rules for a good tax. Honourable members opposite can disagree with these if they like. These are: Simplicity, certainty and equity. To those I have added visibilityvisibility because a quick glance at this Budget will indicate that only half of the money collected in this Budget will be obvious to the community. That part is the personal income tax. Even

company tax is confined to board rooms and, because of its position in a double taxing arrangement, becomes a cost of production invisibly bearing on consumers in the end.
My first proposal, therefore, is for a welfare levy. Welfare, to me, is not just social security. I include health, education, housing and recreation in this area. The levy should be structured more on an assessed ability to pay with self-employed persons being matched with similar levels of employment in the work force. This Budget proposes to collect an average of personal income tax of approximately $2,800 per taxpayer-approximately half our taxpayers will pay less than that. Further, 30 per cent of personal income taxpayers make payments between $2,000 and $3,000. So the average figure could be considered typical. Under the proposal some examples of the account rendered to the recipients of a $3,000 levy would be as follows: Aged persons, $680; unemployed persons, $220; education, $500-at $2,000 a pupil that could be considered pretty reasonable I guess-and health, $380. Taxpayers would know what they got for their money and one could hope that they would indicate their concern when certain areas of expenditure became unreasonable. This proposal, of course, is a derivative of the social security contribution system which applies in many countries. There is little doubt in my mind that successive Australian governments, reliance on high levels of personal income tax and the progressive system that applies, are the main cause of tax avoidance and evasion. Tax avoidance may be considered a preserve of the wealthy. Tax evasion is practised at all levels and is not really affected by the present level of morality which exists in this place.
The Government is, and has been fair game to the Australian community in the areas of both expenditure and revenue. Personal income tax, the only visible tax, is seen to be inequitable. Efforts to achieve redistribution of wealth by this method have failed dismally. Is it therefore not surprising that our Treasurer (Mr Howard) has sought to relieve the general personal income tax burden by broadening the tax base and applying additional turnover taxes. I support this philosophy. In fact, a turnover tax is integral to the types of proposals I support, provided that is, it is a replacement for present levels of taxes collected. Nevertheless I oppose the present methodology which, by the way, is the product of successive governments, all of which have tried to take the easy way out by sticking with the status quo rather than by introducing new and sensible taxes as replacements for proven failures, particularly

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1319

when they fail to meet the criteria of simplicity, certainty, equity and visibility.
Oppositions are also culpable for the present state of affairs. Nothing is more like manna from heaven for an Opposition than a government which attempts to restructure the tax system. The public is never given the chance to view the situation dispassionately. Political point scoring must supersede economic common sense on these occasions. In truth, if I might speak as a taxpayer, my concern is with the bottom line and the right to know what the bottom line is. Our present revenue system denies me and all other contributors that right. Consequently, the Treasurer, in seeking to expand his revenue base, has been forced to follow the established principles. I am sure he would like to do it differently. The consequence of that is that the application becomes indiscriminate and, therefore, inequitable.
I wish to deal with these inequities in detail, but before doing so I shall touch on the broad philosophy. Successive governments have continually addressed the problem of equity by applying band aids. The present system of applying a turnover tax is by use of the wholesale sales tax. This tax is relatively simple to apply. Recent events prove that it is not necessarily certain. Selective application at levels from zero to 32.5 per cent destroy any semblance of equity. Wholesale sales tax not only is invisible but it is also extremely difficult for a consumer to calculate the actual tax as the price of any item could vary considerably from place to place. It is my view that a consumer tax should be generally and uniformly applied at the point of sale for consumption. Such a tax would be simple, and certainly would be better than the present tax, if only because uniformity would make surveillance reasonably simple. It would certainly be visible, as any person retaining his receipts for a year could calculate his tax contribution.
That leaves the question of equity. Equity is guaranteed by uniformity. If one paid a tax on all one's expenditure one would pay tax relative to one's income. I admit the tax would not be progressive, but the present wholesale tax is not necessarily so. The other criticism frequently used by the Opposition in recent days is that a consumer tax is regressive and inflationary. Inflation, unfortunately, is measured in Australia by association with the consumer price index. A consumer tax would of course increase the consumer price index. However, if a more realistic index such as the one applying to farmers' and miners' income, namely the export price index, were in place to calculate wages and salaries, such a tax would not be inflationary. Taxes are taxes. The level of

government burden-whatever it is-is inflationary if wages are adjusted to take it into account. Inflation is not caused by increased wages or taxes; it is caused by increased cost of unit production.
A number of arguments suggest that such a tax would be best applied to funding the States and local government. Further, within reasonable economic guidelines, the level of this tax could be set by the States and local government which would also accept the political responsibility for such an action. The two revenue proposals I have suggested could at least provide all the finance necessary for the refund area I have already mentioned. The rest of the Commonwealth expenditure could then be funded by the present company tax and the social excise. I am well aware that these proposals lack refinement and would have to be viewed in the light of the effect one such revenue method eventually would have on another. Nevertheless, I trust that members from both sides might replace their political hats with economic hats and use these suggestions as a base for considering a government revenue structure which will provide for the four principles I have promoted. I am sure there will be no critics of those principles, at least.
Having disposed of the theory I shall discuss the revenue initiatives of this Budget. My criticism of these proposals must be considered in the light of the restraints that I have indicated restrict a Treasurer in gaining a level of employment and revenue necessary to meet the demands of the community. To me, the most surprising new tax was the tax on bank debit transactions or, more simply, the tax on cheques. This tax will range from IOc on cheques for amounts below $100 to $1 on cheques for amounts over $5,000, and will be additional to in-place charges such as State duty of lOc and bank charges of approximately 15c. If one includes mailing and stationery costs it would now be reasonable to say that the cost of sending a $5,000 cheque could be as high as $2. Such a cheque, by the way, is no longer a large one for people in small business.
This tax must be criticised for numerous reasons. In this day of computers it will be both simple and certain. It is certainly not equitable as it discriminates against those who are obliged to use cheques. Such people include small business people and the self employed who rely on their cheque books as the basis of their bookkeeping systems. It must further discourage the use of our trading banks and reduce their ability to remain the backbone of our lending institutions. More importantly, the decision is foolish as its application will encourage the expansion of the cash

1320 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

economy and the simplification of tax evasion which cash transactions create. I implore the Government to remove this discriminatory tax. The estimated revenue of $200m will not match the additional tax lost through evasion. In attempting to control the cash economy the Government has set out to impose pay-as-youearn provisions on subcontractors. I am not convinced that the objective will be achieved, as it appears that only those already working for approved contractors will be involved. These people could suffer a period of double taxation while the genuine tax evader will continue to demand cash for weekend work.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Blaxland.
Mr TUCKEY-Another move to gain additional revenue was to extend the well established fuel excise to users of off-highway equipment. Again this has been applied in a most discriminatory fashion and is therefore unjust. Farmers, miners, fishermen, forestry organisations, hospitals and the domestic sector are to be exempted by rebate. I accept the need for a change to a rebate system as a replacement for the diesel exemption certificate because substantial abuse has been identified. I believe the proposals to collect and refund the rebate now appear to be as convenient as possible. However, having resolved the problem of abuse, why use the opportunity substantially to expand the tax base? Some of the new revenue will go to the highly desirable area of road construction, yet substantial amounts of money will be clawed back through the fuel consumed in construction equipment. Local and State governments are naturally disenchanted. I support their viewpoint and trust that the Government will consider this matter when providing other funding.
Certain areas can convert to alternative tax free fuels. Most significant are the State government power houses and railways, so their problem is not necessarily as big as they make out. Consequently, my principal area of concern is the selective pressure that this proposal applies to small business people who have no alternative but to continue to use distillate. Some examples are country and remote area operators of tourist facilities, laundries, dry cleaners and abattoirs. Only distillate, with its universal application, is economically available in many areas, and this tax could add 20 per cent to the fuel cost of these people. Sums of $10,000 per annum are frequently mentioned. I call on the Government to extend its rebate system to all off-highway commercial or industrial consumers in areas where alternative fuels are not economically available.

The Budget has achieved some outstanding relief from taxation burdens, and I would be remiss not to say so. In particular, the Government's sincere and practical attempts to provide support for the Australian family structure, which support appears in both expenditure and revenue programs, has my total backing. There is a substantial indication that this Budget is sufficiently expansionary to assist many small businesses to survive and create employment. It nevertheless recognises the ability of Australians, present and future, to pay for expansionary Budgets, unlike the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) who proposed a Budget deficit twice this size financed by the printing press. Internal financial recovery can no more be financed by phony government money than it could be by the introduction of counterfeit dollars. (Quorum formed) The Budget debate is something that I think most back benchers treat as a privilege. I deplore entirely the efforts of one back bencher in calling a quorum on another. I do not think I have ever done that to the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy) nor would I. Another point of economic importance is the move to release one per cent of trading bank statutory reserve deposits from the Reserve Bank of Australia. This will particularly assist the building industry. I applaud this move but wish that we were able to extend it further. My view is that the time is right to return a substantial amount of these trading bank reserves for lending to the community.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Before calling the honourable member for Hunter I would like to make brief reference to a circumstance which required the Chair to punctuate the remarks of the honourable member for O'Connor by requiring other honourable members to observe the etiquette of the House. It is a condition of admittance of visitors to the Speaker's Gallery that they not engage in conversation and in all respect be circumspect so as not to detract from the decorum of the House. Increasingly the Speaker's Gallery has acquired the characteristics of a social club. I am sure that honourable members do not wish to offend. I give them a gentle reminder as to the requirements.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (9.1)-At 8 p.m. on Tuesday, 17 August, the Parliament and the nation went through the agony of hearing the Federal Treasurer (Mr Howard) present the most cynical and shonky Budget that has come before this Parliament since 1977. The Federal Budget is the most important set of financial documents

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1321

which this Parliament can consider. It should provide an honest appraisal of economic circumstances, an honest response to those circumstances and a clear indication of the Government's objectives and how it proposes to pursue those objectives. It should establish the parameters for sound economic management and seek to establish a national framework for sound economic growth. It should give expression to the social and economic aspirations of the Australian community so that as a result of the measures it contains the economy will be more equitable, stronger and more soundly based that would be the case had those measures not been adopted.
On all counts the Federal Budget fails miserably. It has replaced economic integrity with blatant window dressing; it has replaced financial integrity with cynical rhetoric. It has treated with the utmost contempt the widespread demands from all sections of the Australian people for a change in the direction of this Government's economic thinking. There is one reason, and one reason alone, for this Government's sentimental journey into rhetoric about its humane concern for the growing burden of inequity, injustice, insecurity and deprivation which it and it alone has thrust on to the shoulders of increasing numbers of the Australian people. That reason is its now dashed hopes for an early election. Outside the context of an early election this Budget makes no sense. It cannot stand up; it will start to fall to pieces as this fiscal year proceeds.
In connection with the general impact of the Budget, the Government is budgeting for a deficit this year which will represent one per cent of gross domestic product. It is interesting that in each year this Government has been in office it has gradually reduced the percentage of gross domestic product represented by the deficit. Last year it reached 0.4 per cent. This year, for the first time, it reverses direction. This is the policy of a government which has persisted with the claim that in order to achieve economic improvement in Australia it must reduce the deficit; it must rein in the deficit. This year, for the first time in the years that this Government has been in office, it has changed direction. Why has it done this? As I said earlier it has done it for one reason and one reason alone and that is the expectation that the Government had that there would be an early election. Those hopes have been dashed. If this Government were to go to an early election this year it would be annihilated and every member of the Parliament and the nation knows that to be so.
We should not be deluded into thinking that this Government has suddenly made some significant departure from its obsessive and exclusive

commitment to discredited monetarist nonsense. It has released the reins to some extent in order to provide the window dressing. I will give evidence shortly that the window dressing that has been provided has been more than raked back by this Government in increased taxation this year. Those figures will follow shortly. Of course, the Government still pursues the 'fight inflation first' theme. In introducing the Government's first Budget for 1976-77 the then Treasurer, Sir Phillip Lynch, said:
As we have stressed from the outset, we have made our first priority the absolute necessity to combat inflation.
The same thing has been repeated in each Budget since. In 1980-81 the present Treasurer said:
Unless we persist in our fight against inflation, our full economic potential will not be realised.
In last year's Budget-1981-81-the same Treasurer said:
We have therefore opted for a Budget which gives priority to containing and reducing inflation and sustaining private sector growth.
Those laudable objectives have been repeated again in this Budget. The success of the achievement of the prime objective, the basic objective and fundamental objective of this Government should be the measure of the Government's economic success. That was the Government's prime objective. Let us see how successful the Government has been in achieving its primary objective. In late 1975, when the last Labor Government was sacked, inflation in Australia was running at an annual rate of 12 per cent. Four years ago-in 1978-79-it was about 8 per cent. I repeat that the prime objective of this Government has been to control inflation. In 1978-79 inflation was 8 per cent. Let us see what has happened each year since then. In 1980-81 inflation was 9.4 per cent; in 1981-82 it was 10.7 per cent; and in 1982-83 it is estimated that it will be 10.75 per cent. So in terms of its primary objective, its fundamental objective, its first objective, its priority objective, this Government has failed and the Australian people know that it has failed.
What has been the result after six years of the most ruthless economic onslaught which any government has ever launched against the Australian people? We have gained overall 2 percentage points in the control of inflation. After six years of economic onslaught 2 percentage points have been gained in the control of inflation, which is now back into double figures and rising on the Government's own admission in its Budget. What has been the cost of this economic lunacy? First of all we have the highest level of unemployment since the Depression of the 1930s and it is rising. I will give some more details shortly to show the

1322 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

extent to which it is rising and will continue to rise. We have the highest level of taxation in the history of the Commonwealth, the greatest number of bankruptcies and liquidations ever, the lowest level of business and consumer confidence for as long as records have been kept, and an increase from one million to three million in the number of people living in poverty. That is one in five of Australian people. We have the highest level of interest rates ever recorded in Australia. Those things have resulted from this Government's obsession to reduce inflation. It has brought inflation down by two percentage points during those six years. As I said, inflation is now back into double figures and rising. Does it need a genius to see that this Government, this Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and this Treasurer have been absolute disasters for this country.
The position is even worse. It is bad enough when a government is incompetent. It is inexcusable when it locks this nation into a no growth economic strategy. I have said before that we need to achieve a real economic growth every year of 3t per cent at least in order to just hold unemployment at the present level. Not only will we not achieve it this year; this year there will be no growth in the non-farm sector. If we take the farm sector into account, we will have negative growth during this financial year. I said that this Government, by its own policies, has locked Australia into a no growth situation. Let me prove that. The first point I am going to make I made at the time of the last Budget. Let me repeat it.
What did this Government intend to do as a result of that last Budget? First of all, it forecast an inflation rate of 10.75 per cent. Secondly, it estimated that real growth would be about 3 or 3t per cent. If that was to be so and if inflation was to be 10.75 per cent and real growth was to be 3 to 3t per cent, it is quite obvious to anyone, apparently except this Government and this Treasurer, that one would have needed to provide for an increase in the money supply growth of about 14 per cent to accommodate that situation. What was the target that these brilliant economists applied last year? The money supply growth target was set at 10 to II per cent. If one realises that inflation is at 10.7 per cent and if the money supply growth is kept below 11 per cent, it is quite obvious that there will be insufficient capacity in the Australian economy for any significant growth to occur.
I said that the Government would not achieve last year a growth of 3 to 3t per cent and the Government did not achieve it. It did not achieve it because it could not achieve it. It could not achieve it because of that absurd Budget which

was adopted last year. Money supply growth overshot marginally the target last year for the fourth year in succession. It is just as well because if it had not done so we would not have even been able to squeeze out of the Australian economy the 2t per cent real growth that finally resulted. In the second six months of last year, our growth was 0.25 per cent. So it was gearing down like one of those old wind-up gramophones. It has now stopped. Economic growth has stopped, halted, come to an end in Australia and the implications of that I will make clear in a moment.
In the light of that experience one would have thought that the Government would have learned a lesson. Let us see what it has provided for this year. Let us see if it did learn anything from the absurd and extremely damaging economic policies that it adopted last year. Inflation this year is forecast, as I have said, at 10.75 per cent. The money supply growth target has been set within the range of 9 to II per cent. Let us assume that the money supply grows to the top level of that limit-that is, by II per cent. Inflation will absorb all of it. There will be no capacity again for any economic growth and on the Government's own admission there will be no economic growth. I do not want anyone to say that I am suggesting that all one has to do is to relax money supply growth targets in order to achieve economic growth. That would be an absurd suggestion. That is not what is being said by me at this stage. A number of other very important components in the whole framework or structure of economic policies need to be adopted. What I am doing at present is spelling out, in the simplest way that I can, for the simple minds on the Government benches that by their own admission they have been squeezing the possibility of any economic growth out of the Australian economy. What has this approach meant to the Australian people? Let us look, first of all, in terms of employment. I said we need at least 3t per cent growth just to hold unemployment at its present level. With no growth, unemployment this year will go through the roof. The Minister who was previously at the table, the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt), gave authority for this table to be included in Hansard. I seek the permission of the House for it to be so included.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

UNEMPLOYMENT PROJECTIONS
June 1982 to June 1983
June 1982Total Labour Force ('000) Total employment ('000) Total unemployment ('000)

6,826.5 6,378.7
447.8

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1323

Percentage unemployed ('000) Population aged 15 ('000)

6.6 11,282.4

June 1982 to June 1983-
Estimated that population aged IS + will grow by 2.1 %

June 1983-
Population aged 15 + ('000) . . . . . . 11,519.4

Assume constant participation rate of 60.5%

Therefore, labour force ('000) . . . . . 6,969.2

(a) With employment constant (estimated no increase in

real GDP and constant productivity)

Total employment ('000) . . . . . . . 6,378.7

Total unemployment ('000) . . . . . .

590.5

Percentage unemployed ('000) . . . . .

8.5

(b) With employment falling by 2% (estimated no in-

crease in real GDP and productivity increasing by 2%)

Total employment ('000)

6,251.1

Total unemployment ('000) . . . . .

718.1

Percentage unemployed ('000)

10.3

Mr ROBERT BROWN-I have taken out some projections for this current financial year concerning what is likely to happen to unemployment. I have assumed that the participation rate of the Australian population will remain at very much the same level that it was last year, that is, 60.5 per cent. I then made two assumptions: First of all, that employment will remain constant, that is, that the number of people in employment will still be the same in June of next year as it was in
June of this year. If that happens in terms of the increase in the number of people coming into the labour force we will have, by June of next year, total unemployment of 590,500. That compares with total unemployment in June of this year of 447,800. In June of this year, the unemployment level was 6.6 per cent. That calculation that I have just given-this is the lower of the twowould make the percentage unemployed in June of next year 8.5 per cent. During this year it is reasonable for us to expect that productivity will grow. It will probably grow by something like two per cent. We know gross domestic product will not grow. So we will require two per cent less employed to produce the same gross domestic product during this year. The total unemployment in June of this year is 447,800. In June of next year this will be 718,000. This represents 10.3 per cent of the labour force. I challenge any member on the Government side to check those figures in the Hansard tomorrow and attempt to disprove them. If they cannot be disproved-I give honourable members an assurance that they will not be disproved-there is a very strong probability that unemployment in June of next year in Australia will be in excess of 10 per cent of the labour force. If the participation rate falls, there could be a marginal improvement in those figures. I do not think it will fall because the people who are being thrown out of employment at present are breadwinners-for example, people in the steel industry-in whatever industry they happen

to be engaged in. They are not going to be people who drop out, who become discouraged job seekers or part of the disguised unemployment. The participation rate is likely to remain at very much the same level as it is at present. If unemployment approaches 10.3 per cent of the labour force in June of next year, what will this mean? First of all the labour force-that is, from June this year to June next year-will grow by 142,700. Unemployment will grow by 270,300. Therefore, even if no person entering the labour force between June 1982 and June 1983 gets a job in that 12 months there will still be 127,600 people who have jobs in June 1982 who will not have jobs in June 1983. Let me repeat that a total of 127,600 people who had jobs in June 1982 will not have jobs in the middle of next year. That is a shameful situation.
What else has this Government's economic approach meant to the Australian people? Let us have a look at the question of interest rates. Interest rates, of course, have not just been following overseas interest rates. The real level of interest rates in Australia is the highest in the Western world. They are being deliberately kept high by this Government in order to make sure that the $lO,OOOm that flowed into Australia last year to take advantage of high interest rates is kept in Australia and that, at the same time, we get a similar net inflow of capital this year to finance the current account deficit which will be $9,000m again this year. So the Government is deliberately keeping interest rates high. Do not let it suggest that the high level is being caused by overseas trends. We lead the world with the real level of our interest rates in Australia. Over the last few years interest rates on home loans have gone up by 4 per cent. Every time they increase by one per cent $300m is added to the interest payments of Australian home buyers. At present Australian home buyers, in addition to what they were paying a few years ago, repay $1 ,200m every year into the coffers of the big financiers. This amount is being ripped off the Australian home buyers. Average real incomes must fall.
I indicated earlier that the Budget this year is shonky. The figures are not only rubbery, they are also crook. They will be shown to be crook. The Budget will fall to pieces as the year proceeds. As I said when I started my speech, it made sense only when it was presented to the Parliament in the context of an early election. Exactly the same thing would happen this year as happened in 1977. The goodies, the superficial covering, the camouflage of what the Government maintains are concessions to the Australian people would be ripped back next year as soon as the election was

1324 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

over. I intend during the adjournment debates to proceed with some of the matters in this Budget. It is a damning indictment of this Government.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr ROCHER (Curtin) (9.22)-If we are to minimise the impact in Australia of the worldwide economic recession it is reasonable that the 1982-83 Budget is framed, as it is, to come to terms with internal factors which may come under the control or influence of the Commonwealth Government. In this, the Budget of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has been both innovative and realistic. To have managed to include reductions in personal taxes while increasing budgeted outlays by 2t per cent in real terms is no mean feat. Even though total taxes must nearly match outlays, it is idle nonsense to suggest, as the Opposition has, that taxes to be paid by individual wage and salary earners, taxes determined by the levels of income earned by personal exertion, will not be significantly reduced during this tax year. Significant and worthwhile income tax reductions will accrue to all Australian income earners as an inevitable consequence of this Budget.
Let me briefly reiterate some of the more important tax reductions which will come into force from 1 November. The income which may be earned by an individual before paying any income tax is to be increased from $4,195 to $4,595. That means that individuals may earn up to $88 per week without incurring a liability to pay personal income tax. Further relief is offered in the decision to increase the amount which may be earned before tax is levied at a rate greater than 30c in the dollar. Individuals may now earn up to $19,500 before the marginal rate of 46c in the dollar becomes appropriate. Both measures will be calculated pro rata from 1 November and in the following tax year, 1983-84, will be applied for the full period. I say 'pro rata' because the rate of tax to be used in calculating all rebates for the 1982-83 year for expenses such as health insurance, concessional expenditures generally, home loan and dividend rates, and certain retirement payments will be at the rate of 30.67c in the dollar.
Dependant rebates are also to be increased for the current tax year. For the first time, a distinction is to be made in dependent spouse or housekeeper rebates in cases where there are children dependent on the taxpayer. In future the rebate will be greater than that allowable if there are no dependent children. Now, if there are dependent children the maximum rebate will be $963

whereas if there are no dependent children the rebate will remain at $830. A new rebate is also to be introduced whereby taxpayers receiving either social security or repatriation pensions on which tax is payable will be entitled to a rebate of up to $250. Home loan interest rebates, in addition to those announced in March of this year, will be claimable in respect of interest paid on or after 1 July.
Mr Dawkins-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. Is it in order for former senators to read their speeches in this place?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! There is no point of order.
Mr ROCHER-In that I have an advantage over the honourable member for Fremantle; he cannot read. Similarly, rebates on dividend income of up to $1,000 paid to resident shareholders by resident companies will attract income tax rebates. All these measures are designed to benefit individual taxpayers. While conferring benefits on individuals they offer the promise of eventual job creation brought about by increased savings or consumption or both. Savings or spendings by individuals are prerequisites to either sustained or expanded economic growth. The fundamental reason for the recent surge in unemployment is, of course, the slow rate of growth in the Australian economy. It goes without saying that if Australia could somehow achieve a faster rate of economic growth jobs would be more plentiful, incomes would be higher, and fewer people would be dependent upon welfare and unemployment benefits.
As I see it, the Budget strategy is a threepronged attempt to observe an incentive tax policy designed to encourage productive effort, saving and investment; to contain the growth of government spending so that more resouces can be available to the private sector for investment and growth; and to maintain a consistent approach to monetary policy and thereby contain inflation. A fourth aim-to embark on a regulatory reform program to reduce counter productive regulations on business-would have been a welcome addition. In the Treasurer's Budget address he foreshadowed regulations which seek to overcome suspected tax evasion, possible in industries where large scale cash transactions occur or are believed to occur. The objective of circumventing tax evasion is meritorious and strikes a sympathetic cord with all but those who may derive benefit out of any thriving malpractices. Whether the methods to be employed as outlined in an information paper issued with the Budget Papers

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1325

are necessary or entirely appropriate is another matter.
In acknowledging the stated intention of the Government to defer adoption of laws and regulations until July 1983 some preliminary comment seems warranted on proposals to implement income tax deductions for labor and services as well as the alternative reporting system. Essentially, it is intended that 'selected payments for labour and services, not subject to the existing PAYE system will have tax deducted at source'. Further, 'householders who enter into certain building or contruction projects will be required to report to the Commissioner of Taxation payments that the householder makes in connection with the project'. There is a clearly stated principle that deductions will not be made pursuant to pay-asyou-earn law and that the proposed requirement will be separate and distinct from the PAYE system. I urge the Government to acknowledge clearly and unequivocally that one of the reasons it will be separate and distinct is that no master and servant relationship will be created between the contracting parties to be affected by the measure.
Taxpayers with a satisfactory income tax compliance history are to be subjected only to a requirement that payments are reported by the payer. Who decides what will be a satisfactory compliance history, of course, is not immediately clear. Nor is it yet apparent whether future legislation will give discretion to the Taxation Commissioner to decide what is meant by the word 'satisfactory'. Will the legislation set the rules or will they be determined by subsequent regulation or by discretionary decision of the bureaucracy? This important question will, no doubt, be answered over the next nine months. In any event, the proposal as it stands seems to involve unnecessary regulation-an unnecessary amount of work for those who will be obliged to register, record, report, deduct and remit. A clue as to intentions can be found in the information paper which states:
Payments to be subject to source deduction will be limited to those specifically prescribed by regulation.
I repeat: By regulation. We have been told also that identification of these payments requires analysis and that, following completion of an analytical exercise, payments to be prescribed will be published as soon as possible. No doubt, this examination will enable more precise identification of payments that are wholly or principally for the supply of goods and merchandise.
I must say that it seems a little incongruous that in combination with stated concern about the

cash economy it is intended to raise revenue by taxing trading bank account debits. This will not be a tax on banks, as may be popularly supposed; it is a tax on banks' customers, because I have no doubt that trading banks will seek to recover these charges from their clients. Furthermore, I suspect that keeping fees already collected by some banks on trading accounts will be increased to reflect the cost to banks of collecting and remitting these taxes. By increasing the cost of operating a trading bank account it is not unreasonable to anticipate that fewer cheques will be drawn and that more day to day business will be transacted in cash thereby adding to the dimension of the economy.
Another by-product of this measure might prove to be increasing demand from those whose wages and salaries are currently paid by cheque or by direct payment into trading bank accounts to have cash instead-they might demand to be paid in bank notes and coin of the realm, being the only legal tender in Australia, if I correctly recall my smattering of mercantile law. As the total cost of writing a cheque-including stamp duty on cheque forms levied by State governmentsregisters with individuals and businessmen the need to monitor and report cash transactions in some industries may take on all the characteristics of a self-fulfilling prophecy. No doubt, it will all come out in the wash. But the information paper hints that complex law and regulations are necessary to achieve desired goals.
One area of economic activity which can and will have a big bearing on growth and improved employment opportunities is the building and construction industry. Even the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in his speech on the Budget acknowledged the multiplier effect of existing and new jobs in the building industry on the wider job market. What the Leader of the Opposition did not acknowledge-conveniently, I suggest-are the very considerable and unprecedented measures announced in March and in the Budget which created the circumstances enabling' increased building and construction activity with the consequential benefits that will have for employment. What the Government has not yet received credit for are specific initiatives that will stimulate the building and construction industry aimed at fundamental community needs but which also have desirable consequences for job creation.
I instance increased assistance to home buyers through taxation relief on interest payments; additionalloan and grant funds for welfare housing; and a commitment from the banking sector to lend an extra $700m for housing loans. On top of that, the capital works program for both new

1326 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

projects and repairs and maintenance is to be expanded to the tune of $39m to a total of $l72m. Upgrading of non-metropolitan railways will be made possible by loans of $6.4m. The expanded road construction program over the next six years, the completion of which is scheduled to coincide with the celebration of Australia's bicentennial in 1988, adds further icing to the cake. All Australians will recognise the employment creating potential of measures which directly contribute to the construction of greater numbers of houses than otherwise possible as well as roads, railways and public buildings which are all essential national assets.
Coupled with depreciation allowances and investment allowances on income earning buildings and plant, which will benefit the private sector, the Government has underlined its faith in the basic strength of the internal Australian economy. Let us hope that recent examples set in both the private and public sector to reduce our demand on taxpayers' funds will be followed in a way which allows future cuts in government expenditure in real terms.
While there is a large body of opinion in the Australian community which favours tax cuts there is nothing like unanimity about which spending programs should be reduced, or eliminated to facilitate that end. Current tax levels are the product of calls to government to finance the competing demands of many sections and interest groups. Those calls for increasing expenditure by government, at all levels and of all political persuasions, are the prime reasons taxes remain high and will continue to be high until demands for decreasing government involvement and expenditure are as irresistible as those for increased taxpayer funding.
Just as important as the need for restraint in the public sector is the requirement that increases in wages and salaries are matched by increased productivity. When we consider the cost of labour to industry we must acknowledge also the wage gap-that is, the difference between what employer businesses pay for labour and what the worker actually receives. I suggest that this is something between 40 per cent and 60 per cent more than gross wages and salaries.
The all-up cost of employment has dire consequences not only for trade and economic activity but also for prospective employment. In this context wage minimums stipulated in most awards remain an insuperable barrier to greater employment for the inexperienced, unskilled and

semi-skilled. There should be no doubt that minimum wages are, at least sometimes, an unfair barrier to employment. Whilst the original purpose of minimum wages was to alleviate poverty by ensuring an adequate standard of living for workers the effect has been reversed, and importantly so, in times of economic downturn. That effect in more recent times has been to restrict the employment opportunities of the least productive workers by pricing their services out of the market.
Minimum wage laws have led to increased unemployment, particularly amongst our young as well as among minorities and the less skilled. It used to be that employers were prepared and able to subsidise unqualified or inexperienced youth in the near certain knowledge that they would eventually repay that investment. While the original goal of minimum wages was aimed at alleviating poverty by ensuring an adequate standard of living for all workers that is now arguably not the case. Some awards stipulate that if a young man or a young woman is valuable enough to pay, say, $4 an hour then he or she can be employed. If this is not so they are denied the right to work; they are simply priced out of the market. In one way governments recognise this by subsidising employment, and that may be very proper as an interim measure. For example, by appropriating taxpayer's funds to subsidise the cost of employing apprentices who must be paid award minimums, governments and their agencies acknowledge that if the cost of labour is reduced employment is possible. I suggest that that is treating effects and not causes. Surely there is room for debate in Australia, unclouded by emotive arguments based on what has been achieved by unions and others in creating minimum wage laws, about practical ways of reducing the cost of on the job training.
While acknowledging that it is one of the legitimate objectives of good government to provide equal opportunities to all, it must also be possible to give a break to those minorities of which I speak. Given goodwill all around, work experience and the prospect of full employment can once again become a fact of life in Australia. If our goals include improving the lot of those disadvantaged by a lack of employment opportunities, all means of enabling them to move up the ladder must be explored. In doing that we must also recognise that those same people must be able first to get on the ladder before they can move up. Wage minimums prevent that.
Entrenched concepts of what is fair and, indeed, whether wage minimums or unemployment are fair should be re-examined. I am suggesting that any re-examination will reveal the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1327

strength of my argument. I go further by saying that if an agreement cannot be reached on the abolition of wage minimums then at least some thought should be given to the creation of subminimum wage levels targeted to enable those in groupings to which I have referred to achieve the self-respect that flows from useful employment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (9.43)-The Fraser Government is now in its terminal stages, reeling towards an inevitable defeat in the 1983 elections or until the Ministry falls apart, whichever comes first. The Government is now positively phosphorescent with corruption and it has the death wish. Its broad policies are now in tatters. Monetarism has proved to be a disastrous economic policy which has failed spectacularly in every nation where it has been tried out. There are millions of victims of monetarism in our cities, in the country and especially in our industrial areas. Inflation is at a very high level, interest rates are crippling, more than 20 per cent of our population is now below the austerely set poverty line, real unemployment levels are above 10 per cent, and in our heavily industrialised cities levels are often in the 13 per cent to 16 per cent range. Parts of our country are devastated areas. Some of these are caused by drought, others by the callous jobdestroying policies of a megalomaniac Prime Minister-a Prime Minister 'with a manic determination to get his own way,' as the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) so felicitously put it.
I want to concentrate on the disastrous failures in our economy due to the Government's utter lack of comprehension of the importance of national investment in research and development. Where France aims to double its research and development expenditure over seven years the Fraser Government has in fact perpetrated a 10 per cent fall, in dollar terms, in all research and development-a figure closer to 20 per cent in real terms. In the 1981-82 Budget one per cent of all government outlays went to research and development. In 1982-83 the figure is 0.9 per cent. Australia has become a mere industrial museum with our factories as working models of the craft skills of the 1950s-a world of chisels, spanners alld hammers-while our industrial contemporaries are working in the field of lasers, computer-aided design and manufacture and micro-electronics. We have become a nation of technological voyeurs.

We concentrate on the non-competitive and unadventurous end of production. We take simple satisfaction from our tiny triumphs in the export of fruitcake, the Cafe Bar, BYO plastic bottle holders and screwdrivers while Japan and the United States of America saturate our markets with sophisticated products that we are incapable of matching. The technological revolution of the 1960s and the 1970s happened so rapidly in Australia that we hardly noticed what was happening. Politicians, the media, our educators and our management cadre must take responsibility for our failure to recognise the seriousness of the technological challenge to our traditional employment bases and to make urgent social and political responses.
Manufacturing has been very savagely hit. Between 1965 and 1982 Australia's labour force rose by 2,060,000 people. In 1965 it was 4,669,000 people and in 1982 it was 6,729,000 people. What contribution did manufacturing make to that-IS per cent, 10 per cent? The answer is actually minus 7.3 per cent. In that period manufacturing fell by 150,000 people while the overall labour force grew by two million. Whilst some new manufacturing jobs were created in new industries, this was more than offset by the huge losses in traditional manufacturing. Declining employment in traditional or 'sunset' industries is permanent, irreversible and structural. This trend can only be changed, and should be changed, by the creation of sunrise industries.
A Labor government would give priorities to industries such as bio-technology, computer software, scientific instrumentation and solar energy equipment. Time is running out for Australia. The printout is on the wall. The utter disinterest of the Fraser Government in this area may have sold us down the river permanently. We may lack the skilled personnel to fight back. Australia's performance in high technology industries has been appalling. This situation has been exacerbated by feeble government policies, a winding down of Australia's skill base, an almost total lack of venture finance, the complication of foreign ownership of high technology and a fundamental uncertainty about where we are heading.
I shall give the House a few examples and I start with lasers. Our industrial contemporaries are heavily into laser technology. In Australia we are still in a much simpler world. In Australia there are three firms making lasers. These are Quentron Pty Ltd of Adelaide, which makes and imports lasers, Laser Electronics Pty Ltd and Radiation Research Pty Ltd, both of Southport, Queensland. There are about 30 different types of lasers in operation throughout the world. Here in

1328 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Australia we make five of them. Of these two are solid state lasers using ruby and yag, which I have only just learned means 'yttrium-aluminiumgarnet', and three gas lasers, copper vapour, helium-neon and carbondioxide.
In the absence of the risk capital it is not possible for the Australian firms, good as they are, to expand, develop and bring Australian laser technology to the state of the art as it is found in the United States, Britain and Japan. Once again we fall behind-victims of our self-inflicted wounds. Naturally people working at the highest levels of technological sophistication bypass the Australian suppliers and go directly for imported lasers. In this case tariff protection is no answer. It rarely is with highly sophisticated 'sunrise' industries, however applicable it may be with traditional high volume industries such as motor manufacturing. Our research laboratories and most of our defence and other government scientific enterprises import lasers. Therefore, we are stuck in a Catch-22 situation. If we use local lasers our research capacity will fall behind but if we use foreign lasers our local industry will languish. Our greatest need in our laser industry now is for venture capital. It is a high risk area like wild-catting for oil. I am told that venture capital of as little as $lm could put Australia in a position where we can become internationally competitive in lasers. Only a Labor government will bring about a co-operative approach to raising venture finance for new industries, providing facilities and expertise as required.
A second example which I will cite briefly is that of computers. Our record in Australia is very poor indeed. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table comparing the relative value of imports and exports in computer equipment from six countries-the United Kingdom, Japan, Sweden, Spain, Ireland and Australia.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
UN COMMODITY DIVISIONS AICC
Value ofComputer Imports and Exports (1980)
$000,000 (US)

Imports Exports

Ratio
(Imports/ Exports)

United Kingdom Japan Sweden Spain Ireland Australia

1,756 732 364 325 122 377

1,422 542 418 114 350 9

1.23 1.35 0.87 2.84 0.35 41.88 (1980-81)

Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House. The table indicates that in 1980-81 Australia imported $377m worth of computer equipment and sold $9m worth, a ratio against us of 42 to one. We imported $42 worth of equipment for every $I-worth that we were able to export-the worst imbalance of any technologically advanced nation in the world except New Zealand, and we include that country only by courtesy. The third example is that of microelectronics. There are two bright spots in an otherwise dismal picture. I say this to restrain the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) from interjecting fiercely.
Mr Coheo-I thought you were referring to him as one of the bright spots.
Mr BARRY JONES-He is the third bright spot. The recent success of Dr Craig Mudge and his Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization team in Adelaide in designing custom-made VLSI-that is, very large scale integration-computer chips-is a good example of a sunrise industry which seems to have excellent potential as a wealth producer. The operation is very small, set up with $1.5m worth of capital. The project was going for only the second month when the Government provided it with a second chair. And it has very few workers, only 15. This is the kind of enterprise we ought to encourage, just as the Opposition was correct in rejecting the Government's recent Natsemi silicon wafer plant project in Canberra which would have limited Australian participation to mere componentry in a larger world-wide organisation. However, it was necessary for Dr Mudge's chips to be fabricated overseas. The fiche, of course, was provided locally. But we did not have the technological capacity to mak!: chips of a degree of complexity which we had the intellectual skills to design.
The other bright spot is the work being carried out by the Joint Microelectronics Research Centre at the University of New South Wales with the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology under the direction of Professor Graham Rigby, with Dr Martin Green and Dr James Williams. This project received an award of $2m over a three-year period out of the Commonwealth Research Centres of Excellence Scheme. I point out that these are not big spenders; they are very significant but comparatively small amounts of capital are required. This group is designing large scale integrated circuits which are then entirely fabricated in Australia by AWA Ltd. They have the advantage of being entirely made here, but Professor Rigby is candid enough to admit that our technology is about five years behind that of Silicon Valley in the United States. This raises exactly the same dilemma as with laser

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1329

technology: Do we support the local industry in order to build something up, recognising that we may be falling relatively behind, or do we abandon the local industry and, for the sake of getting our research work in other areas at the highest component, make use of the foreign technology? Of course, technology has changed so rapidly that by the time we perfect our silicon chip, the leading edge of microcircuitry may well have moved on to gallium arsenide chips or silicon on sapphire chips, which are much faster and use less power. But we still think that the effort is well worth making.
We must recognise how significant, how profound and how rapid has been the shift away from economies which are based essentially on the production of goods towards economies based on the processing of information. But there are several fundamental strikes against Australia in its attempt to become an information-based society. The first is the quality of our education. We delude ourselves into thinking that our educational standards rank with the world's best. They do not. We are falling far behind. In Japan 88.1 per cent of 17-year-olds are full time at school. Here the figure is 31 per cent. A report published this week by the Australian Council for Adult Literacy concluded that about 10 per cent of adults in Australia were functionally illiterate. Bearing in mind that there is likely to be a higher incidence of illiteracy amongst the poor, migrants and people whose experience of formal education has been frustrating, this suggests that there are some communities in Australia where the illiteracy rate may be above 30 per cent. This makes it almost impossible for such communities to make the transition to work requiring a higher skill base. They become stuck in effect in the Australia of the 1950s while most of us are in the 1980s.
The second factor is inadequate higher education. After the Whitlam years many Australian were prepared to accept the myth that Australia had gone about as far as it could go in higher education and that many Australians ran the risk of being overeducated. Compared with most Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development nations, we are near the bottom of the list. In the United States there are pro rata three times as many young people studying science as there are in Australia. Twenty-eight per cent of American science students go on to their Ph.D. Our figure is 5 per cent. Australia has a significant number of over qualified people, graduates who cannot obtain the job of their first choice. But there is a reason for this. The reason is that Australia is a significantly underqualified society. Nations with the highest proportion of people in

tertiary institutions, such as the United States, Japan and the Scandinavian countries, have far less difficulty in placing graduates than nations such as Australia or India with the smallest relative number of graduates. It is exactly the reverse, of what one might expect. We lack the skill base to make the transition to more exacting and stimulating forms of work.
The third strike against us is that we have a poorly informed governing class. Australia lacks the statistical base to make appropriate judgments about where the economy and our society are going. The Nobel Prize winning economist Professor Wassily Leontief has pointed out clearly how dearly the United States has had to pay for its failure in systematically obtaining information about a variety of national and regional economic indicators and how poorly the United States compares with Japan in this respect. What on earth could he say about Australia when this Government has systematically dismembered the Australian Bureau of Statistics, has made it almost useless and has persistently reduced the range of information that it can provide for government, for economic planners, for academics and for other members of the community? I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard an article entitled 'What Hope for the Economy?' by Professor Leontief which appeared in the New York Review of Books for 12 August 1982.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
What Hope for the Economy?
Wassily Leontief
According to the rhetoric of the Reagan administration much of the machinery of government should be dismantled and its functions, ideally, be limited to those intended by the Founding Fathers to serve the needs of the simple, agricultural community. Public opinion is becoming increasingly skeptical of this view and most professional economists, except for a small but very vocal group of "libertarians," disagree with it. Even some of Reagan's own economists claim that our immensely complex and highly vulnerable modern economy can be managed only through skillful manipulation of several powerful instruments controlled by the federal government-tax rates, budget deficits and surpluses, and the interest rates and monetary supply controlled by the Federal Reserve. I doubt it.
The different varieties of economic policies we hear about and try to practice are usually justified by theoretical constructions such as Phillips Curves, Laffer Curves, fullemployment budgets, "rational expectation" theorems, and similar abstract notions. The builders of more and more intricate econometric models try in vain to compensate for their lack of hard, systematically organized factual information by relying on increasingly ingenious but utterly unreliable methods of indirect statistical inference.
While debate over these theories continues, the economy steadily deteriorates. A year ago when President Reagan issued his first budget I observed that the proposed combination of drastic tax cuts with unprecedented tightening of

1330 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

credit could very likely bring about a slump threatening to lead into a deep depression. The explosive rise in productive investment so confidently predicted a year ago failed to materialize notwithstanding all the tax concessions passed last summer.
Would refining the old theoretical schemes, or, as some propose, redefining the money supply to be controlled by the Federal Reserve, remedy the failure of recent economic policies? Can one seriously believe that a significant contribution to the solution of our economic problems will be made by efforts to increase the reliability of econometric forecasts through tinkering with already highly sophisticated statistical procedures, or by making marginal improvements in the accuracy of aggregate price and other indices that would identify the day and hour when recession ends and recovery begins? I doubt this can be done and so, I believe, does much of the informed public.
The inadequacy of the trial and error approach that still dominates our national economic policies will, I believe, become clear when we have to face the full consequences of the rising wave of new technology. The interdependence of the different sectors of a national economy is bound to grow with the increase in their internal complexity and the scale of operations. Many projects started today-whether for producing energy or for more advanced computers-will come to fruition only in ten, fifteen, or even twenty years. Their ultimate success will depend on whether they are coordinated with other developments taking place not only in our economy but in other parts of the world. Corporate decision making in this country, while effective so far as it goes, often suffers badly because it cannot take a long-run point of view. American corporate executives tend to lose their jobs if profits sag during three successive quarters.
The contrast in this respect with Japan and some Western countries is striking. During the past ten years American corporations earned an average of 18 percent on their investments while their Japaneses counterparts earned only II percent. This means that in the US corporate managers are so cautious that they refuse to move until they can count on recovering newly invested capital in four and a half years. Managers in Japan are prepared to wait for eleven years. No wonder they continue to improve old plants and construct new ones while large US corporations often prefer to maintain liquidity and to diversify their investments by buying up each other's stocks.
Much is said by conservatives about the need to compensate investors for the high risks they take, but not enough is said about reducing risks. One, and possibly the only, effective way of reducing risk-besides taking out insurance that simply redistributes risk without diminishing its level-is systematic coordination of investment based on long-range foresight. That is, planning. All too many corporate leaders bridle when they hear this word, although rational planning requires neither government ownership of industry, nor direct control of corporations, nor abandoning much of the play of the market.
The planning approach is less simplistic than the hit-or-miss approach; it is, however, more ambitious and because of that also more difficult. Under a planning approach national economic policies are not formulated as independent measures designed to solve a particular problem, whether it concerns environmental depredation, energy shortage, inflation, unemployment, or urban blight. They are conceived as coordinated actions intended to make the entire economy function more effectively and grow along a carefully projected path. Such policies cannot be derived from general theories, but must be based on the detailed observation and mapping of the actual state of economic life. Both the interdependence of the different parts of the economy and alternative paths along

which they might advance in the coming years must be systematically explored. The picture is bound, of course, to become less and less detailed as different projections run from five to ten, from ten to twenty, and from twenty to, say, fifty years. Whether one path is followed is not a professional question but a political decision that must be reached by democratic processes.
The effects of any major policy cannot be assessed without also taking account of the mostly unintended indirect effects of other policies applying to other problems. Consider, for instance, a policy by which both government agencies and private corporations want to promote the export of West Virginia coal. Special credits or tax breaks may be provided to do this (as they are for producing oil). Such measures will likely affect the demand for mining equipment produced, say, in Minnesota and also encourage the construction of new, specialized port facilities in Delaware. This in turn will require stepped-up output of cranes and other equipment as well as of cement, steel, and other construction materials. Some of the electric power stations now using West Virginia coal may well shift to natural gas that has to be piped from Texas, leading to an increase in the price of electric power used, say, by textile mills in nearby Tennessee. But that is not all: pollution is usually a by-product of productive activities and increased coal exports are bound to affect efforts to maintain the quality of water near the steel and cement plants, and to protect the fishing grounds lying close to the shore of Delaware.
Thus it is not surprising that actions intended to solve one particular problem create new problems elsewhere. If policy makers act in ignorance of such indirect interrelationships, measures taken by one government or corporate office will tend to cencel out the effects of actions taken by another. The costs of these measures will increase without their contributing to the solution of either one or another problem. As things stand, one group of policy makers often becomes aware that it works at cross purposes with another group; but neither one possesses sufficient knowledge about the combined effect of each others' policies. A jurisdictional dispute then takes place, experts from both sides find themselves engaged in the costly process called "adversary fact finding." The apparently interminable fight over Westway in New York is a case in point.
The method called "input-output" analysis was developed some fifty years ago to deal with such problems involving relations between different sectors of the economy. The "inputoutput" tables are designed to show in great detail the flow of goods and services between various producing and consuming sectors of the economy. In our example above, the tables would show how the steel, cement, coal, and other industries would each be affected by the West Virginia project. Originally, such analysis was intended as a tool for tracing the effects of technological change on national income and in particular on the levels of production and employment in each of the many sectors of the economy, including that in which the original technical change took place. The same approach proved useful in determining the direct and indirect effects of many other changes such as, for example, an increase or a reduction in military spending, shortages of some raw material, or increases in the price of a particular import, say crude oil.
The power and the applications of input-output analysis as a means of establishing economic facts have much increased. Large multinationals such as the International Telephone and Telegraph Company use it to plan corporate policy. At the time of the Marshall Plan, France was the first advanced Western country to use input-output methods to plan the postwar reconstruction of its economy. The Japanese government uses them to plot national economic growth in close cooperation with organized business leadership. Hungary has employed them to guide the difficult transition from a rigid, centrally planned economy to the present system which tries to combine encouragement of private initiative with planning

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1331

national development. Norway uses them more extensively than any other country.
The aversion to such planning in Washington has been curious and marked. The Labor and Commerce Departments and the Pentagon made use of input-output computations during World War II and in the early postwar years. Suddenly in the early 1950s, the use of input-output methods was prohibited; even compiling official input-output tables was temporarily discontinued. This was the period when the head of General Motors testified to Congress, 'What is good for General Motors is good for the country.' The availability of detailed input-output information would, it was thought, be conducive to national economic planning and, in effect, bad for General Motors (whose executive vice president, Roger Keyes, as soon as he became deputy secretary of defense cut off the funds for compiling US input-output tables). I remember a young staff member of the Council of Economic Advisers confiding to me that he and his colleagues secretly made input-output computations in order to be able to answer question posed to them by Arthur Burns, the council's cautious chairman.
Now the Departments of Labor, Commerce, and Energy, and the Pentagon, are again using routine input-output computations; so does the Economics Division of the Congressional Research Service in the Library of Congress. In Texas important decisions on allocation of scarce water resources among different users are made with the help of a regional input-output table.
But what remains particularly self-defeating in the United States is the inability-or occasionally the reluctance-of official statistical organizations to collect the readily available specialized information that is needed not only for inputoutput analysis but for other projects as well. The US is the only advanced, industrialized country that still does not possess an effective central statistical office responsible for systematically obtaining information about population, natural resources, technology, and other aspects of the national economy and society. The Census Bureau hardly qualifies as a central statistical office. As things now stand, each department and each agency of the federal government, and of most local governments, compiles data it happens to need for its own immediate purposes. Confronted with what amounts to a huge statistical jigsaw puzzle, economists and statisticians working in the government or private business, as well as those in the universities, spend a large part of their time trying to put its pieces together. They must try to reconcile incompatible figures coming from different sources and to fill in as best they can the gaping holes in the overall picture.
The most recent Japanese input-output table is produced by the combined efforts of thirteen ministries under the general supervision of a committee of the Council of Ministers. The five hardcover folio volumes containing the Japanese table are several times as large as their US counterpart. The table was compiled much faster, and is indispensable to the Japanese government and businesses in deciding, among other things, which industries have good prospects for growth and which do not.
Creating and maintaining a comprehensive supply of data would permit a drastic reduction in the amount of guesswork and idle theorizing that goes into our policy making now.
To judge by past experience, what reason do we have to expect that after inflation has stopped rising, at the cost of prolonged and severe depression, the old Keynesian or monetarist policies will not again be put in effect and prices will not again begin to rise as the familiar cycle recommences? I do not believe the inflation that has long been plaguing the US economy can be dealt with effectively by the familiar combination of fiscal and monetary policies alone. Even the most skillful manipulation of taxes and interest rates will not work, in my

view, unless it is accompanied by institutionalized day-by-day co-operation-not simply "mutual understanding"-between business, labor, and government.
Austria, a highly industrialized modern democracy, has successfully resisted inflationary pressure by setting up an institution for such co-operation. During the annual negotiations between trade unions and employers' organizations, the government serves as an impartial fact-finder by providing detailed input-output information on the actual state of the national economy, and a systematic analysis of the effects that a proposed settlement will have on its future growth, as well as on the prospects for particular industries.
A specific example: the Institute for Socio-Economic Studies, a branch of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, carried out at the government's request a detailed analysis of how new data-processing technology would affect the newspapers and related industries. In the US and UK the unions have resisted such computerized substitutes for old-fashioned printing. In Austria, the report provided the basis for an agreement by the printers, the editors, and the "union of art, media, and self-employed professions" to follow a step-bystep plan to introduce the new technology. This meant phasing out jobs, setting up training programs, etc.; but the hardships imposed on the employees, on the employers, and, one might add, on consumers, have been minimized and the overall effect has not been not inflationary. The negotiations were stiff, but there were no strikes and no lockouts. What was crucial was that the negotiators had before them a careful factual study whose authority they could accept.
Encouraged by that experience, the Austrian government has directed the National Academy of Sciences to analyze the potential effects on the economy and society of the electronic revolution. The academy has worked out scenarios for different economic and social policies that would permit the country to reap the benefits of the new technology while mitigating its disruptive effects.
In the US, linking wage restraints with price reductions, as in the recent negotiations between the VA Wand GM, seems to point in the right direction. However, what is needed is a general agreement between organized labor and organized business that would apply to major sectors of the economy and would be based on a carefully designed, comprehensive, and voluntary plan. Separate wage contracts made by the UAW without such an agreement and such a plan can contribute little to the solution of national inflationary problems. In fact Japanese imports, rather than agreement with the unions, will do more than the union contract to set the prices for GM's cars.
The situation in the automobile industry brings us to what is probably the greatest challenge facing not only our econ0my but also the economies of other advanced countries: the effects of automation.
Something quite new is happening. All previous technological revolutions-except perhaps the one that caused the so-called enclosure movement in sixteenth-century England-enhanced the commanding role of labor as the dominant, indispensable factor of production. Compared to the demand for capital and natural resources, the demand for labor was steadily maintained and thus secured reasonably full employment at steadily increasing real wages.
The growth of total output was accompanied by riSing per capita consumption and, up until the middle 1940s, a progressive shortening of the normal working day, week, and year. At the end of World War II, the situation changed. Successive waves of technological innovation continued to overtake one another, and the real-wage rate continued to go up; but the length of the normal work week today is practically the same as it was thirty-five years ago.

1332 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

Machinery. however. continues to replace human labor. and as it does so some sectors of the economy, and some types of labor, are much more affected than others. Less skilled workers usually go first; skilled workers. later. And even if a drastic general wage cut could temporarily arrest the adoption of labor-saving technology, the trend is bound to resume unless Luddite barriers are set up against introduction of the new technology. Even a principled libertarian might hesitate to have the wage level settled by cut throat competition among workers using continued pressure from steadily improving labor-saving machinery.
In the long run a reasonable response to the incipient technological unemployment caused by the spread of automation should aim at an equitable distribution of gradually shrinking employment opportunities on the one hand and. on the other. of the gradually increasing national product. This product will continue to rise. however. only if technological advance is not obstructed directly or indirectly. This means that employment policies allowing workers to be displaced by technology will have to be combined with income policies protecting those who are being displaced.
The income policies I have in mind would have to supplement the declining real income that many blueand white-collar workers receive from the sale of their services on the labor market. So also would they have to protect the modest incomes of some independent craftsmen, professionals. and self-employed small entrepreneurs. In effect, we have willy-nilly installed such income policies by gradually changing the tax system, and increasing Social Security, medical insurance. welfare payments, and unemployment benefits. Instead of being hastily curtailed, these systems will have to be redesigned and expanded so as to reduce the contrast between those who are fully employed, partially employed, retired, or simply out of work.
This prospect of an increasingly automated society shows all the more forcefully the need to provide the foundation of factual analysis and economic projection that would make democratic national planning possible. Our political economy will continue to flail blindly unless we can uncover its interacting empirical realities and consider in what general directions it should move.
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House. My colleague the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), who is listening on his crystal set tonight, has repeatedly challenged the Treasurer (Mr Howard)-see Hansard of 16 February this year, pages 112 to 113, for one example-to direct the ABS to provide statistics on foreign investment, foreign ownership of companies, productivity, research and development, rural and urban land holdings, royalty and licence fees, transfer pricing, work force training, foreign technology licences and other vital matters, only to be told by the Treasurer-these are his actual words; I am not making them up:
In the interests of sound economic and financial management the Government has had to review very carefully . . . the costs involved in the collection and dissemination of statistics.
How do we know whether we can afford it if we do not know what our economy consists of? We could not imagine a more asinine answer, even from this Government. As I told the Sydney Rotary Club last week, our company directors and bankers are basically employees used to doing

what they are told. They have been told what to do and shown what to do so often that their deference has become habitual and instinctive. We do not look to them for much imagination or originality. I half expected to be hissed when I said that, but after the meeting I was reassured by the number of Rotarians who said that I had identified one of Australia's major problems, namely, themselves. Finally, we have a poor knowledge content in our economic output.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Sir James Killen-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed.
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the packed House for its support. In the past 25 years there has been a striking increase in the per capita gross national product of nations with poor physical resources but with a strong knowledge base. This has been matched by an equally striking fall in per capita GNP in nations with a strong mineral base. Thus the mineral rich countries such as the United States of America, Canada, Australia and New Zealand have fallen in the pecking order while Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, Japan and Singapore, all of which are deficient or totally lacking in raw materials, have raced up the list. A table has been prepared by the Statistics Group of the Parliamentary Library which draws attention to the relative contribution of what are called 'invisibles' in balance of payment accounts. We should bear in mind that the table understates the situation because it does not include the contribution of intellectual activity to manufacturing. For example, the content of research, development and design in Swedish or Japanese manufacturing is patent. Even so, in this table Australia ranks very poorly because there is very little that Australia produces that depends on intellectual skill that is marketable overseas, with the possible exception of our films, while Great Britain, France and the United States score very welL I conclude by seeking leave to have the table incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.

Adjournment

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1333

The table read as follows--

In.isible Credit Items on Balance of Payments Account Goods, Senices and Income Component of the Current
Account
1980 figures including: cost of freight, insurance, banking, passenger services, travel, investment income, royalties, copyright, government aid payments, sending money to families, etc.
These figures do not include the contribution of intellectually based activity to manufacturing, e.g. research, development and design which make a very significant contribution to the export earnings of Japan, Sweden and West Germany which have comparatively low ranking on the following table:

%

I. Canada

13.0

2. Austra lia

16.6

3. Japan

19.9

4. Sweden

20.8

5. West Germany

21.8

6. Netherlands

29.5

7. Denmark

31.0

8. Switzerland

31.8

9. United Kingdom

33.1

10. France

33.1

II. USA.

35.0

Source: Statistics Group, Parliamentary Library.
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Adermann) adjourned.

ADJOURNMENT
Isolated Patients' Travel and Accommodation and Assistance Scheme-Raoul
Wallenberg-Homes Savings Grant Scheme-Australian Taxation Office-Newspaper Articles
Motion (by Sir J ames Killen) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.3)-Tonight I want to draw attention to the financial problems incurred by a constituent of mine as a result of a medical condition which in my view was deserving of government support. Mrs Janet Jackson of 47 Piperita Road, Ferntree Gully, Victoria, contracted a rare blood disorder, aplastic anaemia in September 1981. After spending a month in Prince Henry's Hospital in Melbourne, consulting doctors advised her that her only hope of long term survival was to receive a bone marrow transplant from her sister. At that time St Vincent's Hospital in Sydney was the only hospital in Australia capable of carrying out the necessary treatment. After nearly 10 weeks in Sydney Mrs Jackson is now weB on the road to recovery but is at the moment required to make weekly trips to Sydney for tests and observation. The first six months post-transplant-the transplant took place on 16 October 1981-are critical in terms of reactions and complications. During this time

Janet Jackson will be taking a drug called Cyclosporin A which is administered to reduce the chance of graft rejection. Cyclosporin A is the subject of a clinical trial at St Vincent's Hospital. It is the only hospital in Australia using this drug and consequently the only hospital capable of measuring levels of the drug in the blood stream.
Apart from the obvious expertise and knowledge of Mrs Jackson's case present in Sydney, it is absolutely imperative that regular trips are made to have drug levels measured. Mr and Mrs Jackson were told by both hospitals that there is an isolated patients scheme to assist with air fares in such cases. It is the Isolated Patients' Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme. However, after further investigation and direct consultation with IPTAAS officers, they were told that they were ineligible because they lived in the metropolitan area of a major capital city. They were further led to believe by a representative of IPTAAS that if they moved 20 kilometres, so as to be outside the metropolitan area, their application would be successful. Thus, the terms of IPTAAS would seem to be formed on a geographical basis rather than on medical need.
Following a request from Mr and Mrs Jackson, I wrote to the Director of Health and outlined the circumstances of the application for assistance under the scheme. I duly enclose the application forms. The director replied as follows:
While many apparently deserving cases, such as Mr and Mrs Jackson's, are brought to the Department's attention, I must convey to you that the legislation is quite clear on criteria for eligibility.
To be eligible for assistance under IPTAAS an approved patient must reside outside the metropolitan areas of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth, and must be referred to the nearest suitable specialist whose place of treatment is in excess of 200 kilometres from the patient's residence.
You will appreciate that IPTAAS was developed to assist people living in remote country areas who are required to travel long distances to obtain specialist medical treatment not available locally. In deciding the criteria for IPTAAS consideration was given to the limited funds available and the generally high level of medical skills available in the five major metropolitan areas of Australia. In view of these points it was decided that most benefit could be achieved within the available funds by assisting only country people, who incur considerable travel and accommodation costs in obtaining specialist medical treatment.
Therefore as Mr and Mrs Jackson do not reside in an isolated area, benefits cannot be paid. The fact that appropriate treatment is only available in Sydney is not in dispute.
The director having said that, I then wrote to the Minister for Finance (Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle), again outlining the case. I also pointed out that coupled with the worry of Mrs Jackson's illness the essential travel in this case must be creating enough of a trauma for this young couple

1334 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Adjournment

without having to worry about travel expenses. I therefore sought the support of the Minister for an act of grace payment for this couple. The Minister replied as follows:
Whilst Mr and Mrs Jackson's situation evokes sympathy, your request in effect asks me to distinguish their case from other Australians who may experience personal misfortune and for which the Commonwealth has not established specific schemes of assistance. If I were to approve an act of grace payment in this instance, it would not only go beyond the specific limits of those schemes of assistance which the Commonwealth has established, but it would also make it impossible to refuse assistance in future to virtually everyone unfortunate enough to face financial burdens arising from personal misfortune in almost any form.
Accordingly, I am sorry to say that I do not believe that this case is one in which I should exercise my act of grace powers.
Mr and Mrs Jackson have asked me to bring this case to the attention of the Parliament so that in future cases metropolitan dwellers are no longer disadvantaged if suitable medical care is not available in their capital city. I call on the Government to remove this anomaly and provide assistance under the IPTAAS provisions in such unusual and deserving cases.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (10.7)~I use this opportunity to draw the attention of the House to the formation in Australia of a committee called the Free Raoul Wallenberg Committee which was formed under the auspices of the Australasian Union of Jewish Students, a part of which is very active in my electorate. Raoul Wallenberg was, of course, a hero of the holocaust, a legend in Budapest and increasingly has become a legend throughout the world. He arrived in Budapest in July 1944 at the age of 32 as first secretary to the Swedish legation. He was sent by the Swedish Government at the request of the American War Refugee Board at the time when Adolf Eichmann had taken charge of the final solution for almost 900,000 Jews in Hungary. Already some 400,000 Jews from the countryside had been deported to Auschwitz and Birkenau. The Swedish legation in Budapest worked day and night to cope with the flood of applications from Jews in Budapest who claimed business or family contacts with Sweden in order to be granted Swedish citizenship.
Wallenberg was a clever negotiator and organiser. He was courageous, inventive and coolheaded. He spoke German and understood Hungarian affairs. He soon established good connections with the German and Hungarian authorities and with the Hungarian underground. He quickly organised the rescue of Jews from deportation. He managed to save some 20,000 Jews in Budapest by issuing them with Swedish protective passports and placing 13,000 Jews in so-called

'Swedish houses' while they were waiting to emigrate to Sweden. Near the end of November 1944 the Russian armies were rapidly approaching and Eichmann speeded up the deportation. At Wallenberg's initiative, check points were set up on the roads leading from Budapest to the West. The whole Swedish legation remained on full alert to intercept convoys, rescuing Jews with Swedish papers. Eichmann threatened on several occasions to kill Wallenberg but Wallenberg would not back down. He made repeated trips with his assistants.
In carrying out his rescue operation Wallenberg cared little for his own safety. He argued, threatening Nazi officers that they would be tried as war criminals if they went through with their final solution, sometimes using sheer bluff, promising pardon after the arrival of the Russians. He could be seen in front of deportation trains handing out Swedish papers to all hands that could reach them and then insisting that the people holding the papers be allowed off the train. With his own hands he pulled Jews out of the death marches on the 200-kilometre long highway to the Austrian border where thousands of Jews were driven on foot for deportation. He was everywhere, on railway stations, rescuing Jews from cattle wagons, at the old brickworks on the outskirts of Budapest, demanding the release of Swedish Jews and at the same time distributing to them bread, soup and medical supplies. His last heroic act was when he stopped the Hungarian Arrow Crossmen mass murdering at the last minute, in the sealed ghetto where about 70,000 Jews had been forced together, by threatening the German commander with execution by the Russians. Although the Nazis could not stop him the Russians did. Perhaps the Russians always suspected him, with his wealthy family connections, his United States of America connections. Maybe they thought that he was a spy. In any case, seven months after he arrived in Budapest he set out in a car with two Russians for an appointment 120 miles away and was never seen again in the West. Repeatedly in the last almost 40 years he has been seen in Russian prisons. The most recent report was in the late 1970s when an ex-prisoner wrote about him to his daughter in Israel. Needless to say, the father was quickly rearrested. Throughout the world Free Raoul Wallenberg Committees have been formed. They have kept the issue alive by marshalling the evidence and holding international meetings. The Australasian Union of Jewish Students is preparing a petition to Leonid Brezhnev, President of the Supreme Soviet. That petition states:

Adjournment

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1335

We, people of different religious, racial, national and political persuasions, demand the release of Raoul Wallenberg. We feel that it is atrocious that any country has the right to detain and imprison this man. It deeply distresses us that the Russian Government denies that it is unjustly holding this hero. We call upon Russia to observe basic human rights which are a fundamental prerequisite to peace and trust. We therefore demand that the Soviet Union:
I. admit they have been detaining Raoul Wallenberg in prison since 1945.
2. release him, and allow him to return to his family.
3. issue a public apology for imprisoning this man without a trial for 37 years.
am sure that the House will support that petition.
Mr WALLIS (Grey) (10.12)-Tonight I wish to raise a matter concerning two married couples in my electorate. Both of these couples are young and both husbands were in reasonably good jobs. They had a desire, naturally, to try to get their own homes together. The husbands and wives decided to work to try to save the necessary money to get a home together and also to enable them to take advantage of the grants that were available under the old Homes Savings Grant Scheme. If they had saved an amount of $6,000 the grant would have been $2,000. After working for a few years they got together the necessary finance and had reached the stage where they could sign up for a home, make application for the grant and, upon completion of the home, get $2,000. They succeeded in accumulating the funds.
Early in June of this year, when the new scheme came into operation, they went to Adelaide, signed up with various building firms, and got the other loans that were required. When the couples returned home, one to Port Augusta and the other to Ceduna, they were told that under the new scheme they were ineligible for a grant. Although in three years they had saved the amount of finance necessary to get the $2,000 under the old scheme, with the introduction of the new scheme they suddenly found that what they had done in good faith was no longer acceptable. They had saved the amount of money required to take advantage of the grant under the old scheme. Under the new scheme an income limit was introduced which in this year amounted to $21,700, and the combined incomes of the husbands and wives in each case exceeded that figure. This all happened within a few days of the introduction of the new scheme. If they had signed up a month earlier it is probable that they would have been all right. Unfortunately, this happened in June, at about the time the new scheme came into operation, with the result that when they made their applications they were told they were not eligible.

These people are very resentful of what has happened, and I fully agree with them. They complied with the conditions of the old scheme in good faith and expected that they would get assistance in building a home. In introducing the new scheme, which the Government has been trumpeting widely as one of its big advances, an income limit was imposed, with the result that these couples will not receive any assistance whatsoever. The only reason that the wives went out to work was to obtain sufficient finance. As soon as they had it the wives stopped working and at the present time they are not working. They now feel that they have been 'had' by the Government. In good faith they had saved the amount of money that was required and had reached the stage where they could take the necessary steps to arrange for the construction of their homes. They got everything signed up, applied for the home savings grant, and now they suddenly find that they have nothing.
I do not know what can be done about it at this stage. I have written to the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney), who is now in charge of homes savings grants, but I do not expect that anything will be done. The Government has put an income limit on these grants. I will not argue about it. Maybe it is right that there should be an income limit, but I think it is completely wrong to apply it to people who have saved their finance over a three-year period on the understanding that, when their savings reach a certain figure they will receive a grant. These couples did that in good faith and in line with the policy that applied at that time. They had reached the stage where they could get sufficient finance to put their homes together and apply for the grant. They were then told that they were not entitled to do so because they had earned too much.
I do not know whether anything can be done about these cases, but it is an anomaly. These people feel resentful, and I fully understand why. I certainly hope that the Minister will take into consideration the anomaly that e~ists inthese cases.
Mr COWAN (Lyne) (10.17)-The matter I wish to raise tonight relates to the need for the expansion of the Australian Taxation Office in Newcastle. It is my understanding that the office is only a small one and deals with minor matters so. far as the Taxation Office is concerned. It is my understanding also that the Taxation Office intends to set up another major office in the Sydney metropolitan area. The people of Newcastle, and particularly the Newcastle City Council and the Newcastle Chamber of Commerce and Industry,

1336 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Adjournment

are most concerned that the new office be established within the Hunter Valley area. I strongly support the move, as do the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe) and other members with electorates within and bordering the Newcastle area. It would be a shame if we were to see a situation where there is a third major taxation office within the Sydney metropolitan area. I am told that the area that has been spoken of is Chatswood, and that office would look after virtually all of the northern part of New South Wales. This Government believes in decentralisation. It is most important, if we are to set up a Commonwealth office, that it should be in an area that is significant in regard to decentralisation and is a very major and important part of Australia.
As I said earlier, there is a minor office in that area which now employs about 12 to 15 people. No actual assessments of the returns are carried out in that office. It is my understanding also that a new office, if established, will employ about 400 to 450 people. Other members and I met as a deputation with the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Commissioner of Taxation some months ago now. It was indicated that there were two problems, firstly, to establish a building suitable for operation and, secondly, to acquire the qualified staff to operate the office.
I point out to the House that within the Newcastle area there is a university, a college of advanced education and the facilities to provide an
education for the people who may want to occupy the office. For the sake of decentralisation I am quite sure that there would be a sufficient number of qualified people prepared to go to the Newcastle area to work. As I said earlier, the Newcastle City Council and the Newcastle Chamber of Commerce support it and it will serve one of the virile and vital areas of the State. I claim that qualified personnel are available to work in the office. I think it is very important, for the sake of decentralisation, that the office be established there. This office will serve over a million people within the area. At present anybody from the northern part of the State who wishes to contact the Taxation Office personally must catch a train or an aircraft to go to Sydney to visit the office. If an office is established in the suburbs of the metropolitan area they will then have to go to the office in the suburbs, which will involve extra expense and extra time. I think it is very important that we provide the facility where it is needed. I strongly support the move that this office should properly be established within the Newcastle area or somewhere close by.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (1O.22)-My speech will be very brief. I suppose we all ought to be

grateful when the Press decides to cover us at any time, and I am indeed always grateful for the coverage I get, but occasionally it is necessary to correct one or two points that are attributed to me. I suppose most honourable members find themselves in that positon. I wish to correct an article-at least its headline and one point in itwhich appeared in yesterday's Daily News. The content of the article is a generally accurate report of remarks I made on the Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill that we debated on Tuesday, but certain features of it are not accurate. Before I comment on it I seek leave to incorporate the article in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The article read as follows--
WA 'a base for American subs'
HMAS Stirling naval base in WA was being used in American anti-submarine operations in the Indian Ocean, a Federal Labor MP told Parliament.
MHR for Swan, Mr Kim Beazley, said that he believed the hunter-killer type of submarine called occasionally. They were the "business end of an anti-submarine warfare infrastructure provided in substantial measure by Australia," he said.
He said the frequency of visits by submarines to WA suggested that the rest-and-recreation visits were associated with these operations.
"They appear for a week once a month at HMAS Stirling," he said.
"We are 'not entitled' to know the details of those operations just as we are 'not entitled' to know the technical details of how Pine Gap monitors communications," he said.
"It is my view from an assessment of the public record that the regular visits represent the tail and softer end of a substantial Australian contribution to an American anti-submarine warfare effort in the Eastern Indian Ocean."
Mr Beazley said Australia contributed communications through the North-West Cape and surveillance through operations from Australia, Indian Ocean islands and Malaysia.
"We have contributed to hydrographic surveys and in other ways assisted the development of underwater sensor systems and we participate in monitoring maritime communications," he said.
Australia provided secure transit for the submarines between the Indian and Pacific Oceans and were a substantial contribution to Australia's ally, he said.
Mr Beazley said Australians were entitled to know the full extent of the country's co-operation with the US.
He said the pattern of visits suggested than an operation other than simple Rand R (rest and recreation) was being conducted.
"It may be that both activities ought to be approved," he said.
"But neither should occur without full and frank public discussion. "
Mr BEAZLEY-The article is headlined: "WA 'a base for American subs' ". The words 'a base for American subs' imply that those were remarks that I had made. I did not at any stage in

Adjournment

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1337

my speech refer to any place in Western Australia as being a base for American subs. What I said in that speech was:
In addition, Western Australia now experiences visits by submarines with a frequency which suggests that Rand R visits are associated with an operation.
That is very different from saying that a base is in existence in Western Australia. I would not say that. Basically, the requirements for a base are that there should be facilities for the storage of weapons, for the arming of weapons, for sophisticated re-equipping of submarines or surface ships or whatever, and for repairs where necessary. These facilities do not exist at Cockburn Sound for the United States Navy, or for any other navy for that matter. Therefore, it could not reasonably be said to be a base for American submarines.
During that debate I was trying to get an assessment of the type of operation in which those submarines might be involved in the eastern Indian Ocean and the contribution that Australia was making to that activity. I am very grateful that the rest of the article is an accurate report of my remarks in that regard. There was just one other inaccuracy in the article that required correction, and that is the section which claims that I stated:
We are 'not entitled' to know the details of those operations just as we are 'not entitled' to know the technical details of how Pine Gap monitors communications . . .
I did in fact say that but I did not, as the article has done, put quotation marks around the words 'not entitled' which implies that I do believe that we are entitled to know that information. I do not believe that we are entitled to know that information. That is the technical detail which I think is not particularly important for us to know. We ought to know, however, what the general nature of operations in that area is, and whether we are to any degree associated with them. I did make a call for that in the remarks I made. With those two corrections, which I think are fairly important corrections, as it might create an unnecessarily inaccurate impression in the Western Australian community as to what operates at Cockburn Sound--
Mr Les Johnson-I am glad you have put the record straight.
Mr BEAZLEYI appreciate the honourable member's concern for my accuracy; he looks after us remarkably well in this place. As I said, I appreciate the opportunity to make that alteration. I appreciate the fact that the Daily News saw fit to record my remarks. I hope that it will report the corrections as well.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (10.26)-My comments follow much the same

lines as those of the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley). I have been misrepresented also in an article which has not yet appeared in the Press. That is quite remarkable. This evening I received my copy of the 9 p.m. edition of Dateline, an Australian Associated Press publication, which states:
ANS 930,934 Federal Liberal backbencher Don Cameron, asked the Gov!. in ParI. today why a special prosecutor was needed to investigate tax frauds.
I thought to myself: I remember speaking at a quarter to four this afternoon but I have absolutely no recollection of having said that. I am not the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) who comes in here giving the impression that three knights are named in reports, when it turns out that it is some fantasy of his mind. I am not like that. I have here a copy of the speech I made. I read the proofs very carefuly. Then I went to the Parliamentary Library and obtained this copy of the actual AAP report which states that I was confused and revolted, et cetera, and that I had asked the Government in Parliament why a special prosecutor was needed to investigate tax frauds. The article goes on to state:
Mr Cameron, speaking during the committee stages of the special prosecutors legislation, said the best way to reorganise and rehabilitate the Attorney-General's Department, which had been found to be lacking, was to involve its staff in tax fraud investigations.
The article goes on and on. It is quite frightening to be aware of the fact that tomorrow morning one is likely to be misrepresented. As far as I was concerned the only comments I made in this place related to the fact that people in positions such as these had to be paid salaries in the vicinity of $300,000 a year for their services. My only query was this: Why does the Government not set about reducing the allowable amount for tax deductibility that companies can claim when they hire the services of silks and the like so that we have a definite input in pulling down the fees paid to barristers and the like? I expressed the view that justice was now only within the reach of those who could obtain legal aid, the very wealthy and the companies who could use it as a fax deduction. I hope that at this hour it is not too late for AAP to unscrew itself because it certainly messed up this story. I would hate to read tomorrow's paper and see that I was confused and revolted. The only matters that cause me to be confused and revolted are the antics of the Opposition in this place and not the comments and observations that I might make.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted.

1338 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Papers

Mr Carlton~1 require the debate to be extended.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~ The debate may continue until 10.40 p.m.
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar~Minister for Health) (IO.30)~ The honourable member for La Trobe (Mr Milton) raised in his speech in the adjournment debate a matter regarding constituents of his who were in distressing circumstances because the wife's illness required medical treatment in Sydney when she, in fact, lived in Melbourne and did not come within the guidelines of the Isolated Patients' Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme which is set up to deal with the requirements of those in country areas who need to go to metropolitan centres for health treatment. He approached the Director of Health, I presume in Victoria, and also the Minister for Finance (Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle) for special treatment, an act of grace. I will certainly have my department examine the circumstances which were raised by the honourable member to see whether there is any way.in which those unfortunate people can be assisted.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~Order! The debate having concluded, the House stands adjourned until Tuesday next at 1.45 p.m.
House adjourned at 10.31 p.m.
NOTICE
The following notice was given:
Mr Scholes to move~
(I) That the House of Representatives request the Ministers for Defence Support and Aviation to appoint an interDepartmental Committee on the future use and development of Avalon Airfield. Lara, Victoria, and
(2) That the committee examine and report on---
(I) the extent to which - -
(i) commercial aviation; (ii) general aviation, and (iii) international charter (A) passenger and (B)
cargo,
usage could be integrated with existing, and projected, defence requirements;

(b) what additional facilities would be required to enable the airfield to be used for--
(i) arrivals and departures of (A) domestic and (B) overseas passenger charter flights;
(ii) domestic passenger traffic; (iii) private and company executive aircraft; (iv) international and domestic air cargo, and (v) general aviation; (c) the estimated costs of additional facilities, and
(d) who would be required to bear the cost of providing additional facilities.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 9 September 1982, pursuant to statute:
Australian Bureau of Statistics Act-Australian Bureau of Statistics-Proposal for collection of information--1982No.8-Survey of vaccination of females and children within specific age groups, March and April 1983.
Public Service Arbitration Act-Public Service ArbitratorDeterminations accompanied by statements regarding possible inconsistency with the law-1982----
No. 4l4-Royal Australian Nursing Federation. No.4l5-Australian Public Service Artisans'
Association. No. 416-Australian Workers' Union. No. 417-Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of
Australia. No. 418-Commonwealth Foremen's Association.' No.4l9-Commonwealth Foremen's Association of
Australia, Australian Public Service. No. 420-Association of Draughting, Supervisory and
Technical Employees. No. 42l--Commonwealth Works Supervisors
Association. No. 422-Printing and Kindred Industries Union. No. 423-Australasian Society of Engineers. No. 424-Australian Public Service Artisans' Associ-
ation and another. No. 425--Merchant Service Guild of Australia. No. 426-Royal Australian Nursing Federation. Nos. 427 to 429-Association of Draughting, Super-
visory and Technical Employees. No. 430Transport Workers' Union of Australia.
('Not accompanied by statement).
States Grants (Petroleum Products) Act-Amendments of the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of New South Wales (2), Queensland (2) and Western Australia, dated 23 August 1982.

Answers to Questions

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1339 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Statutory Authorities under the Minister for the Capital Territory
(Question No. 2860)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard. 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated. (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
A comprehensive review of all statutory authorities within my portfolio was conducted as part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions. As a result the following statutory authorities were to be abolished:
Canberra Commercial Development Authority Canberra Retail Markets Trust Nature Conservation Advisory Committee Fair Rents Board.
In addition, the Totalisator Agency Board, the Liquor Licensing Board and the Poker Machine Licensing Board have been amalgamated into ACT Gambling and Liquor Authority. Also a Committee of Review has been established to, inter alia, review and report on the appropriate responsibilities and scale of activities of the National Capital Development Commission.
A further comprehensive review of statutory authorities within my portfolio was considered to be unnecessary following the Review of Commonwealth Functions. However, the necessity for particular statutory authorities within my portfolio is kept under constant review.

during the period I July 1977 to 30 June 1978. A hospital patient, as defined in the Health Insurance Act 1973, is an inpatient for whom the hospital provides comprehensive care including all necessary medical, nursing and diagnostic services and, if they are available at the hospital, dental and paramedical services.
(2) The honourable member's request for confirmation that the 5.4 million bed days quoted by him, and wrongly attributed to the then Minister, represents the actual number of bed days in 1981-82 for which no charges were made, cannot be met. However, in 1980-81 the total number of 'hospital' bed days was approximately 9.9 million out of an estimated total public hospital bed days of 17.8 million. Under the new health funding arrangements, the identifiable health grants within general revenue sharing, together with anticipated revenue from hospital charges, provide New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, Western Australia and the Northern Territory-together with South Australia and Tasmania who are continuing with hospital cost sharing-with the financial support in the provision of public hospital treatment without charge in excess of 5.4 million bed days.
Hospital fund contribution rates are determined primarily on the levels of public hospital charges determined by the States and the financial positions, claims experience and membership profiles of individual funds.
(3) The Commonwealth's preliminary assessments of States' increased revenue raising capacity from recognised hospitals from I September 1981 was based on a 50:50 private/public bed day mix except in New South Wales and Victoria where the estimated mix was approximately 53:47 and 51 :49 respectively based on private patients increasing by 10 per cent on the 1980-81 levels.
However, following States' requests for reviews, the preliminary assessments have been amended, where necessary, in light of actual experience in 1981-82. The most significant adjustment was for the Northern Territory where allowance was made for the large Aboriginal population which includes high users of hospital and health services.

Public Hospital Bed Days
(Question No. 3185)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that almost 3.9 million public bed days were utilised by those of pensionable age in 1977-78, as shown in the Health Insurance Commission Report for that year.
(2) Given the increase in bed days arising from the addition of invalid pensioners, low income groups and the unemployed to those eligible for free beds, can he give an assurance that his 5.4 million bed day estimate, which is crucial for determining hospital fund rates and costs to the Commonwealth, is not an under-estimate of the likely outcome.
(3) What bed day calculations have been used in determining private/public mixes, and what is the estimated number of hospital-only patients.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. But it can be deduced from Table 24. I, based on some assumptions, that 'hospital patients' of pensionable age utilised approximately 3.9 million bed days in public hospitals

The Commonwealth does not have information to estimate the number of patients who have hospital-only insurance. Evidence of type of insurance would, I expect, be recorded in the individual hospitals at which the persons were in-patients. However the number of persons covered for basic hospital insurance as at 31 March 1982 was 10,210,548, while at that date the number of persons covered for basic medical insurance was 9,615,684. The difference is 594,864. It cannot be stated that this is the number of persons with hospital only insurance as there are factors such as those covered for medical only insurance which would distort the figures.
Recovery of Goods Illegally Exported
(Question No. 3306)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) What legal means or agreements are available to the Commonwealth Government to recover goods of all types, including historic aircraft, illegally exported from Australia to the United Kingdom, United States of America or other countries.

1340 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Answers to Questions

(2) If no legal means or reciprocal arrangements exist is the Government prepared to take action to establish such a legal means of agreement: if so, what action will it take.
Mr N. A. Brown-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The legal issues involved in the question whether a foreign Court would enforce a claim by the Commonwealth based on the forfeiture provisions of the Customs Act 1901 are complex. The better view would appear to be that most foreign Courts probably would not enforce a claim by the Commonwealth to recover goods forfeited under those provisions. The Commonwealth is not a party to any relevant agreements.
(2) An Interdepartmental Working Group has been established to examine and report on the nature of cultural property of national or historical significance to Australia and means, including possible legislation, to control and protect that property. The States have been invited to make submissions to the Working Group which will report in due course.
Defence Equipment under Construction Overseas
(Question No. 4032)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1982:
(I) What is the contract value of Department of Defence equipment ordered and still under construction overseas.
(2) What are the conditions of insurance and extent of cover for these items (a) while under construction and (b) after construction, but prior to delivery.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Major items of equipment still under construction overseas include the following:
Navy 2 Sea King helicopters $A 11.873m (at September 1980 prices) 2 FFG ships $A356m (at January 1981 prices)
RAAF F/ A-18 Aircraft $A35.905m (at February 1982 prices) 10 P3C aircraft $A258m.
(2) Defence contracts for the supply of stores/equipment normally place the onus for insurance and damage responsibility on the contractor until such time as the equipment passes into effective Commonwealth control. For major equipment being constructed to a specific defence design, such as a ship, the Commonwealth, to the greatest extent possible, accepts the insurance risks from the time the initial payment is made against the contract. The principal reason for the Commonwealth carrying its own risk is that the cost of premiums which would otherwise be payable out of Commonwealth funds are avoided.
However the extent to which the Commonwealth actually bears the cost of loss or damage is dependent on the particular circumstances of each case.
Equal Employment Opportunities: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 4141)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 10 March 1982:

(I) Does the Minister's Department have an equal employment opportunities program: if so, (a) how long has the program been in existence, (b) what are the aims of the program, (c) what is the Department's assessment of the success of the program in achieving its aims, (d) how have, or are, the aims of the program been, or being met, (e) is the program aimed at covering the whole Department, or merely a section of it, (f) what are the procedures for union consultation and involvement in the program, (g) what involvement does the Equal Employment Opportunies Bureau of the Public Service Board have in the program and (h) has the program changed in its priority rating within the Department since its introduction.
(2) If there is no program, on what basis was this decision reached.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(a) Since its establishment in 1975 the Department of Administrative Services has provided equal employment opportunities consistent with Government policy and the various guidelines issued by such bodies as the Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Bureau of the Public Service Board and the National Labour Consultative Council.
(b) The Department's aim is to provide equality of opportunity on the basis of job related selection criteria for transfer, promotion or entry to training courses, regardless of race, colour, sex, marital status, political opinion, religion, national extraction, social origin, or physical handicap. It also aims to recognise the needs of all groups of the Australian community in the administration of its functions.
(c) The Department has developed a number of management procedures to facilitate its EEO aims but believes that there is a need for vigilance to ensure that these procedures are effective. In this connection a Personnel Practices and Development Committee of senior executives has been established to oversight EEO and other staffing matters. A variety of statistics are being collected, as resources permit, to identify areas which may need attention. There have been some notable successes relevant to the achievements of the Service as a whole, for example four of the Department's Second Division officers are women (about 8 per cent).
(d) The Department is keeping staff abreast, through the Staff Bulletin, of the development and progress of the EEO program: provides staff selection guidelines which require the adoption of practices throughout the Department which are most likely to ensure EEO; includes segments on EEO principles and practices in various departmental training programs; ensures representation of appropriate officers at seminars and courses conducted by the Equal Employment Opportunity Bureau of the Public Service Board; facilitates the participation of staff members who are disadvantaged or are members of minority groups in specific development or EEO programs (for example a Fourth Division Aboriginal staff member was sponsored to attend the Darwin Community College as part of the Aboriginal Task Force Program. As a result that officer now has educational qualifications for promotion to the Third Division).
A consolidated policy statement on equal employment opportunities is currently being prepared and will be circulated throughout the Department shortly. The document draws together the initiatives taken so far in the EEO field and emphasises the Department's long term commitment to further development of personnel practices and management policies most likely to ensure EEO.
(e) The whole Department.
(f) The Department consults with unions on aspects of administration which impact significantly on staff and has a

Answers to Questions

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1341

policy of notifying EEO and other matters affecting staff in a Staff Bulletin. To date no problems have arisen in the area of EEO which have necessitated union involvement.
(g) The Department intends to take up an offer of consultancy services available from the Board's EEO Bureau in evaluating the statistics mentioned in (c) above. As a matter of normal management practice, publications of the EEO Bureau are circulated in the Department and every effort is made to implement programs it suggests. Where appropriate, grievances involving EEO are referred to the Bureau for advice.
(h) The Department regards EEO as an integral part of sound management. There has been no change in the priority rating of EEO since the Department was established in 1975, but the passage of time has allowed the development and application of an increasingly wide battery of related procedures.
(2) Not applicable.
Taxation Deductions for Australian Films
(Question No. 4223)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 18 March 1982:
With reference to the new scheme for increased taxation deduction and exemption provisions for Australian films, (a) for which films has certification been applied, (b) who have been the applicants in each case, (c) in which cases has certification been (i) approved and (ii) rejected, (d) in the case of each film approved for certification, what amount is eligible for the income tax deduction for capital expenditure and (e) what is the estimated cost to taxation revenue for each film, and in each year, of the (i) income tax deduction for capital expenditure and (ii) exemption from tax on nett earnings.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) (b) and (c) I am advised by the Australian Taxation Office that it is considered that the provision of the specific names of applicants, or the naming of films for which certification has been applied for, approved or rejected, could result in the disclosure of investors names and so could involve a breach of the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act, which prohibit the divulging of information respecting the affairs of any person (including a company) disclosed or obtained under the provisions of that Act.
However, the following are general details prepared by my Department of applications for certification under the scheme as at 26 August 1982:

Issued
Rejected Withdrawn or lapsed
Applications being processed or to be processed

Provisional
385 21 33
188

Final 32
22

Total received

627

54

(d) and (e) I am advised by the Australian Taxation Office that this information is not available.

Qantas Airways Ltd: Advertising
(Question No. 4254)
Mr John Brown asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 23 March 1982:
(I) What was the amount spent by Qantas Airways Ltd in each year since 1975 on (a) domestic and (b) overseas advertising.
(2) In what specific countries has Qantas advertised in each year since 1975 and what amounts were spent.
(3) Who prepares advertisements for Qantas.
(4) Of the amount spent each year what is the percentage attributable to (a) salaries; (b) administrative costs or; (c) any other activities not specifically related to advertisements.
(5) What form did the advertisements take in each year since 1975, for example, brochures, films, posters and how much was spent in each country on those specific forms of advertising.
(6) How many people were employed in each year since 1975 by Qantas in the advertising or promotion department (a) in Australia (b) overseas, indicating the countries.
(7) Which specific advertising agencies were commissioned each year in (a) Australia and (b) overseas to handle promotion and advertising for Qantas.
(8) Were there any efforts made to co-ordinate the advertising campaigns of Qantas with that of the Australian Tourist Commission.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I)
YEAR ENDING 31 MARCH
($ million)

1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982

(a) domestic (b) overseas

2.9 3.0 3.6 4.0 3.5 4.4 6.5 4.5 4.6 5.7 5.4 4.4 4.2 4.2

(2) Expenditure levels have been compiled on a regional
basis in view of the commercially confidential nature of the information.

YEAR ENDING 31 MARCH ($ million)

1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982

Australia Asia Europe USA/Canada

2.9 3.0 3.6 4.0 3.5 4.4 6.5 0.6 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.8 1.5 1.5 2.0 2.4 2.5 1.3 1.9 2.0 2.5 2.7 1.9 1.2 2.1 1.1

(3) The annual advertising brief is produced jointly by the relevant advertising agency and Qantas Sales Managers for each particular sales region. Each of these may be modified or added to by further 'ad hoc' briefs that occur during the year to meet changing circumstances. In all cases, final approval of advertising material rests with Qantas.
(4) Information available since 1976 indicates that salaries and administrative costs combined have not exceeded 5 per cent of advertising expenditure in any year.
(5) Qantas has advertised in some thirty countries in the period. The Company indicates that to provide the information as requested would involve a significant effort as it

1342 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Answers to Questions

would be necessary to examine every transaction in those countries since 1975. Nevertheless, the following is provided.
Television advertisements have been employed in Australia, United States and Canada, New Zealand, and Hong Kong since 1975; in the UK from 1975 to 1977 and from 1981 to the present; and in West Germany from 1981 to the present. Radio advertisements have been employed in Australia and the USA since 1975, and in the Netherlands since 1979. Brochures, films and posters have been used in many countries for many years.
(6) (a) Year ending 31 March: 1976-18; 1977~17; 1978 16; 1979 - 16; 1980--15; 1981-19 and 198218.
(b) There are no Qantas advertising personnel located overseas since field sales staff perform this service.
(7) (a) Australia --Leo Burnett, 1975-1977 Monahan Dayman Adams 1978 to present.
(b) Overseas-Many different overseas agencies are engaged to handle Qantas' advertising requirements abroad. For most countries, the same agencies have been employed for a number of years.
(8) For many years, Qantas and the Australian Tourist Commission (ATC) have been co-ordinating their advertising campaigns abroad. Wherever possible, media plans of both Qantas and the ATC are exchanged to ensure maximum awareness of each other's activities and to ensure complementary advertising is achieved.
Australian Military Involvement in Vietnam
(Question No. 4569)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) How many deaths of Australian (a) armed forces and (b) public service personnel occurred during each year or part thereof of Australia's military involvement in Vietnam.
(2) How many of these deaths were non-battle casualties and what was the cause of death in each case.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a)
Defence Force Deaths

1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972

Air Navy Army Force Total

16

64

79

5

108

2

102

65

39

I

16

64

80

113

3

107

I

67

6

46

9

475

II

495

(b) Public service deaths. No deaths of public service personnel are known to have occurred during Australia's military involvement in Vietnam.
(2)

Non-Battle Deaths

Cause

Air Navy Army Force Total

Explosion
Burns Chest and head injur-
ies (Vehicle accident) . . . . . Self inflicted wounds Coronary heart disease
Motor vehicle accident
Accidental discharge of weapon
Struck on head by helicopter rotor blade
Haemorrhage Missing believed drow-
ned Accidental knife injury Peptic ulcer Neuroblastoma
Homicide
Subdural haematoma Intra cranial tumour Acute alcoholic
poisoning Falciparum malaria
Air crash Cerebral malaria Pneumonia Respiratory arrest
Accidental shooting Encephalitis Hypertension Accidental head injury Result of a fight with
a Vietnamese National

10

10

I

2

I

I

I

I

6

6

7

II

3

I

I

I

I

1

I

I

I

3

3

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

2

I

I

3

3

I

I

8

2

10

I

I

I

I

I

2

60

7

69

Footnote: The total Army non-battle deaths (60) differs from that given in answer to Parliamentary Question No. 5914 from Mr Les McMahon (Hansard of 20 August 1980). The 35 non-battle deaths listed in answer to that question related only to those who died immediately as a result of
an accident and not to those who subsequently died from injuries received in accidents or from disease.

Industrial Elections: Cost
(Question No. 4735)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) What has been the cost incurred by the Australian Electoral Office for the purpose of conducting industrial elections in each of the last five years.
(2) Do industrial organisations contribute any funds to the conduct of industrial elections; if so, what has been the total contribution in each of the last five years.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The cost incurred by the Australian Electoral Office in the conduct of industrial elections for each of the past five years has been:

Answers to Questions

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1343

1977-78
1978-79 1979-80
1980-81 1981-82

$ 559000
610 000 602000
583000 776000

The above figures do not include the salaries of the full-time staff of the Australian Electoral Office or Charges for telephone, lighting, etc., which are incorporated in the overheads
for the whole of the Australian Electoral Office.

(2) Industrial elections conducted by the Australian Elec-
toral Office are referred for that Office's conduct under the
provisions of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act which provides, inter alia, for all the costs of such elections to be borne by the Commonwealth.

The administration of that legislation is, of course, a matter
for my colleague the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations, the Hon. Ian Macphee, M.P.

National Aviation and Maritime Museums
(Question No. 4743)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) Has his Department arrived at any firm proposals concerning the establishment of National Aviation and Maritime Museums.
(2) What are the (a) proposed locations and sites for these museums, and (b) estimated costs of their establishment.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The report of the Interdepartmental Working Group which examined the development, timing and location of a national aviation museum has been completed. A number of recommendations were made and are under consideration. The Interdepartmental Working Group examining the national maritime museum proposal has not yet completed its report but discussions with the States are continuing.
(2) There is no Government committment to either a national aviation museum or a national maritime museum and no decisions have been taken concerning locations, sites or costs.

Department of Aboriginal Affairs: Appropriations
(Question No. 4749)
Mr Les McMahon asked .the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What funds have been allocated to his Department in each year since its establishment in 1972.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The table below details Commonwealth Appropriations to the Department of Aboriginal Affairs from 1972-73 to 1982-83.

Year 1972-73

Aboriginal advancement
programs
$ 44,739,000

Administration
$ 4,374,500

Total
$ 49,113,500

Year
1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83
Total

Aboriginal advancement
programs

Administration

Total

$ 84,930,990 105,571,000 129,918,300 113,780,100
111,415,500 118,002,500 127,376,308 139,347,000 148,010,400
163,866,000

$ 7,705,010
11,582,700 13,830,800 14,068,327 14,227,000 14,958,524 15,555,300
16,305,600 17,439,960 16,800,000

$ 92,636,000 117,153,700 143,749, I00 127,848,427
125,642,500 132,961,024 142,931,608 155,652,600
165,450,360 180,666,000

1,286,957,098 146,847,721 1,433,804,819

Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 4770)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds grants to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Export Development Grants Board, which determines grants to non-government organisations under the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974 and the Export Expansion Grants Act 1978, is subject to audit by the Auditor-General. No other grants to non-government organisations are made by the Department.
Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Aviation
(Question No. 4781)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Aviation, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Fife-The response to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In most cases non-government organisations currently in receipt of grants, or subsidies, funded from appropriations to the Department of Aviation are required to submit audited financial statements to support payments made to them.
In those cases in which these statements are not required, independent investigations are undertaken by departmental staff.
Alternative Voting Systems
(Question No. 4835)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
Is he able to say whether there have been any studies or inquiries conducted into alternate systems of voting in

1344 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Australia, for example, direct computerised voting; if so, what were their results and recommendations.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Over the years the Australian Electoral Office has looked at technological developments which might serve to streamline the voting process. The investigations have typically been conducted within the Office rather than in the form of formal inquiries giving rise to specific recommendations, and findings are mainly contained in internal working documents.
The Australian Electoral Office does not have a register of studies which may have been conducted within academic institutions, or by State electoral authorities.
On the specific matter of direct computerised voting the Australian Electoral Office, while noting the potential benefits of such a system, has identified a number of practical difficulties which stand in the way of its introduction in Australia.
At any general election, the Australian Electoral Office establishes some eight and a half thousand polling booths. These are scattered throughout metropolitan, country and outback areas. The polling booths are not necessarily on Commonwealth property, fixed from one election to another, or serviced by telephone or land-line links. To provide computer facilities in all of those booths with the installation and maintenance involved, together with the required land-line servicing. would be an enormous financial and logistical operation. It would be possible to use only a manual system in those polling booths lacking ready access to the network, but this would water down substantially the overall benefits of the system. as well as complicating the electoral machinery.
Furthermore. there would be little point in introducing such a system merely so as to conclude the count earlier. Under the current system of polling. about 80 per cent of the votes are counted on polling night, and it is only in the close seats that the results are unknown. It should also be realised that the speed with which the result of an election can be known depends on the prevailing electoral legislation. Under the Commonwealth Electoral Act. postal votes can be received up to ten days after the close of the poll, and this provision therefore sets a basic restriction on the time by which an election can be concluded. The counting period could not be shortened further without altering this provision. and such a change could make it harder for certain electors, particularly those living in remote areas, to have their votes included in the count.
It also needs to be taken into account that existing computerised voting systems are essentially giant adding machines. This is satisfactory with first-past-the-post voting, but quite a different story when it comes to a preferential system, notwithstanding the advances of recent years.
A final difficulty with computers is the possibility of computer fraud or, in any event. allegations of computer fraud. It is absolutely essential not only that an election system be fair but that it be seen to be fair. The safeguards built into the current system are the product of many years of experience, and the full scale introduction of a new and much more complicated system could create opportunities for illicit interference or allegations of such interferene with the electoral process. A completely new process of scrutineering would have to be developed-one which would be acceptable to the electorate, the candidates and the political parties.

Importation of Piranhas
(Question No. 4839)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the report in the Daily Mirror of 2 July 1982 that the proprietors of a holiday resort in Queensland have imported a tank of piranhas as a solution to a plague of cane toads.
(2) Has his Department investigated this report; if so, what action has been taken.
(3) Have any of the imported fish escaped into the rivers and estuaries of Australia.
(4) Will he undertake to ensure that none of Australia's natural fauna will be adversely affected by any imported fauna of the nature described.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) This matter is one for investigation by the Bureau of Customs as piranha are prohibited imports under Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations of the Customs Act. I am informed that Customs officers are investigating the matter.
(3) If the Daily Mirror report is correct in stating that the fish were imported to an island resort, escape of these fish to mainland rivers, as opposed to capture and release by man, would be unlikely because of the sea barrier.
(4) Current legislation and the Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Bill provide legislative controls to reduce the risk of importing fauna which may have adverse effects on native fauna. The penalties for breaches of the proposed new legislation will be severe, involving fines of up to $ I00 000 or five years imprisonment for individuals and fines of up to $200 000 for bodies corporate.
Speech by Commonwealth Pesticides Co-ordinator
(Question No. 4847)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
Will he table in the parliament the full text of the Commonwealth Pesticides Co-ordinator's (Mr J. T. Snelson) speech to the Royal Australian Chemical Institute in Melbourne in May 1979; if not, why not.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In speaking to the Royal Australian Chemical Institute at the Seminar held in Melbourne on 8 May 1979, Mr J. T. Snelson was making a personal contribution and was not speaking in his capacity of Commonwealth Pesticides Co-ordinator.
The speech is therefore not a Department of Primary Industry document and does not necessarily reflect Departmental policy. It would be inappropriate for the text of the speech to be tabled in Parliament by the Minister for Primary Industry but it has been published in the proceedings of the Seminar and should be available from the Victorian Branch of the Royal Australian Chemical Institute.

Answers to Questions

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1345

Immigration: Sponsorship Documents Lodged by Mr F. L. Weaver
(Question No. 4899)
Mr Maher asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 19 August 1982:
Did Mr Frank Loyal Weaver of Concord, New South Wales, on 2 March 1982 lodge sponsorship documents for entry to Australia from Japan, for his fiancee Miss Momo Ishikawa, for purposes of marriage; if so, has this application been approved.
Mr Hodges-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes, sponsorship documents were lodged by Mr Weaver on 2 March 1982 for the entry from Japan of his fiancee, Miss Momo Ishikawa.
The application has not been approved because Mr Weaver declined to attend the usual interview associated with his application. He asked that the interview be deferred indefinitely.
Unemployment: Link with Psychiatric and Physical Morbidity
(Question No. 4321)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to studies linking unemployment with psychiatric and physical morbidity.
(2) Is any longitudinal or other study being carried out in Australia to assess precisely these effects.
(3) Is the Government funding any studies of this kind through the National Health and Medical Research Council.
Mr Carlton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Yes. My attention has been drawn to the following studies:
A Study of Non-Psychotic Psychiatric Morbidity among the Unemployed, by Dr R. A. Finlay-Jones of the National Health and Medical Research Council's (NH & MRC) Social Psychiatry Research Unit at the Australian National University (funded under my Department's Health Services Research and Development Grants Program). The results of this study were published in the Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry (1981)

titled Psychiatric Disorder Among the Young Unemployed.
Comparison of Unemployed and Employed Workers on Work Values. Locus of Control and Health Variables. by G. O'Brien and B. Kabanoff, The Flinders University of South Australia.
Psychological Effects of Unemployment: a consideration of some alternative explanations, by B. Kabanoff, The Flinders University of South Australia.
Is Unemployment a Health Hazard? Health-related Behaviours of a Sample of Unemployed Sydney Youth in 1980, by A. Turtle and A. Ridley, University of Sydney.
(3) The NH & MRC is not directly supporting any studies linking unemployment with morbidity. However, the Council provided $243,527 in 1982 for the NH & MRC Social Psychiatry Research Unit, referred to above, which is a centre of concentration for social psychiatric research in Australia.
Commonwealth Vehicles: Rolls-Royce Saloons
(Question No. 4572)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) How many Rolls-Royce saloons are currently owned by the Government.
(2) When was each vehicle acquired and what was the purchase price in each case.
(3) Did the Government purchase these vehicles direct from the United Kingdom, or from importers or distributors in Australia.
(4) If the vehicles were purchased from importers or distributors, what are the details in each case.
(5) Where are these vehicles located.
(6) Which persons are entitled to use these vehicles and how is that entitlement determined.
(7) What has been the cost of operation of each of these vehicles since its acquisition.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Commonwealth currently owns 12 Rolls-Royce vehicles. Eleven vehicles, consisting of Limousines, Tourers and Cabriolets, are located in Australia and one Saloon is located in London.
(2), (5) and (7) The purchase price, location, average maintenance costs, and any extra refurbishment costs, for each vehicle are summarised as follows:

Vehicle type
Silver Wraith Limousine Silver Wraith Limousine Phantom V Limousine Silver Wraith Tourer Phantom V Limousine Silver Wraith Tourer Silver Cloud Cabriolet Silver Wraith Limousine Silver Cloud Cabriolet Phantom VI Limousine

Location
Brisbane Sydney Sydney Sydney Melbourne Melbourne Adelaide Perth Perth Canberra

Year model
1959 1959 1967 1959 1967 1959 1962 1959 1962 1970

Purchase price
$ 17,742 17,658 24,349 17,458 25,497 17,408 18,472 17,410 18,196 26,295

Estimated average annual
maintenance
cost'

Cost and
year of refurbishment

$

$

893

7898

1,156

319

1,460 3,500 (1979-80)

220

454 7,448 (1981-82)

t712

t229

tl,085

1346 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Answers to Questions

Vehicle type

Location

Year model

Purchase price

Estimated average annual
maintenance cost"

Cost and year of
refurbishment

Phantom V Limousine Silver Wraith Saloon

Canberra London

$

1966

22,866

1979

47,868

$

$

t940§42,145

(1981-82)

2,976

" Includes repair and maintenance costs only as cost of fuel not available. t These costs are the average costs from 1969; earlier records are not available. t These costs are for 1981-82 only; previous years costs are not readily available but are estimated to average about $1,000 per vehicle over recent years.
§ The decision to spend $42,145 on refurbishing the Rolls Royce Phantom Limousine, located in Canberra, was taken in the light of the replacement cost of $220,000 as quoted by the NSW distributor.

(3) and (4) Records which could provide complete information concerning the purchase of the Rolls Royce vehicles are not now available. However, the available information is as follows:
The Rolls Royce Silver Wraith Saloon located in London was purchased in the United Kingdom in March 1979.
The Rolls Royce Phantom VI Limousine located in Canberra was purchased in 1970 through the Melbourne distributor, Kellow Faulkner Pty Ltd.
My Department understands that most of the remaining Rolls Royce vehicles were purchased direct from the United Kingdom.
(6) The Rolls Royce Silver Wraith Saloon located in London is used by the Australian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom. A Rolls Royce has been used as the Head of Mission vehicle in the United Kingdom since at least 1963. Records of the type of vehicle used prior to then are not available.
The Rolls Royce vehicles located in Australia are used by the Governor-General, visiting Royalty, Heads of State and Heads of Government.
The provision of Rolls Royce vehicles for the Governor General, visiting Royalty, Heads of State and Heads of Government is an established practice which has been endorsed by successive governments over a long period. The number and type of ceremonial vehicles required for these purposes are under review by my Department.
Australian Military Involvement in Vietnam
(Question No, 4569)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 May 1982:
(I) How many deaths of Australian (a) armed forces and (b) public service personnel occurred during each year or part thereof of Australia's military involvement in Vietnam.
(2) How many of these deaths were non-battle casualties and what was the cause of death in each case.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Defence Force Deaths:

1962 1963 1964

Navy

Army

Air Force

Total

Navy

Army

Air Force

Total

1965
1966 1967
1968
1969 1970 1971 1972

16

64

79

5

108

2

102

I

65

I

39

16

64

80

113

3

107

I

67

6

46

9

475

II

495

(b) Public Service Deaths. No deaths of public service personnel are known to have occurred during Australia's military involvement in Vietnam.
(2) Non-Battle Deaths:

Cause

Navy

Explosion Burns
Chest and head injuries (vehicle accident)
Self inflicted wounds
Coronary heart disease Motor vehicle accident Accidental discharge of
weapon
Struck on head by helicoptor rotor blade
Haemorrhage
Missing believed drowned . . . . .
Accidental knife injury
Peptic unlcer Neuroblastoma Homicide
Subdural Haematoma Intra cranial tumor Acute alcoholic poison-
ing Falciparum malaria
Air crash Cerebral malaria Pneumonia Respiratory Accidental shooting Encephalitis Hypertension

Army
10 I
I I 6 7
I I I I 3 I I
I I I I 3 I 8 I I

Air Force
2

Total 10 2 I I 6 II 3
I I 2 I 3 I IO I I

Answers to Questions

9 September 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1347

Cause

Air Navy Army Force Total

Accidental head injury

2

Result of a fight with a

Vietnamese National

2

60

7

69

Footnote: The total Army non-battle deaths (60) differs from that given in answer to Parliamentary Question No. 5914 from Mr Les McMahon (Hansard of 20 August 1980). The 35 non-battle deaths listed in answer to that question related only to those who died immediately as a result of an accident and not to those who subsequently died from injuries received in accidents or from disease.
Director-General of the Natural Disasters Organisation: Direct Access to Minister
(Question No. 4688)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 17 August 1982:
(I) Did the then Minister for Defence, Mr Barnard, agree in 1974 to permit the Director-General of the Natural Disasters Organisation direct access to the Minister.
(2) If so, does the Director-General still enjoy direct access to the Minister, if not, why not.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, on operational matters connected with major disasters.
(2) Yes.
Workers Compensation: Pharmaceutical Prescriptions
(Question No. 4768)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) What is the estimated annual cost to the Commonwealth of meeting workers' compensation pharmaceutical prescriptions.
(2) Is it intended that (a) the Commonwealth or (b) insurers should meet the cost of these prescriptions.
(3) If it is intended that insurers should bear the cost of these prescriptions, can this be achieved by requiring doctors to identify prescriptions being issued in respect of workers' compensation patients.
Mr CarIton-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Data are not collected on workers' compensation pharmaceutical prescriptions.
(2) Under the National Health Act all persons receiving medical or dental treatment are entitled to receive pharmaceutical benefits. Pharmaceutical benefits are supplied free of charge to eligible pensioners holding a Pensioner Health Benefits card and sickness beneficiaries holding a Health Benefits card and their dependants; and to other persons on the payment of a patient contribution, currently $3.20, for each supply of a benefit item. There is no provision in the Act for thejnsurer to pay the amount of patient contribution. The Federal Government reimburses the chemist the Government price of the pharmaceutical benefit minus the patient contribution where applicable.

(3) Not applicable.
Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Defence
(Question No. 4772)
Mi Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What independent audit is required by the Minister's Department to ensure the proper expenditure of funds granted to non-government organisations by the Minister or the Minister's Department.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Royal United Services Institute is required to provide the Department of Defence with an audited return of expenditure.
Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of Defence
(Question No. 4798)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Royal United Services Institute.
(2) $15,000.
Grants to Non-government Organisations: Department of the Vice-President of the
Executive Council
(Question No. 4803)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Vice President of the Executive Council, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
(I) In the 1981-82 financial year what non-government organisations received grants or payments from the Minister's Department.
(2) What was the value of these grants or payments.
Sir James Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) No funds are granted to non-government organisations by me or my department.
Grants to Civil Defence Organisations: Department of Defence
(Question No. 4823)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1982:
What was the (a) value, (b) purpose and (c) date of (i) application for and (ii) making of each grant made to civil defence organisations in each of the last 5 years.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

1348 REPRESENTATIVES 9 September 1982

Answers to Questions

The Department of Defence does not make specific grants to civil defence organisations, but through its Natural Disasters Organisation (NDO) it provides physical and financial assistance to State and Territory Emergency Services in support of their dual counter disaster and civil defence roles. The purpose and value of the various NDO support programs are:
(I) Commonwealth reimbursement of salaries of approved State Emergency Service permanent officers and support staff employed at Regional/Divisional level. These officers' duties include the organisation, administration and training of local Emergency Service units, public education, support of local government authorities in the development of local counter disaster and civil defence plans and arrangements. Expenditure has been:
1981-82- $l.7m (101 positions) 1980-81 - $1.4m (98 positions) 1979-80 - $1.3m (97 positions) I978-79-$l.3m (96 positions) 1977-78- $1.07m (93 positions)
(2) Commonwealth financial subsidies to local government authorities to assist in the provision of accommodation for local Emergency Service units. Subsidies are on a $ for $ basis with funds provided by local and State government resources, to a limit of$IO,OOO for each project. Expenditure has been:
1981-82-- $.187m (26 projects) 1980-81 -$.270m (40 projects) 1979-80- -$.170m (23 project&) 1978-79 $.160m (29 projects) 1977-78 $.174m (24 projects)
(3) Supply of emergency equipment to State Emergency Service units. This equipment which includes rescue vehicles and trailers, field radios, first aid kits, rescue equipment and tools, tentage and tarpaulins, cooking equipment, protective clothing and footwear is designed to meet both counter disaster and civil defence requirements. Expenditure has been:
1981-82-- $l.5m 1980-81 - $l.3m 1979-80 - $l.2m 1978-79 - $l.2m 1977-78-- $1.5m
(4) Provision of management and planning training at the Australian Counter Disaster College for State/Territory counter disaster personnel including volunteer Emergency Service personnel and non-government organisations. The costs of travel, accommodation and training courses and seminars are met by the Commonwealth. Expenditure has been:
1981-82 $l.3m (750 students) 1980-81- $l.lm (879 students) 1979-80$1.02m (958 students) 1978-79--$0.925m (1,088 students) 1977-78 $0.924m (1,036 students)
(5) Commonwealth assistance to State and Territory public information programs by the production of printed material on naturaldisasters (floods, cyclones, bush fires, earthquakes) as well as nuclear civil defence literature. Training and public

information films, video and radio tapes on various topics are produced or sponsored. The cost of telephone directory disaster information pages is met by the Commonwealth community service. Expenditure has been:
1981-82-$0.\03m I980-8 1-$0.093m 1979-80-- $0.085m 1978-79 $0.087m I977-78-$0. 103m
Upgrading of Southern Outlet Road, Launceston, Tasmania
(Question No. 4924)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport and Construction, upon notice, on 24 August 1982:
(I) Has the Government approved the extension of the Southern Outlet Road, Launceston, Tasmania, to 4 lanes.
(2) What is the completion date for the upgrading of the road.
(3) Is he able to give a description of the proposed upgrading work.
(4) Who is to perform the work.
(5) What is the estimated cost of the work.
Mr Hunt~ The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Commonwealth has approved the Tasmanian Government's general policy for construcing a four lane divided carriageway between Mt. Pleasant and the Launceston Airport turnoff at Breadalbane. Firm approval has, at this stage, only been given to Stage One of the project. Detailed planning proposals relating to subsequent stages of the project have yet to be prepared and submitted to the Commonwealth for approval.
(2) The anticipated completion date of Stage One is December 1984.
(3) Stage One of the project comprises:
(a) all the earthworks for four lanes between Mt Pleasant and the St. Leonards Water Reservoirs
(b) pavement for four lanes between Mt. Pleasant and chainage 7800, that is over the section with steep grades
(c) pavement for two lanes between Chainage 7800 and Strathroy Bridge
(4) Stage One earthworks will be undertaken by the State Road Authority day labour workforce. Tenders are to be called for the pavement works associated with Stage One of the project.
(5) The estimated direct cost of Stage One is, in 1981-82 prices, $8.59 million,',.


