House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 128, 1982 Thursday, 26 August 1982
THIRTY SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-FIFTH PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Ninian Martin Stephen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of
the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(To 11 October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Industry and Commerce
"Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
" Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs and Public Service Matters and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Party Government)

(From II October 1982)

"Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Treasurer "Minister for Defence "Minister for National Development and Energy and
Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs "Minister for Primary Industry "Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of
the House "Minister for Finance
"Minister for Industry and Commerce " Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Aviation, Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister and Deputy Leader of the House "Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations "Minister for Education
Minister for Transport and Construction Minister for Defence Support and Minister Assisting the
Minister for Defence Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the
Attorney-General Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Home Affairs and Environment and
Minister Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting the Minister for Social Security Minister for Health and Minister Assisting the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
"Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H.
The Honourable John Winston Howard The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable Sir John Leslie Carrick, K.e.M.G.
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable Sir James Killen, KCMG.
Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance Guilfoyle, D.B.E.
The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.e. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.e. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.e.
The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson
The Honourable James Joseph Carlton
The Honourable John Charles Hodges

(LP) (NP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP) (NP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (NP) (LP)
(NP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NP)
(LP)
(LP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker, The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden. KCMG .- Q.c. Chairman ojCommittees and Deputy SpeakerMr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen oleammillees John Lindsay Armitage. the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie. Peter Hertford Drummond. Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman. Henry Alrred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the Hou!ie-~ The Honourable Sir James Killen. KCMG. Leader afthe Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deput)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager a/Opposition BusinessThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader of the Liberal ParlyojAustraliQ-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H.
Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Honourable John Winston Howard Leader a/the National Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony, e.H. Deputy Leaderoflhe National Pari>, of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor ParlyThe Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leaderoflhe Australian Labor PartyThe Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony. Rt Hon. John Douglas. C.H. Armitage. John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenfried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewett. Dr Neal Bourchier. John William. CBE. Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield. James Mark Braithwaite. Raymond Allen Brown. John Joseph Brown. Hon. Neil Anthony. Q.c. Brown. Robert James Bungey. Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman. Alan Glyndwr Cameron. Donald Milner Cameron. Ewen Colin Cameron. Ian Milne Dixon Campbell. Graeme Carlton. Hon. James Joseph Casso Hon. Moses Henry Chapman. Hedley Grant Pearson Charles. David Ernest Child. Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman. William Peter Connolly. David Miles Cowan. David Bruce Cross. Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling. Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins. John Sydney Dean. Arthur Gordon Dobie. Hon. James Donald Mathieson Drummond. Peter Hertford Duffy. Michael John Edwards. Dr Harold Raymond Everingham. Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife. Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher. Peter Stanley Fraser. Rt Hon. John Malcolm. e.H. Free. Ross Vincent Fry. Kenneth Lionel Giles. Geoffrey O'Halloran Good luck. Bruce John Groom. Hon. Raymond John Hall. Raymond Steele Harris. Graham McDonald Hawke. Robert James Lee. A.e. Hayden. Hon. William George Hicks. Noel Jeffrey Hodges. Hon. John Charles Hodgman. Hon. William Michael Holding. Allan Clyde Howard. Han. John Winston Howe. Brian Leslie Humphreys. Benjamin Charles Hunt. Han. Ralph James Dunnel Hurford. Christopher John Hyde. John Martin Innes. Urquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher.Qld Richmond. N.S.W.
ChiHey. N.S.W. Macarthur. N.S.W. Swan, WA.
Phillip. N.S.W. Bonython. SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith. N.S.W.
Barton. N.S.W. Dawson.Qld Parramatta. N.S.W. Diamond Valley. Vic. Hunter, N.S.W.
Canning, WA. Wilmot. Tas. Mitchell. N.S.W. Fadden.Qld
Indi. Vic. Maranoa. Qld
Kalgoorlie. WA. Mackellar. N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic.
Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic. Henty, Vic.
Robertson. N.S.W. Wentworth. N.S.W. Bradfield. N.S.W.
Lyne. N.S.W. Brisbane. Qld McMillan. Vic.
Lilley.Qld Fremantle. WA. Herbert. Qld Cook. N.S.W. Forrest. WA. Holt. Vic. Berowra. N.S. W. Capricornia, Qld Casey. Vic. Farrer. N.S.W. Mallee. Vic. Wannon, Vic.
Macquarie. N.S.W. Fraser. A.C.T. Wakefield. SA Franklin. Tas. Braddon. Tas. Boothby. S.A. Chisholm. Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley.Qld. Riverina. N.S.W. Petrie.Qld Denison. Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong. N.S. W. Batman. Vic. Griffith.Qld Gwydir. N.S.W. Adelaide. SA Moore. WA. Melbourne. Vic.

NP NP
ALP LP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP NP ALP LP ALP LP LP LP LP LP NP
ALP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP ALP LP LP NP ALP ALP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP ALP
LP ALP LP
LP NP LP
ALP ALP
LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NP LP LP
ALP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi. Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins. Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Katter, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating. Hon. Paul John Kelly. Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin. John Charles Killen. Hon. Sir James. KCMG. Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd. Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch. Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald.
KCMG. (to 22.10.82) MacKellar. Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean. Ross Malcolm McLeay. Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McVeigh. Hon. Daniel Thomas MacPhee. Ron. Ian Malcolm Maher. Michael John Mildren. John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford. John Graham Newman. Hon. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Hon. Peter James O-Keefe. Frank Lionel. A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Ian Louis Rocher. Allen Charles Ruddock. Philip Maxwell Sainsbury. Murray Evan Scholes. Gordon Glen Denton Scott. John Lyden Shack. Peter Donald Shipton. Roger Francis Sinclair. Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden. Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie. KCMG .- Q.c. Spender. John Michael. Q.c. Street. Hon. Anthony Austin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson. Hon. David Scott. M.e. Tuckey. Charles Wilson UTen. Hon. Thomas Viner. Hon. Robert Ian Wallis. laurie George West. Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckett, M.e. Willis. Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker. SA Deakin, Vic. Scullin. Vic. Hughes. N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle. N.S. W. Bowman.Qld Kennedy. Qld Blaxland. N.S.W. Canberra. A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton. Qld Prospect. N.S. W. Murray, Vic. Hume. N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah. N.S.W. Calare. N.S.W. Perth. WA. Grayndler. N.S.W. Sydney. N.S.W. Darling Downs. Qld Balaclava, Vic. Lowe. N.S.W. Ballarat. Vic. Wide Bay. Qld La Trobe. Vic. Ryan.Qld Shortland. N.S.W. St George. N.S.W. Banks. N.S.W. Bass. Tas. Gippsland. Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker. S.A. Cowper. N.S. W. Curtin. WA. Dundas. N.S.W. Eden-Monaro. N.S.W. Corio. Vic. Hindmarsh. SA Tangney. WA. Higgins. Vic. New England. N.S.W.
Bruce. Vic. North Sydney. N.S.W. Corangamite. Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt. Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid. N.S.W. Stirling. WA. Grey.S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson. Qld Gellibrand. Vic. Sturt.S.A. Port Adelaide. SA

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NP NP
LP LP NP LP ALP ALP NP LP ALP ALP NP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NP NP LP LP NP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NP
LP LP LP NP ALP NP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NP-National Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron (from 8 September), Mr Campbell, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson (to 8 September), Mr Scott, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr MacKellar (from 18 August) (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDlTuRE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman (from 9 December), Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean (to 9 December), Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY - Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Donald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATIONS-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERSMr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges, Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Martyr, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston, Senator Georges and Senator Hamer, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen, Senator Elstob, Senator Hill, Senator Mcintosh, Senator Martyr, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton (to 24 August), Mr Coleman (from 24 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin, Senator Missen, Senator Sibraa and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE
PARLIAMENTAI\Y PRIVILEGE-Mr Spender (Chairman), Senator Evans, Senator Georges, Senator Jessop, Senator Kilgariff and Senator Macklin, and Mr Adermann, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Porter.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn Deputy Clerk (Acting)-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedure)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-D. M Blake, V.R.D. Deputy Clerk of the House-A. R. Browning
Deputy Clerk of the House-L. M. Barlin Operations Manager-I. C. Harris
Clerk Assistant (Acting)-I. C. Cochran Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Table Office (Programming)-J. K. Porter Table Office (Bills and Papers)-J. W. Pender
Commillee Office-M. Aldons (Acting) Serjeant-at-Arms Office-J. E. Bellchambers (Acting)
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaff(House ofRepresentatives)-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary LibrarianH. de S. C. MacLean
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 140 of 1982)An Act to amend the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 consequent upon the enactment of the Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982.
Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 70 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Air Accidents (Commonwealth Government Liability) Act 1963.
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 77 of 1982)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Air Navigation Legislation (Validation and Interpretation) Act 1982 (Act No. 95 of 1982)An Act to make provision in relation to the exercise of certain powers and the performance of certain functions under regulations and instruments under the Air Navigation Act 1920 and for related purposes.
Appropriation Act (No. I) 1982-83 (Act No. 1160£]982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1982-83 (Act No. 117 of 1982)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Appropriation (Parliamentary Departments) Act 1982-83 (Act No. 118 of 1982)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service, in relation to the Parliamentary Departments, of the year ending on 30 June 1983.
Asian Development Fund Act 1982 (Act No. lSI of 1982)An Act to authorize a further contribution by Australia to the Asian Development Bank for the purposes of the Asian Development Fund.
Australian Bicentennial Road Development Trust Fund Act 1982 (Act No. 133 of 1982)An Act to establish a Trust Fund for the purpose of the grant of financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for expenditure on upgrading Australian roads in celebration of the Bicentenary in 1988, and for related purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 126 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 125 of 1982)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 124 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981.
Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 127 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Bank Account Debits Tax Act 1982 (Act No. 141 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks.
Bank Account Debits Tax Administration Act 1982 (Act No. 142 of 1982)An Act relating to the collection of a tax in respect of certain debits made to accounts kept with banks, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Berry Fruits) Act 1982 (Act No. 132 of 1982)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain berry fruits.
Bounty (Ships) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 145 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Bounty (Ships) Act 1980.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 154 of 1982)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. ISS of 1982)- An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 71 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Civil Aviation (Carriers' Liability) Act 1959.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Management of Organizations) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 143 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
Cotton Levy Act 1982 (Act No. 147 of 1982)An Act to impose a levy upon certain cotton produced in Australia.
Cotton Research Act 1982 (Act No. 146 of 1982)An Act to provide for the collection of levy imposed by the Cotton Levy Act 1982 and to establish a Cotton Research Trust Account.
Customs and Excise Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 81 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Excise Act 1901.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Customs Securities (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 137 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 and the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 in relation to certain Customs securities, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff Act 1982 (Act No. 113 of 1982)- An Act relating to duties of Customs.
Customs Tariff (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 115 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 114 of 1982)An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 consequent upon the enactment of the Customs TariffAct 1982 and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 136 of 1982)An Act to repeal section 140fthe Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975, and for related purposes.
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment (Countervailing Duties) Act 1982 (Act No. 68 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in relation to countervailing duties.
Defence Force (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (Act No. 153 of 1982)An Act to amend certain Acts, and to enact transitional provisions, consequent upon the enactment of the Defence Force Discipline Act 1982, and for other purposes.
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982 (Act No. 1520f 1982)An Act relating to the discipline of the Defence Force and for related purposes.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 109 of 1982)- An Actto amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.1) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. II00f 1982)- An Act to amend the Diesel Fuel Tax Act (No.2) 1957.
Diesel Fuel Taxes Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 108 of 1982)- An Act relating to taxes on diesel fuel.
Dried Fruits Export Charges Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. l440f 1982)- An Act to amend the Dried Fruits Export Charges Act 1924.
Drought Assistance (Primary Producers) Act 1982 (Act No. 99 of 1982)An Act to make provison for the grant of financial assistance to primary producers who are affected by drought.
Export Market Development Grants Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 157 of 1982)An Act to amend the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, and for related purposes.
Fertilizers (Subsidy) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 69 of 1982)An Act to amend section 3 of the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966 and to amend the Phosphate Fertilizers Bounty Act 1963.
Health Legislation Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 1120f 1982)An Act to amend the Health Insurance Act 1973, the National Health Act 1953 and the Health Insurance Commission Act 1973, and for related purposes.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1982 (Act No. 102 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Individuals) Act 1982 (Act No. 101 of 1982)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes of companies, of corporate unit trusts and of superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Rates) Act 1982 (Act No. 105 of 1982)An Act to declare the rates of income tax payable upon incomes other than incomes of companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation funds.
Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 103 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Mining Withholding Tax) Act 1979.
Income Tax (Rates) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 1040f 1982)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Rates) AC11976.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 76 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 106 of 1982)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 123 of 1982)- An Act relating to income tax.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 97 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Grants) Act 1980.
Live-stock Export Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 83 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-slock Export Charge ACI 1977.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Live-stock Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 82 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Live-stock Slaughter Levy Act 1964.
Loan ACt(No. 2) 1982 (Act No. 107 of 1982)An Act to authorize the borrowing and expending of moneys for defence purposes.
National Crimes Commission Act 1982 (Act No. 138 of 1982)An Act to establish a National Crimes Commission to investigate criminal activities, in particular organized criminal activities, with a view to the prosecution of offenders.
Northern Territory (Self-Government) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 130 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Northern Territory (Self-Government) Act 1978.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 128 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act 1971.
Public Service Acts Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. III of 1982)- An Act relating to the Australian Public Service.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 78 of 1982)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 100 of 1982)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Royal Commissions Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 139 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Royal Commissions Act 1902.
Salaries and Wages Pause Act 1982 (Act No. 134 of 1982)An Act to suspend for 12 months the powers of certain authorities in relation to the remuneration of certain persons, and for certain other purposes.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No. I) 1982 (Act No. 840f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 85 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1982 (Act No. 860f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1982 (Act No. 87 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1982 (Act No. 88 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1982 (Act No. 89 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.7) 1982 (Act No. 900f 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1982 (Act No. 91 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1982 (Act No. 92 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 93 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Security Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 148 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Social Security Act 1947.
Social Security Legislation Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 98 of 1982)- An Act relating to social security.
Special Employment-related Programs Act 1982 (Act No. 135 of 1982)An Act to make provision for the expenditure of funds on special employment-related programs.
Special Prosecutors Act 1982 (Act No. 79 of 1982)- An Act to provide for Special Prosecutors.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Amendment Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 94 of 1982)- An Act to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
States (Works and Housing) Assistance Act 1982 (Act No. 96 of 1982)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure ?f a capital na~ure, to ma~e loans to the States and the Northern Territory for welfare housing and to authonze the borrowmg of certam moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1982 (Act No. 129 of 1982)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 131 of 1982)An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981, and for related purposes.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act (No.2) 1982 (Act No. 80 of 1982)- An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Student Assistance (Loans Guarantee and Subsidy) Act 1982 (Act No. 158 of 1982)An Act to provide for the giving of guarantees and subsidies by the Commonwealth in respect of certain loans made to eligible students.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) (Consequential Amendments) Act 1982 (Act No. 122 of 1982)An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax-Promotors) Act 1982 (Act No. 121 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company TaxVendors) 1982 (Act No. 120 of 1982)- An Act to impose a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Taxation (Unpaid Company Tax) Assessment Act 1982 (Act No. 119 of 1982)An Act relating to the assessment and collection of a tax in respect of certain unpaid company tax.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 156 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964.
Tobacco Charge Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 72 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No. I) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 73 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.1) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.2) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 74 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.2) 1955.
Tobacco Charge (No.3) Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 75 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Tobacco Charge Act (No.3) 1955.
Wheat Marketing Amendment Act 1982 (Act No. 150 of 1982)- An Act to amend the Wheat Marketing Act 1979.
Wildlife Protection (Regulation of Exports and Imports) Act 1982 (Act No. 149 of 1982)An Act to further the protection and conservation of wildlife by regulating the export and import of certain animals, plants and goods, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: FIFTH PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian Broadcasting Corporation (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian National Railways Commission (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Shipping Commission Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Commonwealth Employees (Voluntary Membership of Unions) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Complementary Industrial Relations System) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Conciliation and Arbitration (Government Service) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Constitution Alteration (Fixed Term Parliaments) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Defence (Visiting Warships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Industrial Democracy Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Insurance Amendment, Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Ombudsman Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Omega Navigation Facility Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third RJading.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Franchise Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Petroleum Retail Marketing Sites Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981. Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Protection of the Sea (Prevention of Pollution from Ships) Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Queensland Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders (Self-Management and Land Rights) Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Repatriation Acts (Tuberculosis Pensions) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION-continued
River Murray Waters Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Weights and Measures (National Standards) Amendment Bill 1982. Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
World Heritage Properties Protection Bill 1982. Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.

Notices ofMotion

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 957

Thursday, 26 August 1982
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers. _
EMPLOYMENT
Notice of Motion
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) notes the concern of employees at International Harvester Australia, Gee long, Victoria, an<) the Geelong community,and
(2) calls on the Government to give urgent consideration, at the same time as considering protection for BHP, to the effect of dumping on other sections of Australian industry and thus ensure that employment is not threatened further by unfair competition.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION
Mrs Darling proceeding to give a notice of motion-
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable lady will put her notice into proposition form instead of an argument.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION
Mrs Darling proceeding to give a notice of motion-
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable lady is still putting an argument.
DEFENCE INDUSTRIES
Notice of Motion
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House requests the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence to conduct an urgent inquiry into the effects on the aircraft industry of-
(I) the level of work needed by the industry in order to maintain skills in the industry;
(2) proposed retrenchments in the industry, as a result of the decision to cut by 30 the Nomad project, on available skills in(a) technical management and design, and (b) trade skills related to aircraft production;
(3) the cost of an extension of the Nomad Project to cover the loss of skills in projected retrenchments in the period between the rundown in Nomad production and the commencement of the F/ A-18 and the trainer program, and
(4) that the Committee report as a matter of urgency.
PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House deplores the Department of Education's lack of a national program in early childhood education and calls on the Minister for Education to accept responsibility for

the national co-ordination, planning and support of preschool education by making it an integral and properly funded component of his Department.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAX EVASION: PROSECUTIONS
Mrs CHILD-I remind the Prime Minister of the fact that Commissioner Costigan, having expressed the view that new legislation was not necessary to act effectively against the tax evasion industry, concerning the claim that the new legislation has arrested the matter, said:
Even if it is, the past criminal activities cannot be allowed to go unpunished, and the revenue lost to be forgotten. Action is required.
I therefore ask the Prime Minister: Firstly, why have no prosecutions been launched under the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act, assented to 20 months ago in December 1980? Secondly, how many prosecutions are in the course of preparation? Thirdly, when may we expect the first of these prosecutions to be launched?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Treasurer has flu this morning and is not here; otherwise I have no doubt that he would be advised on the detail of the honourable member's question. I will see what precise information I can get and let the honourable member know. I take this opportunity to remind the House that the special prosecutor and special task force that is being established as a result of the Costigan recommendations will be pursuing those matters with the utmost vigour. We are also prepared to establish a second task force-I think this has not been brought to particular notice-in relation to the wider matters of the Costigan report if the Royal Commissioner believes that that could be of assistance, and especially if he can point to those areas where further examination would be most likely to lead to prosecution. In relation to the specific question on the Crimes (Taxation Offences) Act, I will get the information for the honourable member as soon as possible.
AIR FARES: KING ISLAND
Mr GROOM--Is the Minister for Aviation aware that both the Nimmo report into transport to and from Tasmania and also a recent Senate committee report on the same subject recommended that a special Commonwealth subsidy be paid on air fares between King Island and other Bass Strait islands and the mainland of Australia? If so, why is there a subsidy on the air fares between the mainland of Australia and the mainland of Tasmania but not between Currie, the capital of King Island, and Melbourne? How can

958 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Questions without Notice

the Minister justify this injustice? Has the Minister received an invitation to travel to King Island? When will he be able to come to the island to enjoy its famous hospitality including fishing, pheasant shooting, crayfish, et cetera, and to discuss this vitally important issue?
Mr FIFEI am aware of the problem that has been referred to by the honourable member for Braddon in his question. I am certainly aware of the recommendations contained in the two reports that he has referred to. The honourable member has made extensive representations to me on this matter. I am pleased to be able to advise him that the question is under active consideration. I have also received his invitation to visit King Island to enter into discussions and to enjoy the hospitality of that very beautiful part of Australia. I am able to say that I will be accepting the honourable member's invitation and making arrangements to visit there as soon as possible for the discussions. The discussions are the nub of the question that the honourable member has put to me. I am unable to say when that visit will take place but it will be in the very near future. I am looking forward to travelling there with Kendell Airlines from my constituency of Farrer. It is an urgent matter for the residents of King Island and those who visit there from time to time. I give the honourable member an assurance that I will progress the matter as rapidly as possible.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE FEDERATED SHIP
PAINTERS AND DOCKERS UNION
Mr DUFFY-I refer the Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney General to his statement of 24 August to the effect that the Attorney-General does not accept the views expressed by the Royal Commissioner, Mr Costigan, in paragraph 3.89 of his report, wherein the Commissioner stated:
The only reason why the former laws were not effective to inhibit their breach was because those laws were not enforced.
I ask the Minister: Will he table any legal opinion obtained by the Attorney-General on this matter?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I have no information with respect to any such opinion that exists. The Attorney-General's conclusion was reached after examining the law and what the Royal Commissioner had to say. Some people seem to think that simply because the Royal Commissioner makes a remark in his report that that has some characteristic of holy writ. It certainly does not.

TIMBER INDUSTRY
Mr PORTER-I refer the Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce to the troubled state of the timber industry at present. I ask: What action is the Government taking in relation to the timber industry's requests firstly, for a reference to the Temporary Assistance Authority; secondly, for anti-dumping action to be taken against imports from New Zealand; and, thirdly, a renegotiation of unfair trading practices imposed under the terms of the proposed agreement with New Zealand for closer economic relations?
Mr HODGMAN-The matter raised by the honourable member is important. Honourable members will be aware that the Minister for Industry and Commerce met with representatives of the Australian Softwood Products Council regarding the position in the industry and the Council's request for a reference to the Temporary Assistance .Authority covering sawn softwood timber as referred to by the honourable member. In addition, Sir Phillip Lynch met with representatives of the South East Trades and Labour Council of South Australia on the very same matter. He is, therefore, fully aware of the serious downturn in the industry's activity.
Mr Hurford-What is he doing about it?
Mr HODGMAN-If the honourable member listens he will find out. After studying a report from the Department on the Council's request the Minister decided that the most appropriate action at this point of time would be for the permanent heads of the relevant Australia and New Zealand departments to discuss the matter. These discussions are now under way. In making these decisions the Minister took into consideration the following factors: Firstly, New Zealand imports are currently the main source of concern; secondly, sawn timber is on schedule A of the New Zealand-Australia Free Trade Agreement; and, thirdly, the advanced stage of negotiations on the closer economic relationship between Australia and New Zealand. One objective of these discussions will be to establish clearly the reasons for the breakdown in our trading relationship with New Zealand in this area. Another objective of the discussions between the two permanent heads will be the resumption of meaningful talks between the two industries leading to a more cooperative and fruitful long term relationship.
Mr Hurford-More talks! What is he doing about it?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Adelaide will remain silent.

Questions without Notice

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 959

Mr HODGMAN-It is an important matter. The honourable member should listen to the detail of the answer. This approach is regarded as more constructive and capable of achieving a quicker and more lasting solution to the present problems than a formal reference to the TAA at this stage. Imports of sawn softwood from all sources will continue to be carefully monitored so that further action can be considered immediately should increased imports from sources other than New Zealand threaten to disrupt the local industry. I advise the House that in addition to the official discussions there is progress on the softwood timber industry's dumping complaint. A senior Australian Customs officer from the department is in New Zealand at this time pursuing dumping investigations. This follows an examination of pricing and costing data which suggested apparent dumping margins of up to 49 per cent on square dressed structural softwood from New Zealand.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will bring his answer to a conclusion.
Mr HODGMAN-Mr Speaker, the answer would be incomplete without--
Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. This is a very important matter and ought properly to be the subject of a ministerial statement and debate. The Parliament ought not to be used by the Minister to hide behind the shield--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Shortland will resume his seat. There is no point of order. I call upon the Minister to bring his answer to a conclusion.
Mr HODGMAN-To assist the House, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a document containing the balance of the information which I wish to give to the House.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
The Department will be finalising its investigation as soon as possible and preparing a report for my consideration. With regard to the honourable member's reference to CER and unfair trading practices, I understand that the industries' dissatisfaction with the proposed CER arrangements largely relates to the transition period during which export incentives and import licensing will continue to apply. The industries acknowledge that, when fully implemented, CER will benefit the forest products industries by removing the main causes of imbalance in New Zealand's favour in the current trading relationship.
Following a series of consultations and discussions with the Australian forest products industries, the Department facilitated a meeting between the industries of the two countries. At this meeting in Auckland on 21 and 22 July, the Australian industry delegation sought the early removal of export incentives and import licensing. While it is still too early to predict confidently the outcome of this meeting, since talks between industry sectors in the two countries are continuing, the New

Zealand industry is well aware of the depth of the Australian concern. I believe that throuol, continued industry-to-industry consultations, supported wilcre necessary by -contact between officials, it should be possible to arrive at a position acceptable to both sides.
McCABE-LAFRANCHI REPORT
Mr JACOBI-I refer the attention of the Minister representing the Attorney-General to a report in the Australian Financial Review of 4 June 1982 wherein the Treasurer commented on the McCabe-Lafranchi report and stated that he cannot explain why no attempt was made to put at least a sample of the companies into liquidation, thereby giving the liquidator powers far wider than exist under the Income Tax Assessment Act. Is the Minister now in a position to explain why only one of the 923 companies involved was put into liquidation?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I am not aware of the report that the honourable member referred to. But because it is relevant to the question that the honourable member asked, I take this opportunity to say that there was a quite unprincipled attack launched upon the Attorney-General in this place and in the Senate yesterday. I pointed out then that the Attorney-General in fact before the Costigan report was given to the Government-indeed before the relevant witnesses even gave evidence before Mr Costigansought an opinion from the Solicitor-General on this matter. So, he acted very promptly indeed.
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANISATION
Mr ROCHER-My question is directed to the Minister for Employment and Industrial Relations. Has Australia's delegation to the International Labour Organisation requested application of ILO conventions No. 87, dealing with the protection of the right to organise, and No. 98, protecting the right of workers to organise without employer interference and to bargain collectively, following the suppression of Poland's free trade union organisation, Solidarity? Will the Government seek an investigation by the ILO governing body's Committee on Freedom of Association? Will the credentials of future Polish delegates to the ILO be challenged by Australia's delegates? Will Australia draft a resolution condemning the suppression of Solidarity and actively pursue its introduction and adoption by thelLO?
Mr MACPHEE-The Australian Government ratified and supports the Conventions to which the honourable member referred. We have in fact been concerned about the matters raised in

960 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Questions without Notice

the question. Convention No. 87, concerning freedom of association and protection of the right to organise, and Convention No. 98, concerning the right to organise and bargain collectively, involve basic human rights and are central to the International Labour Organisation. The right of individuals to make their own decisions about the organisations they wish to join or not to join is a fundamental one. In December 1981, complaints were lodged with the ILO against the Polish Government by the International Confederation of Trade Unions and the World Council of Labour regarding breaches by Poland of the principles of freedom of association and, in particular, Convention No. 87, which Poland had ratified.
Following several communications between the ILO and the Polish Government, the governing body of the ILO, of which the Australian Government, employers and workers are members, in its February and March session considered an interim report prepared by the Freedom of Association Committee on matters raised in the complaint. It stressed the extreme gravity of the allegations and it pointed to the detention of unionists for reasons connected with their activities to defend the interests of workers with a serious interference with civil liberties and trade union rights. All Australian members in the governing body-worker, employer and government-supported the adoption of the report of the Committee and the governing body further considered the matter in its May meeting and again urged the Polish Government to respect Convention No. 87 which has been ratified by Poland. During the annual convention of the ILO in June of this year, the Committee on the Application of Conventions and Recommendations considered the suspension oftrade union activities in Poland and recognised that this was a particularly serious case. It also noted that the general suspension of trade union activities constituted a serious infringement of Convention No. 87 and called for a continuation of co-operation between the ILO and the Polish Government. The whole of the Australian delegation supported that report and the Australian Government will continue to do all that it can through the ILO, to bring pressure upon the Polish Government.
Mr Scott-I ask that the Minister table the document.
Mr MACPHEEI table the document.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mrs Kelly proceeding to address a question to the Prime Minister-

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. We object to and reject your ruling. This is a direct question. The question may be discomforting to the Government of which you are a member but we do not find that a justification for ruling it out of order. This is a very serious matter and it is one which should be soberly and extensively explored in this Parliament.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is arguing the issue. He will make his point of order.
Mr Hayden-Question Time is one of those occasions when this can be done.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable gentleman to point to the Standing Order on which he is basing his point of order.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I am asking you for the Standing Order on which you are giving your ruling.
Mr SPEAKER-The Standing Orders state that a question is out of order if it is argumentative, suggests an answer, has innuendo, or is too long. I asked the honourable lady to cease the argument and direct a question. She failed to do so and I therefore ruled it out of order.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, it was not an argument. How can one ask a question unless one puts a proposition to the Government, especially when such serious, gross, culpable incompetence is involved?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. If the honourable lady reframes her question she will be in order.
LIVE SHEEP EXPORTS
Mr LUSHER-Can the Minister for Primary Industry confirm reports that the Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union is to suspend bans and limitations on the export oflive sheep?
Mr NIXON-The export of live sheep has posed difficult questions over a number of years, causing great division between the meat processing industry and producers. It has led to confrontation on the waterfront at the point of live sheep loading. It has been a very difficult issue to resolve. I am glad to say that the Australian Council of Trade Unions accepted the recommendations to the Government of the committee that we sent overseas. The recommendations were picked up by the Government and are being put in place. I was pleased to see in today's papers that the AMIEU appears now to have accepted the ACTU's judgment on the matter. I am hopeful, therefore, that this eight or lO-year old problem which has caused so much difficulty will now be

Questions without Notice

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 961

put to rest finally and that the process of selling live sheep overseas which has been an integral part of the economics of the sheep and wool in-- dustry can progress satisfactorily.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE FEDERATED SHIP
PAINTERS AND DOCKERS UNION
Mrs KELLY-My question once again is addressed to the Prime Minister. Did the Prime Minister in the House yesterday defend the Treasurer and the Attorney-General by relying on the secrecy provisions of section 16 of the Income Tax Assessment Act? Is he aware that in a statement of 27 June 1982 the Treasurer was able to give a broad outline of the very case dealt with in the report of the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union? Is he aware that Mr Costigan, who stated that he was in his report bound by these secrecy provisions, was still able to give an outline of the broad legal issues involved in a particular case without breaching those secrecy provisions? Do these two instances mean that the secrecy provisions of the Act do not prevent Ministers from having a full knowledge of broad legal and other developments in the taxation area? In the light of this how can the Government justify its alleged ignorance of what has been described by the media as the biggest criminal swindle in Australia's history? Is there any explanation other than gross and culpable incompetence?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable member appears not to have read the Costigan report. I refer the House again to a certain section of the report which I think is very important in relation to this matter. I repeat paragraph 3.10 which states:
It is necessary, before 1-
That is, Mr Costigan-
proceed further, to draw the attention of those who may read this Report to the circumstance that the secrecy provisions of the Income Tax Assessment Act apply with equal force to the Ministers who have charge of the enforcement of the law in this area. I refer in particular to persons holding the office of Treasurer, and of Attorney-General. The events to which I am referring took place over a period of \0 years. It will be recalled that during that time there had been a number of incumbents of both those high offices of the State. All of them have been denied access to the detailed information which has now been provided to me, and which has identified the situation described in this Report.
I would have thought that that is plain enough. There are other references which the Treasurer used on the very same point. It would be wrong to say that any defence of the Attorney-General or the Treasurer rested on the secrecy provisions of the Act. It rests on the report of themselves and their own undoubted integrity. What must be

regarded by all honourable members in this House as a sham attack on both Ministers, because there is not a person in the-Australian Labot Party who does not know--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I ask honourable members on the Opposition benches to cease the noise. In this Parliament a person who has the call is entitled to be heard, not drowned out.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is not a person in this House or in the other place who does not know that the integrity of Senator Durack and of the Treasurer stands as high as or higher than that of any other two people in this Parliament.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Shack having addressed a question to the Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce-
Mr SPEAKER-The question is out of order. The honourable gentleman is not entitled to ask the Minister to announce Government policy.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT
Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Prime Minister. I refer to the extraordinary catalogue of professional neglect and incompetence produced by the personal administration of the Crown Solicitor during the period covered by the latest published report of Royal Commissioner Costigan. In that respect it is necessary to quote from page 62 of the report, which states:
Ultimately (and not at all remotely) responsibility rests with the Crown Solicitor himself. He and his Head Office have a duty to make himself and itself aware of what is happening so as to ensure that it is being done correctly . . . the Office, has stood by and allowed the most appalling conduct to continue. In those circumstances I can conclude only that there was no proper supervision being exercised by the Office during that time.
I ask: Is it a fact that as reward for this unparalleled, damaging-incompetence this officer was promoted to head the Attorney-General's Department as a consequence of the personal and professional assessment of his suitability for the task by the Attorney-General and in consequence of the Attorney-General's enthusiastic recommendation to Cabinet? In view of this clear evidence of gross and culpable incompetence on the part of the Attorney-General, will the Prime Minister now dismiss him?
MiSPEAKER-Before I call the Prime Minister I indicate to the House that it is the normal practice when a question asked contains a reflection on an individual to require that question to be put on the Notice Paper. Given the nature of the circumstances of the report and the debate which

962 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Questions without Notice

took place yesterday, I do not propose to direct that the question be put on the Notice Paper. I leave it to the discretion of the Minister-in this case, the Prime Minister-to decide whether the matter should go on the Notice Paper or should be answered directly.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Quite obviously a very serious situation which must appal all honourable members in this House was revealed in the Perth office of the Crown Solicitor's Office as a result of the Costigan report. In addition to that there is a question of the relationship between the Perth office and the central office. That matter is under urgent examination as a result of an approach to the Law Council of New South Wales. I do not want to make too much of it, but it is worth noting that a joint management review, assisted by outside consultants, was undertaken a couple of years ago.
Mr Hayden-Don't wriggle; answer the question. Are you going to sack this man for his blundering incompetence or are you going to have him inflicted on the country's administration for ever more?
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent. The Leader of the Opposition understands the forms of the Parliament. He asked the question. He ought to listen to the answer.
Mr Hayden-What answer? That is not an answer. A blundering incompetent Attorney General costing the country thousands of millions of dollars.
Mr SPEAKER-To the Leader of the Opposition I extend considerable privileges beyond those which I extend to other members. I ask him not to abuse that privilege. I ask him to remain silent while the answer is being given.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Those matters are being acted upon with great urgency. They are serious. It is more than unfortunate that the joint management review did not reveal these deficiencies in a more adequate way when it was held two or more years ago. The honourable gentleman seems unaware of the ways in which a permanent head is appointed. As a result of laws which we passed to stop the stacking of the positions of permanent heads by political appointees, by statute there must be a report from a committee of permanent heads naming a suitable applicant or a short list for Cabinet. Quite clearly there is a responsibility on a Minister to make a recommendation to Cabinet as a result of that process, but that process was fulfilled in its entirety in relation to that appointment. I think the honourable

gentleman, in seeking to attack the Attorney General again, has gone beyond the bounds of what members in this Parliament should normally do or say.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There are no boundaries for the Opposition and for this Leader of the Opposition in relation to a cowardly and privileged attack on the head of this Attorney General's Department.
Mr Scholes-Who is the biggest coward in Australia? It is the Prime Minister.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Corio will withdraw.
Mr Scholes-The Prime Minister has reflected on every member of this--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will withdraw.
Mr Scholes-I will withdraw, Mr Speaker, in deference to your position-not that coward.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will withdraw unreservedly.
Mr Scholes-I withdraw.
DISTINGUISHED VISITOR
Mr SPEAKER-This seems to be a good time to interrupt the proceedings. I inform the House that we have present in the gallery the honourable B. J. Westh, Minister for Agriculture in the Danish Government. On behalf of the House I extend to him a very warm welcome.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TRADE UNION ACTIVITIES
Mr BIRNEY-Is the Prime Minister in a position to advise the House of the appropriate measures the Government should pursue to control union activities of the kind disclosed in the Costigan report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union?
Mr Hurford-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. The question requests an announcement about policy. I ask you to declare it out of order.
Mr SPEAKER-The question asks for information.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Costigan report indicates quite clearly that trade unions in this country, as other organisations of significance within the Australian community, need to have

Questions without Notice

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 963

their activities governed and determined to a significant extent by laws which may be directed specifically to the institutions themselves or, if not that, by the normal laws of the Commonwealth or of a State. The activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, as described by Mr Costigan, indicate very plainly that that union has thumbed its nose at the normal law, that it has become a sanctuary for people with a criminal record and that the union is governed and determined by people with a criminal record.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I ask honourable members on the Opposition benches to understand the processes of the Parliament. If a question is asked the Minister called is entitled to answer as he chooses so long as the answer is relevant. He is entitled to be heard. I ask honourable members on the Opposition benches to accord with that practice.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I emphasise the point that organisations of importance to the community and of influence within the community need to be governed by laws which are specific to the purpose of the organisations or by the general laws of the Commonwealth or of a State. The Costigan report makes that very clear indeed in the comments about the Painters and Dockers Union.
Against that background, I think many members of this House will want to question why the Australian Labor Party is committ~d to certain policies, such as the right of unions to regulate their own affairs free from government or judicial interference. Is that not a right that the Painters and Dockers Union would usurp to the full? Is that not a right which, if it were given to the Painters and Dockers Union by the Australian Labor Party, would be abused to the detriment of the wider Australian community. Exemption of the union movement from the Trade Practices Act, not restricting unions to legally defined industrial matters, the abolition of the Industrial Relations Bureau and the repeal of all penal provisions directed at unions and union members are measures which would indeed sanctify the position of the Painters and Dockers Union. They would place all unions above the law. That is precisely the position in which the Painters and Dockers Union has sought to place itself.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order.
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I ask honourable members on both sides of the House to remain silent so that I

can hear the point of order by the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Hayden-There are only a couple of points I want to make quickly, but they are extraordinarily important. Yesterday I made it clear that the Labor Party--
Mr SPEAKER-Is this a point of order?
Mr Hayden-It is much more than a point of order. I think you ought to bear in mind, Mr Speaker, that I have had the benefit of the two confidential volumes of the Costigan Royal Commission report. I have read them overnight and I want to put a point, perhaps to cause the Prime Minister to reflect a little more maturely on what he is about. These are the points I want to make: I shall not feel myselfbound--
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, this is not a point of order--
Mr Hawke-You don't rule on whether it is a point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-I am not assisted by the honourable member for Wills.
Mr Hawke-Nor by the Prime Minister.
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills will remain silent. I think we will have a moratori"um of thirty seconds while we gather our senses. This is no way for the Parliament to conduct itself. I indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that if he has a point of order, as distinct from a point of argument, he should make the point of order.
Mr Hayden-It is a very important point in relation to--
Mr SPEAKER-It may be important as an argument, but is it a point of order?
Mr Hayden-I am asking for indulgence because it is important. I want to make one point clear: If the Prime Minister seeks to associate the Labor Party with the Painters and Dockers Union in the way in which he is about to, I will find myself no longer bound to the confidentiality in relation to the two volumes of the report of the royal commission inquiry in relation to the Painters and Dockers Union and will disclose associations that certain other people have with certain other organisations.
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-The House will come to order. What the Leader of the Opposition said was not a point of order.
Dr Klugman-He is changing his answer--

964 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Questions without Notice

Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Prospect that, if he interjects again, I will name him. The Leader of the Opposition did not make a point of order. However, what he did say, with my leave, is a very salutary point which has been said and is registered. I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition was given those two reports--
Mrs Childs-I take a point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Is this another point of order that is not?
Mrs Child-Bearing in mind the times when you have called for dignity in the House, Mr Speaker, could I suggest that the Prime Minister sit down when you ask him to sit down.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because of the intervention of the Leader of the Opposition, I ought to report to the House two facts. The House can make whatever conclusions it wants to or does not want to. The Leader of the Opposition was given those reports at 1.30 yesterday, and I invite them to--
Mr Hayden-One forty-three.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-One forty-three; I stllnd corrected. I hope it is not just a coincidence that the front page of the Age is as it is today.
Mr HaydenMr Speaker--
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. I indicate to the Prime Minister--
Mr Scholes-The House met at 1.45. That should be on the record.
Mr HawkeYou are not going to let him get away with that?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Corio will remain silent. I cannot deal with the House if there is constant noise. The honourable member for Wills has been here a short time but he does know that I cannot deal with the House if he keeps his noise up. The Prime Minister, by what he said, cast an inference about the Leader of the Opposition. I ask him to withdraw.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If an inference was cast in relation to the Leader of the Opposition, I certainly withdraw it.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I am not satisfied with that. The Prime Minister does not believe it. That is the first point.

The implication is that I am probably responsible for the leak. The Prime Minister does not believe that. That I happen to believe. The next thing-is that it is a contemptible comment--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that the powers that I possess are only to require the withdrawal of an offensive remark. I have required the withdrawal; the withdrawal has been made. I am not prepared to allow a debate over the matter at Question Time.
Mr Hayden-However, Mr Speaker, you do have the authority to extend indulgence and I ask for that.
Mr SPEAKER-I will grant the Leader of the Opposition short indulgence.
Mr HAYDEN-Mr Speaker, I am trying to avoid the inflammation which the Prime Minister is seeking to set loose in this chamber this morning, but I do find his comment to be contemptibly offensive. The Prime Minister knows better than that. I have reason to believe that he does not believe the imputation that is implicit in it. If the Prime Minister wants to play the rules rough and loose, I will play them rough and loose and will regard myself as no longer bound by the provisions and obligations of confidentiality in relation to those reports, with all the implications which flow from that. It is about time we got some decent standards in this country and we will not get them while this Prime Minister functions in the way he does.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I have granted the Leader of the Opposition indulgence and that has now expired. I return to the business of the House. I call the Prime Minister to continue the answer to the question.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Royal Commissioner draws attention to certain facts about the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union in different sections of his report. He says:
In Victoria the union is under the control of hardened criminals.
He says:
There has been . . . some 15 murders that took place between 1970 and 1979. The two worst years were 1971 when three murders took place and 1979 when four took place.
federal secretary Gordon told the Sweeney Royal Commission 'We catch and kill our own'.
Their answer to any interference with their activities is not to use the processes of the law but rather threats, violence and intimidation.
He continues:

Questions without Notice

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 965

No community can tolerate a group within it that regards the taking of a man's life as permissible provided he belongs to that group.
In this way the painters and dockers have assumed for therrlselves a position outside the law and have maintained that position by violence.
Those comments emphasise in the clearest possible terms that unions must be governed by either the general laws of the community or laws that are specific to the nature of the organisation concerned. The policy of the Australian Labor Party to place the union movement above the rule of law is one that would be disastrous in the light of the Costigan Royal Commission's report. Mr Cain and the Leader of the Opposition have said a good deal about tax avoidance. I challenge Mr Cain to pursue with the same vehemence and strength the rooting out of criminals, violence and corruption in the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union in Victoria as, allegedly, he wants to pursue tax avoiders. These are matters that are very properly within his province and it is time he showed a little more enthusiasm for that side of his activities.
One other point needs to be made. The points I have made in this answer are perfectly appropriate and entirely proper. I regret any imputation against the Leader of the Opposition in relation to one comment. I hope that the Leader of the Opposition accepts that. But his use of blackmail to go against the Royal Commission's recommendations on secrecy, his preparedness to jeopardise the further examinations of the Royal Commission--
Mr Scholes-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The rules of the House provide clearly that imputations against honourable members are out of order. Even when indulgence is granted to the Leader of the Opposition and the Prime Minister, an accusation of blackmail is an imputation falling within the provisions of the Standing Orders.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Corio has raised a point of order which is correct. An imputation against a member cannot be made except on a substantive motion. The right honourable gentleman used a term in relation to the Leader of the Opposition that he was using blackmail. I did not stop the right honourable gentleman because I understood the term to be used not in its strict sense but in a pejorative sense. The honourable member for Corio having taken the point, I call upon the Prime Minister to withdraw.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I withdraw the word 'blackmail' and use the word 'threat'. The Leader of the Opposition made it perfectly plain

that if the answer continued in ways which he thought might have come forward he would breach the secrecy provisions in relation to those parts of the other two volumes of the report. It is quite understandable why the Leader of the Opposition--
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I object to the unparliamentary term blackmail. It is not appropriate in the circumstances. The point I sought to make was simply that if the Prime Minister continued to behave in his usual indecent fashion then he would force a change of conduct in the Parliament.
Mr SPEAKER-I do not know whether the honourable gentleman heard it, but in fact I called upon the Prime Minister to withdraw and he did withdraw.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I used the word 'threat'. It was a threat because the Leader of the Opposition said that if the answer continued along a line of reasoning which he thought was going to come forward he would then publish the two volumes of the report which have been given to him in confidence. It is not the Government, it is Mr Costigan who has wanted those two reports kept confidential, and in the closest possible way, because he believes that publication will prejudice his further inquiries. If the Leader of the Opposition seeks to publish the documents knowing that, then, quite plainly, the consequences will be on the head of the Leader of the Opposition himself. Let me make the point again. Members of the Federated Painters and Dockers Union have violated the laws of this land. They have put themselves above the law. They seek to exercise their own forms of punishment and violence. It is time that the Premier of Victoria exhibited a little energy ill trying to do something about it. It is all very well to try to chide the Commonwealth in relation to tax avoidance, but these other matters are within the responsibility of the Premier himself. I challenge him to exhibit the same energy in relation to those matters as we are in relation to tax avoidance.
RETIREMENT OF MR J. W. BIGG
Mr SPEAKER-I wish to inform the House of the retirement of the Principal Attendant of the House of Representatives, Mr Jock Bigg. Mr Bigg and his wife are in the Speaker's Gallery this morning. The House has been very fortunate in having the services of Jock Bigg as he has been Principal Attendant since 1976. He has served in that position with distinction. It is an important post being concerned with the support and assistance given in this building to members, the staff and visitors and with the manner and efficiency of

966 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Retirement ofMr J. W. Bigg

that support which is actually provided by the attendant staff. In this crowded and inadequate building it is not always easy to provide reasonable services to all who work here or visit the Parliament but nonetheless the House is particularly well served by its attendant staff, which is in no small measure due to the organisation, supervision, personality and leadership of Jock Bigg. I know that all honourable members join me in wishing Jock and Mrs Bigg improved health and happiness in retirement.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (10.55)-All of us who have worked here in Parliament House with Jock Bigg realise the enormous contribution he has made to the everyday organisation of this Parliament. I am sure that I speak for all my colleagues and the staff here when I say: Thank you, Jock, for your cheerful manner, your great organisational skills and your hard work in keeping this place running smoothly over the years.
As a new member of parliament two years ago I greatly appreciated Jock's assistance in setting up my office and facilitating the smooth flow of visitors. As the member for Canberra, of course, Parliament House is also my electorate office to a large extent. And in the past two years I am sure that I have considerably added to Jock's workload with an endless stream of requests regarding school visits and visits by business and community delegations, as well as ordinary constituent inquiries. Throughout all this Jock has provided prompt, courteous assistance and has managed to retain a sane and balanced attitude to life that should be a model to all of us here. I know that Jock has made some plans for his retirement, and I am sure that he is looking forward to a welldeserved rest after a long and varied career of public service.
Jock, I wish you and your family all the best in the years ahead. I am sure that you know that your local member would be very pleased to hear from you from time to time.

of the opportunity of coming to visit. The organisation of these school visits puts a heavy burden on the attendants, the Joint House staff and the refreshment room staff. Jock has been of immense assistance to me, particularly in view of the burden that I have put on him. I know that all of the 'seventy-fivers' in particular feel that we have shared an experience with him. We are very grateful for all that he has done for us.
DEPARTMENTAL ESTIMATES Sir JAMES KILLEN (MoretonVicePresident of the Executive Council)-For the information of honourable members. I present a report on Functional Classifications of Outlays Departmental Estimates 1982-83.
ADVANCE TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE
Sir JAMES KILLEN (MoretonVice-President of the Executive Council)-For the information of honourable members. I present a statement on expenditure from the Advance to the Minister for Finance for July 1982.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Defence)-For the information of honourable members. I table details of the special flights by the Royal Australian Air Force for the period 1 January 1982 to 30 June 1982. Copies of this report are available at the Table Office.
AUSTRALIAN DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE BUREAU
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Australian Development Assistance Bureau annual review 1980-81.

Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (l0.56)-Mr Speaker, I join you and the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) in expressing to Jock Bigg the good wishes of all of us in the House. Those of us who came to this House first in 1976 shared with him a new experience. He became Principal Attendant; we joined this House and sat in it for the first time. In particular I would like to thank Jock for the enormous assistance he has been to me in organising perhaps an excessive number of visits to this place from schools in my electorate. As my electorate is reasonably close to Canberra many schools within it take advantage

FISHING INDUSTRY ACT 1956 Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 8 of the Fishing Industry Act 1956, I present the annual report on the operation of the Act for 1980-81.
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation)- For the information of honourable members. I present the annual report of the Department of Education for 1981.

General

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 967

AUSTRALIAN IONISING RADIATION ADVISORY COUNCIL
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members. I present the Australian Ionising Radiation Advisory Council 1981 report.
PARLIAMENTARY ZONE: PROPOSED WORKS
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Pursuant to section 5 of the Parliament Act 1974 I present proposals for the construction of roads, bridges and landscape elements required to complete the setting for the new Parliament House and link it with the balance of the parliamentary zone and Canberra's metropolitan road network.
I seek leave to make a brief statement.
Leave granted.
Mr HODGMAN-The National Capital Development Commission in consultation with the Parliament House Construction Authority has developed a draft program of works to facilitate access to the new Parliament House. Included in the works is the construction of roads and relocation and augmentation of services. Also included is the establishment of the formal land axis along the line between Capital Hill and Camp Hill envisaged by Walter Burley Griffin and reflected in the design of the new Parliament building and its main entrance forecourt. Consideration of the various proposed works is being sought from the Joint Committee on the New Parliament House. When its report is tabled I expect to be in a position to take further action under the Parliament Act to obtain the approval of the Parliament.
Some of the proposed road works require a variation to the Plan of Layout of the City of Canberra and I propose to notify my intention to vary the Plan in accordance with the Seat of Government Administration Act 1910 by special gazette shortly. There will follow a period for the lodgment of public objections to the variations after which the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory will consider the proposals and report to Parliament.
SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT
Motion (by Sir James Killen) agreed to:
That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 7 September 1982, at 1.45 p.m., unless Mr Speaker fixes an alternative day or hour of meeting.

PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Speaker, I claim'to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman wishes to make a personal explanation he may proceed.
Mr HAYDEN-I claim to have been misrepresented in regard to my position as Leader of the Australian Labor Party. In Question Time the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) sought to forge-albeit somewhat shakily, but nonetheless forge-a link between the criminal activities disclosed by the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union and the Labor Party. I merely draw your attention and that of the House to the fact that both the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and I made it clear in this House yesterday that there is no sympathy and no accommodation at all for those people of that union who have been involved in such activity and it is our strongest wish that the full and unrelenting force of law should fall upon their shoulders.
The second thing I wish to make clear is that if there is any criminal partnership between the Painters and Dockers Union and others w~h in some way may have a political quotient, it is certainly not with the Labor Party. I say that advisedly having considered certain documents not generally available, but I am not rul!ng out that such a linkage may in fact be establishable. The third thing I wish to say is that the Cain Labor Government has been in office for three months in Victoria. There have been 27 years of conservative government.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member is now going beyond a personal explanation.
Mr HAYDEN-If there is criminality of a wild and extensive nature by the Painters and Dockers Union it flourished under a conservative government.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor)-Mr Speaker, I seek to correct a misstatement I made in my speech in this House on 17 August.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the honourable gentleman asking my indulgence to make a correction?
Mr BARRY JONES-Yes.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr BARRY JONES-In my speech in this House on 17 August, reported on page 26 of

968 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Personal Explanations

Hansard, dealing with the report of the Austranlan Broadcasting Tribunal on the question of cable television and sUbscription television I referred to a Mr Henry von Bibra as 'a consultant to the companies interested in cable televisionMyer, Amatil, Elders-IXL and other generous contributors to Liberal Party funds'. Since making that statement. I have been advised by Mr von Bibra that he did not playa critical role in the inquiry in that he was retained by Myer and appeared in front of the Tribunal in the public hearing only to present claims on behalf of Myer. Elders-IXL has also approached me to the same effect. Mr von Bibra also informed me that he has no personal interest in any company which is interested in participating in cable television. I accept Mr von Bibra's explanation that he was only a consultant to Myer and that he did not play a critical role in the inquiry. I regret that my allegation was wider than intended, and I note that in my 10 years as a member of parliament this is the first retraction I have ever had to make on a matter of fact.
Mr MAHER (Lowe)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation in the nature of a correction also.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman wishes my indulgence he may have it. He may proceed.
Mr MAHER-Last Thursday in the Grievance Debate I implied that a conflict of interest existed for a Sydney firm of chartered accountants in relation to a company in receivership, namely ALPEX Commodity Traders Ltd. I have been contacted by Mr Walker, a chartered accountant. I am now confident that no conflict exists, or has ever existed, and that these chartered accountants did not act for ALPEX until the accountancy firm was appointed receiver.
I mention this matter today to ensure that the high professional reputation of Messrs Walkers, Meares and Co. is maintained and not besmirched in any way. I apologise to Mr Walker for any inconvenience.
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-Before 1 call General Business, 1draw the attention of the House to the fact that the other day I welcomed into the chamber a number of young people from the National Capital Forum for Young Australians. 1 am now informed that that was half the number and the remainder are in the chamber today. 1am sure the House welcomes them.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!

EDUCATION
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (11.07)-1 move:
That this House calls on the Government to re-establish the needs principle in relation to the funding of schools in Australia to ensure that all Australian children have an equal opportunity to the highest standard of education.
The House will be aware that the needs principle was first adopted by the Australian Labor Party as its policy in the middle 1960s and was first implemented by a Federal Government when the Labor Government was elected at the end of 1972. Following that election the Interim Committee for the Australian Schools Commission, under the chairmanship of Professor Karmel, was established to examine the needs of all schools in Australia and to make recommendations about how those needs ought to be addressed and how the Commonwealth might contribute financially to meeting the needs as exposed by that Committee. The recommendations of that Committee were first put into effect early in 1973 and, at the same time, plans were put in place to establish the Schools Commission.
The Schools Commission was designed to be a permanent body which would continually examine the needs of schools in Australia and make recommendations about how the Commonwealth might financially assist all schools in Australia in relation to meeting those needs. We have now seen the Schools Commission operating successfully ever since. However, over recent times, the Schools Commission has been burdened by the redefinition which this Government has employed in relation to its operations and in relation to the funding recommendations which it makes to the Government and the programs which the Government has required the Schools Commission to implement. What we have is a gross distortion of the original needs policy to the point where it is scarcely recognisable any more as a needs principle. What has to be recognised is that the needs principle, as established and defined by the Labor Party and first put into operation by the Labor Party, was based very firmly on the notion of equality of opportunity as far as the education of Australian children was concerned. We took the view that it was necessary to provide Commonwealth assistance to schools in Australia to ensure that all children, regardless of whether they came from wealthy or poor backgrounds, regardless of whether they were in poor communities and regardless of whether they were in government or non-government schools, should have an equal opportunity to receive the highest possible standard of education.

Education

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 969

However, what we now have is this Government's pre-occupation with privilege and its determination to entrench that privilege has meant that the notion of equality has been sacrified. The funding policies of this Government have worked very much to the advantage of the wealthier schools in Australia and very much to the disadvantage of the poorest schools in Australia, whether they be government or non-government. The Commonwealth's contribution to the running costs of government schools throughout Australia has fallen from 10 per cent under the last Labor Government to 7 per cent under this Government. That means that there has been a decline in the Commonwealth's contribution to the funding of government schools throughout Australia. As well as that, if one looks at the total amount of funds for schools throughout Australia, one sees that the share of Commonwealth funds for government schools has slipped from 60 per cent under the last Labor Government to less than 50 per cent now. It is our view that this is a complete distortion of the original intentions of the needs policy. It really overlooks the very serious problems that exist in relation to schooling in Australia and the challenges which lie ahead.
This sort of distortion has taken place and this drift has occurred away from the government school sector largely because of the funding guidelines which the Government has sent to the Schools Commission and because of some deliberate policy decisions which the Government has taken in relation to the funding of nongovernment schools. In the first place, the basis of funding non-government schools is that these schools are entitled to a percentage subsidy based on the standard running costs of government schools in this country; that is, depending on whether the non-government schools are determined to be in group 1, 2 or 3, they receive a subsidy which ranges from 20 per cent for the wealthiest schools to 40 per cent for the poorest schools in Australia. The percentage of the subsidies has been increased under this Government. The most rapid increase in subsidy has gone not to the schools in greatest need, not to the poorest non-government schools in this country, but rather to the wealthiest schools in this country which already enjoy a very high standard of resources and an infinitely higher standard than most non-government schools.
What has happened is that as the running costs of government schools have increased the subsidies to non-government schools have automatically increased. On top of that, as a result of the increasing of the percentage which is applied to the standard running costs, the per capita grants

going to non-government schools have increased. This has had the effect in terms of the rate of increase in those subsidies going to non-government schools of increasing the subsidies to the wealthiest schools by three times the rate for government schools and nearly twice that for the poorest Catholic school in Australia. This has meant that, notwithstanding the fairly substantial increases in subsidies to non-government schools, a serious gap still exists in relation to the resources of the poorest non-government schools and government schools as a whole.
The intention was that the Federal contribution should be used to lift the resources of nongovernment schools so that they approached at least the resources which existed in government schools. But if we look at the Catholic system, which after all accounts for 80 per cent of the non-government schools enrolments in this country, we find that the average Catholic school operates at 75 per cent of the resources which exist in average government schools. That 25 per cent gap which currently exists between government schools and Catholic schools is the same gap which existed 10 years ago when the needs of schools were first examined by the Karme1 Committee. It is to that problem of that gap that the Labor Party would want to direct most of its attention. We believe it is important for the Commonwealth to continue to contribute to nongovernment schools in order that the standards in those schools can be lifted to the level of resources which exists in government schools.
The gap which exists in relation to the poorer schools in this country-the gap between those schools and government schools-has to be set against the other gap which exists between the most wealthy schools in Australia and average government schools. If I can give a few figures to indicate the extent of that gap I think we will be able to see the way in which this Government's education policies have really distorted, in a very gross way, the needs principle which was established in 1973. If we look at the average running costs of secondary State schools we find that there is an expenditure of a little over $2,000 a pupil. About $2,000 is spent on each pupil in an average government secondary school. We can then look at what resources are available to a private secondary school in level I, recognising that level 1 no longer exists as a discreet level any more and that all the level 1 schools are now in an expanded group 1. If we take just those schools which last year would have been in level 1 we find that the level of private income available to those schools, on average, is $2,500 a pupil.

970 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Education

We find that the average expenditure in government schools is about $2,000 a pupil whereas the private resources available to the average of the most wealthy non-government schools amount to $2,500. On top of that, to that private income has to be added a 20 per cent subsidy from the Commonwealth and a further approximately 20 per cent subsidy-it varies from State to State-from the State governments. As a result of those additional subsidies which come from public sources we are beginning to see that the extra resources available to these wealthy schools rarely exceed by a very large factor the resources available to the average government secondary school. That gap now is running in the order of 63 per cent-that is the gap which exists because of the additional resources which are available to the most wealthy non-government secondary schools in Australia.
It seems to us that there is no justification at all for the public to continue to subsidise resources in those wealthy schools when the resources in those schools exceed by such a lavish amount the resources which are available to government schools at a time when there still exists a substantial gap between the resources available to the poorest non-government schools and those available to government schools. What we believe in relation to the pursuit of a decent needs policy is that if a needs policy means anything it means that the resources which the Commonwealth can make available to schools in this country ought to be directed towards those schools in greatest need. The first task should be to assist those low resourced non-government schools to reach the level which obtains in the government system. That is the way in which we would approach this problem.
We believe that it is necessary, in relation to lifting the resources in non-government schools, to reach agreement with the non-government school systems about the appropriate level of resources which ought to exist within those schools and to work with those systems to ensure that those resource targets are achieved over a reasonable period. We also believe that there is a need to reach agreement with State governments about resource targets in their schools. Whilst it is often claimed by this Government that the targets established by the Karmel Committee in fact have been met and in some cases exceeded, and that therefore the Commonwealth contribution is not as necessary as it used to be when those schools did not operate at the level recommended by the Karmel Committee, what has to be remembered in the first instance is that the Karmel Committee recommended those targets as being the minimum

acceptable standards which ought to exist in government schools and certainly not desirable targets. Just to say that we have reached, on average, the minimum acceptable targets does not mean that there can be any decline in the contribution from the Commonwealth towards improving government schools.
Another point that has to be acknowledged is that it is the government sector where the greatest demands are being made in relation to the problems of secondary education. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has been ranting-I suppose that is the only way to describe it-in recent times about the inadequacy of our schools and about the failure of schools to provide adequately for those students who he believes are not academically inclined. He believes that the secondary schools are apparently serving the academically inclined students well but not those who have different and non-academic types of interests or ambitions. I acknowledge that there is a very clear need to concentrate very directly on the problems of school retention rates because we have found that retention rates, after 25 years of increasing gradually, in recent times have turned around. We now find that more and more kids, mainly boys, entirely those in government schools, have been dropping out of school much earlier than was the case a few years ago.
It is important to find the reasons for that increased drop-out rate and to try to encourage those students who would have remained at school in earlier times to continue at school or to move into some other form of full time education, whether it be in secondary schools or in the technical and further education sector. We cannot begin to approach that problem if, at the same time, we are reducing the Commonwealth contribution to the cost of running government schools. It is in the government sector where most of these problems are showing up. It is in the government sector where retention rates are lowest. The retention rate is as low as 10 per cent in some secondary schools. That is to be compared with retention rates of 90 per cent and above in many nongovernment schools. We believe that there is a need to concentrate very precisely on the problems of retention rates in government secondary schools and to provide those schools with the sort of additional assistance which is necessary for them to provide an enriched, diverse curriculum to ensure that they provide the sort of education that secondary students obviously want.
In this context, however, it is important to allay one myth. If one listened to the Prime Minister one would believe that it is only the low achievers who are dropping out of school early. That is

Education

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 971

simply not true. One of the most alarming factors in recent times has been the increase in the dropout rate amongst those students who are in the top achievement quartile. There has been a very substantial increase in the number of bright students dropping out of secondary schools. It is difficult to identify all the reasons for that but one of the important factors, of course, is simply the state of the job market. Many of the brighter kids decide that they will get out of school earlier and get the few jobs which are available at that time rather than stay on in school for an extra couple of years with indifferent employment prospects at the end. That has a number of important implications for this country. In the first place it means that we are losing the contribution that could otherwise be made by the students who are clearly able to benefit from continuing education. It also means that a lot of other students who do not have a large range of job opportunities in front of them are pushed out of the jobs which they normally would have gone to into the dole queues. That is a very important question which really has to be addressed. We cannot do so if at the same time we are starving the government schools of funds. We need to concentrate on the problem of retention rates. That will mean giving extra assistance for those schools, particularly government schools, which are experiencing that problem.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Is the motion seconded?
Mr FREE (Macquarie) (11.26)-1 second this motion with some pleasure because it is a singularly appropriate motion to be discussing in what may be the final weeks of this Parliament. At a time when we are witnessing this elitist Government in its death throes it is important to recognise that it is this Government's commitment to elitist education policies that has frustrated the application of the needs policy that would have provided equality for all Australian children. That policy was frustrated by the Liberal and National Country parties even during the period when the Australian Labor Party was in office. The Interim Committee for the Australian Schools Commission was appointed by the Whitlam Government to make recommendations as to the immediate needs of schools, priorities within those needs and appropriate measures to assist in meeting those needs. The Committee concluded that it should make its assessment of needs on a quantitative basis. It defined need in those days as the need for a minimum quantity of resources in schools and constructed an index to measure the input of such resources. The index

measured recurrent resources in schools by converting expenditure on salaries and other recurrent items to a standard equivalent using weights to make the figures comparable for all government school systems.
There was a separate index for primary and secondary school systems. The base of the index was the average recurrent resources in government schools in 1972, and this was represented as 100. As this was the average level of resources in government schools there were obviously some state systems which were either above or below this level. The Committee then examined the practicalities of overcoming the worst schooling deficiencies in a reasonably short period. It concluded that the minimum acceptable degree of improvement would require an overall average increase of at least 40 per cent in the use of recurrent resources per pupil in government primary schools and 35 per cent in government secondary schools by 1979. The Committee based its funding recommendations for government schools on this analysis. For 1974 and 1975 it recommended funds aimed to go about one-sixth of the way in each year towards reaching the 1979 targets. The Whitlam Government accepted these recommendations.
The Committee adopted the same approach towards the recurrent funding of non-government schools. It divided non-government schools into two categories-the Catholic systemic schools and the non-systemic schools. It was found that the systemic schools were operating in 1972 at an average standard of about four-fifths that of government primary schools. It then recommended funds for 1974 and 1975 that would bring these schools one-third of the way towards the 1979 target standards it had set for government schools. With regard to non-systemic schools, the Committee classified each school into one of eight categories according to the level of resources used in the schools. This was a direct reflection of the concept of need as defined by the Committee. Schools in the top category had resources well in excess of the 1979 targets. Thus the Committee recommended phasing out assistance for these schools over 1974 and 1975. The other categories had increasing levels of subsidy according to the decreasing levels of resources in each school.
The Labor Government accepted the Committee's recommendations with one modification. It decided quite rightly to cease funding the top category of schools almost immediately rather than to phase out such funding. However, the States Grants Schools Act 1973 which authorised the grants recommended by the Committee was amended by the then Opposition, the Liberal and

972 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Education

National Country parties, in the Senate to ensure that the grants for the top category of schools, the resources of which were already in excess of target, were maintained. With the establishment of the Schools Commission, in December 1973, that Commission endorsed the target resource standards set by the Interim Committee and maintained the quantitive approach to the assessment of needs. It developed the Schools Recurrent Resources Index-SRRI-which was a more refined version of the index created by the Interim Committee.
Although the Labor Government in 1975 did not accept the Commission's financial recommendations, it did accept some of the modifications to the subsidy scheme for non-Bovernment schools recommended by the Commission. The most important of these was the linking of nongovernment school subsidies to average running costs in government schools. This involved the calculation of a national average annual per student cost in government schools in the primary and secondary sectors. The result was referred to as 'standard cost'. Non-government schools were then ranked into six subsidy levels through the use of SRRI. The per capita grants to be received by schools at each subsidy level were expressed as percentages of standard cost. This was to have far reaching consequences because it meant that the need of non-government schools would now be measured in direct relation to actual resources in government schools rather than to target standards.
With the advent of the Fraser Government in 1975, the approach to government school funding changed. The general recurrent grants received by government schools have declined since 1976. The Liberal-National Country Party Government has used the target resource standards established by the Interim Committee as a justification for this policy. By 1977, some States had passed the targets and others had almost reached them. By the financial year 1977-78, on a six-State average, government schools were operating at 7 per cent above the targets. This rapid growth in resources was a result of increased State government funding, as Commonwealth general recurrent grants had not been increased in real terms since 1975. The Fraser Government has tried to justify the lack of increases in government school general recurrent grants on the basis that the needs of these schools as measured by the Interim Committee have been met, although the original targets were, in the Committee's own words, 'the minimum acceptable degree of improvement'.
This Government's policy on non-government school funding is based on two essential elements.

The first is that, as far as this Government is concerned, all non-government schools, irrespective of needs, should receive Commonwealth grants equivalent to at least 20 per cent of average government school running costs. The second element of the policy is that subsidies over and above this level should be provided to nongovernment schools on the basis of needs. Therefore, while this Government endorses the needs principle, it does not consider that that principle should override what it sees as the right of all nongovernment schools, regardless of their resources and the level at which they are operating, to receive support equivalent to 20 per cent of the average government school running cost.
This Government has also maintained the linkage between non-government school subsidies and government school running costs, although the Schools Commission has recommended time and again that the nexus be broken. The effect of maintaining this linkage has been to provide increasing subsidies for non-government schools. Since 1976, the Commonwealth general recurrent grants for government schools have declined. The improvement in government school resources since that year has been achieved, as I mentioned, by the States, increasing their own expenditure. As the Commonwealth recurrent grants to nongovernment schools are based on government running costs, this increased State expenditure has been directly reflected in increases in Commonwealth subsidies for non-government schools. At a time when the Commonwealth Government has been endeavouring to contain total expenditure on schools, the automatic increases in subsidies have been made up by cutting expenditure on other programs, principally capital grants for government schools. The non-government capital program has not suffered a similiar decrease. Increased Commonwealth recurrent and capital grants for non-government schools has enabled these schools to attract more students. In contrast, government school student numbers are declining.
Decreases in student numbers in government schools do not automatically result in the release of recurrent resources, particularly when these decreases in enrolments occur over a wide range of schools. Obviously, when student numbers drop and there is no equivalent fall in expenditure, expenditure per student increases; This entails further increases in non-government subsidies, as they are linked to per student recurrent expenditure in government schools. In short,

Education

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 973

there is a circular progression favouring nongovernment schools created by the current funding policies. As we increase per student expenditure in government schools from the States, that leads to increased subsidies for non-government schools. That then leads to increased enrolments in non-government schools, which in turn leads to decreased enrolments in government schools, bringing us back to the beginning of the cycle.
The Commission's attitude to the linkage has been spelt out on a number of occasions. As a result of this linkage, there has been a substantial shift of funds from the government to the nongovernment sector. In the period 1976 to 1983, grants for government schools have declined by

11.2 per cent. Over the same period, grants for non-government schools have increased by 76.9 per cent. In that period, capital grants to government schools have fallen by 35.8 per cent. The Commission has pointed out the effect of the linkage time and again. In 1977, the Commission urged the Government to reconsider its policy guidelines. In its report for the triennium 1979-81, it raised the matter again. In its report for 1980, the Commission again raised the matter. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard Table B3 from the report.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

TableB3 SCHOOLS COMMISSION PROGRAMS 1976 TO 1980

Percentage

variation

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980 1976 to 1980

Government Schools General Recurrent
Migrant Education Disadvantaged Schools Special Education
Capital

$'000
202,088 19,957 18,285 11,107
140,169

$'000
195,122 20,103 18,367 11,360 155,174

$'000
190,504 19,820 18,366 11,963 147,878

$'000
192,460 20,508 18,366 11,964 137,255

$'000
192,460 21,927 18,366 11,964 93,255

Percent - 4.8
+ 9.9 + 0.4 + 7.7
- 33.5

Non Government Schools General Recurrent
Emergency Assistance Migrant Education Disadvantaged Schools
Special Education Capital

391,606
174,319
7,420 2,844 4,047 29,209

400,126
182,210 957
7,524 2,859 3,899 29,908

388,531
198,653 575
7,800 2,859 3,295 33,295

380,553
214,649 575
8,164 2,859 3,295 32,231

337,972
228,849 575
8,853 2,859 3,295 26,131

- 13.7
+ 31.3
+ 19.3 + 0.5
- 18.6 - 10.5

Joint Programs Multicultural Education
Disadvantaged Country Areas Children in Institutions Services and Development
Education Centres Special Projects

217,839
19,712 1,721 4,859

227,357
4,467 1,276 18,443 1,791 4,978

246,477
4,470 1,276 15,556 1,494 4,137

261,773
527 4,892 1,354 15,237 1,444 4,006

270,562
1,381 4,892 1,354 11,231 1,372 3,000

+ 24.2
- 43.0 - 20.3 - 38.3

26,292

30,955

26,933

27,460

23,230

- 11.6

All Programs

635,737

658,438

661,941

669,786

631,764

- 0.6

Note: Estimated Dec. 1978 price levels
Mr FREE-I thank the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Hodges) and the House. The report states:
Table 83 shows the significant way in which the Commonwealth's role in school funding is changing. It shows a decline of 14 per cent in total allocations to government schools in 1980 as compared with 1976, a rise of 24 per cent in payments to non-government schools and a fall of 12 per cent in programs shared by government and non-government schools. The Commission believes these trends are a cause for concern.

The Commission raised the matter again in its Report for the Triennium 1982 to 1984. It again recommended a minimum contribution to govern-
ment schools. It recommended in that report that a basket of services, a desirable and realistic level
of resource standards, be made available. Each of these recommendations was rejected by the Government and the linkage has been maintained. The results of present policy are obvious. First of all, there is a continuing squeeze on the

974 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Education

government school sector. Secondly, large numbers of non-government schools, almost exclusively in the Catholic sector, are still badly off, some of them operating at 70 per cent of government schools resource levels. Thirdly, we have an accelerated use of public money to support private affluence in the form of wealthy private schools. I refer to the GPS schools-the greater public schools-the schools which in fact the greater public never gets into.
Mr Fisher-What percentage are they?
Mr FREEPublic money is being used to support those schools, some of them operating at 180 per cent of government school resource levels. In answer to the interjection, I understand that some 15 per cent of non-government school students attend schools operating above the average government school resource levels for 1981. That includes some 103,000 students who attend over 300 schools. Surely in the interests of equality, in

the interests of making the best use of public money at a time when we are having economies urged. upon us, when we are told that money is so tight, and in the interests of all Australian students, a genuine needs policy demands the transfer of government funding from this rich sector to the poorer sector, from the over-resourced sector to the under-resourced sector.
There are needs in other areas that require attention. My colleague the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) has drawn attention to the appalling state of retention rates in government schools. There is a clear need for assistance to be given to raise the retention rates. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard Table 6, from the Australian Bureau of Statistics publication Schools Australia 1981, which sets out retention rates in the various school sectors.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

TABLE 6.
APPARENT RETENTION RATES(a) OF SECONDARY SCHOOL STUDENTS TO YEAR 10, YEAR 11 AND YEAR 12, BY CATEGORY OF SCHOOL: AUSTRALIA, 1981

Year of education

Government

Roman Other nonTotal nonCatholic government government

Total

Year 10 Year II Year 12

89.2

95.3

107.8

98.6

91.4

49.7

62.8

102.7

73.5

55.2

28.5

45.6

89.2

56.9

34.8

(a) See paragraph 18 of the Explanatory notes.
In 1981,91.4 per cent of students who had commenced secondary school stayed until at least Year 10. This figure represents an increase from 1980 figure of 90.5 per cent.
Mr FREE-Table 6 of that publication shows the need for increased attention to the problem of retention rates in government schools. In 1981 government schools retained only 28.5 per cent of their intake to year 12. The Catholic sector retained 45.6 per cent and the overall nongovernment sector retained 56.9 per cent. As the honourable member for Fremantle has pointed out, retention rates in the other non-government schools frequently exceed 90 per cent. In the interests of all students and in the interests of the nation's future this wasted resource demands remedies. These are important matters. These are matters affecting the welfare of all our children, regardless of the schools they attend. They affect the future of this nation. They are matters which I believe demand and will get the attention of the honourable member for Fremantle when he takes over as Minister for Education in the Labor Government which I am sure will be elected at the latest in 1983. If an election is to be held this year, so much the better.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (11.42)- When I read the motion moved by the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) today, my first thought was that it was a pointless motion in that it is calling for the re-establishment of something that is already well established and working well. Having listened to him and the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr Free), it seems that the real animus behind the motion is not a dedication to a needs principle but some sort of hatred of the sorts of schools that the Australian Labor Party wants to see cut out of the system, particularly the church schools. The Opposition has not been particularly specific when it comes to naming the schools, but it is fairly clear that it is objecting to the church schools. The Opposition would like to see the system retained but wants to see the small minority who go to some of the church schools deprived of the sort of assistance that the Commonwealth gives. The Opposition certainly does not believe in freedom of choice and equality of treatment.

Education

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 975

The system that the Government is administering is based on several principles. It is based in most detail on the needs principle, but other principles are applied as well. We want freedom of choice in education, we want equality of opportunity and access, we want the disadvantaged to be given particular treatment and assistance-a discrimination in their favour-and we want, through a number of programs, to achieve high standards in excellence in schools. There are a number of principles. As far as funding is concerned the most important of all is the needs principle. That is qualified or supplemented by the other principles that I have mentioned.
The system is one for a basic grant to all children and for treating all children equally. We believe in equality of treatment, equality of opportunity and freedom of choice for parents. If that freedom of choice indicates preference for a school with a church atmosphere, it is extremely important and of fundamental importance, perhaps of the greatest importance. Nevertheless, the basic grant of 20 per cent of the standard costthat is, of the average recurrent cost of educating a child in a government school-goes to everyone. That is basic and in many cases it stops there. Applying the needs principle, further assistance is given according to whether the school is, to whatever extent, rich or poor. The school which can most meet its commitments out of its independent revenue or its private revenue gets least assistance. The school which has the most difficulty in meeting its commitments out of its own revenue gets the most.
There are three groups of schools. Group 1 looks after the pupils in independent schools, who are in a very small minority-some 10 per cent. The remaining 90 per cent of the pupils are divided into group 2 and group 3. Approximately 85 per cent of those pupils are in the group 3 category-the most needy schools category. The ones who get the most assistance are the 85 per cent of children at non-government schools in group 3. It is worth mentioning in passing that government schools would all be, in terms of their resources, in group 1. They are far ahead of the non-government group 3 schools, which are some 30 per cent below the government schools in terms of resources. That is why they call out for and get the most assistance in terms of the needs principle and the equity principle.
It is worth noting that the assistance given is 1 Iso accountable. A school receiving Commonwealth money as assistance must provide each year a statement that the subsidy has been used for the purposes intended. If it is not so used, it simply would not be continued and the school

would have to return the money. Beyond that statement of proper use, the schools now must account for the way in which they use private funds-the funds they do not get from the Government. I will quote from page 5 of the Commonwealth Schools Commission's program guidelines for 1982 as I think the question of accountability is of some importance. It is worth quoting it because it is not always understood. In paragraph 2.9, which relates to the income assessment procedure, the guidelines state:
The Commission-
That is, the Commonwealth Schools Commission-
will consider school income as well as expenditure in assessing each school for additional subsidies beyond its basic grant of 20 per cent.
This expenditure is the expenditure on resources, but the guidelines state that the Commission will also consider income. The guidelines continue:
However, assessment will continue to be based primarily on the level of recurrent expenditure from private resources. The Commission, following consultations with non-government school authorities, has developed a mechanism for the inclusion of income as a secondary consideration in the assessment procedure. State Planning and Finance Committees will be substantially responsible for its application.
Details of the procedure are said to be available from the Commission's State offices. As well as a system of funding based on the principle of varying needs-different subsidies for the different groups of schools, depending on how much each group can meet from its own resources of its total necessary expenditures-there is a great degree of accountability on the expenditure by these schools of the Commonwealth's money.
The honourable member for Fremantle and the honourable member for Macquarie, in supporting this motion, placed a great deal of emphasis on the question of government schools. They spoke as if the Commonwealth is not thoroughly committed to government schools whereas in fact it is thoroughly committed to government schools. Indeed, government schools enrol 77 per cent of total school students. For that 77 per cent of the enrolments they get 89 per cent of the government moneys spent on schools-government moneys meaning both Commonwealth and State moneys-whereas the 23 per cent of students in the non-government schools receive orrly 11 per cent of the government moneys. In the whole system of funding there is a very strong priority for government schools. Honourable members opposite can argue about the desirability of that if they want to. They can talk about deprivatisation of education, as some people do. Leaving aside abstract and philosophic questions, the fact remains that the government schools sector gets the giant

976 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Education

share of the government moneys. Indeed a pupil in a non-government school now gets from governments $850 a year towards the cost of his education whereas the pupil in the government school gets $1,950 a year towards the cost of his education. So an enormous priority is given to government schools. To imply, as do the speakers supporting the honourable member for Fremantie, that there is some downgrading of the government school sector is misleading and, in many cases, mischievous. The emphasis is on the government school sector. That emphasis is overwhelming in terms of the amount of money going there for each child.
Nevertheless, in addition to acknowledging that some 77 per cent of Australian school students are being educated in government schools, we have to acknowledge that the other 23 per cent in the exercise of freedom of choice decide that they want to go to church schools or, in some cases, nonchurch, non-government schools. Most of the 23 per cent of students are in church schools or in that position. This Government believes in helping them to exercise that freedom of choice. The Government notes, in addition, that a large number of them, particularly those attending the group 3 schools, are going to schools which are inferior to the State schools but which have appealed to the parents of those children and which in the exercise of their freedom of choice outweighs the inferior resources.
Acknowledging that position, it is obvious that a government with any sense of equity has to adopt policies which will assist those group 3 schools to reach the level of government schools. The basic consideration in the total survey of the school situation in Australia now is that government schools remain significantly ahead of the group 3 schools in terms of their resources. These schools are overwhelmingly Catholic systemic schools. It is only reasonable, if we respect this freedom of choice, that major steps be taken to help those group 3 schools to reach a higher level of resources. Of course that is what the purpose of the Government's policy is about, based very largely on the needs principle. While the nongovernment schools remain some 30 per cent below government schools in their resources this needs policy obviously must be maintained and strengthened. That is why this Government has increased the amount to be given to these group 3 schools to 40 per cent of the standard cost of educating a child in the government schools.
In discussing the funding of schools I am afraid tnat Opposition members either make a mistake or take a wrong direction almost every time that they discuss this matter. One of the mistakes that

they have made or one of the wrong directions that they have taken is to refer only to Commonwealth funding at a particular time ignoring total funding. Obviously the Commonwealth in making its decision as to how much it will spend on whatever category of school has to take into account how much is already being spent by the State governments. Of course, the State governments spend far more on government schools than does the Commonwealth. There was a time when the State governments were responsible for 100 per cent of the funding. The Commonwealth has now come in increasingly but obviously it does not turn a blind eye to what the States are doing in running their schools. The Commonwealth must adjust its spending to the amounts sperit by the State governments in their attempts to get the schools to a certain level.
If there is a big increase in funding by the States then that must be taken into account when deciding on the best use of Commonwealth money as distinct, of course, from that other category of Commonwealth money-that is, moneys returned to the States under the revenue sharing arrangements. I mention that because if honourable members wanted to include that in the amount of money spent we could easily say that the Commonwealth is responsible for the lot. But that would be an unconstitutional way of putting it. Clearly, we must take into account what the States are doing.
In any case, even allowing for that, Commonwealth total recurrent grants have greatly increased. There is not only the general recurrent grant but also the English as a second language grant to government schools, the disadvantaged category and the special education category. Commonwealth funding of State schools has gone up some 20 per cent since 1976. Even this year, in terms of ordinary general recurrent grants as opposed to total recurrent grants, it will go up again by some 2 per cent or $6m this financial year. Honourable gentlemen opposite also ignore the fact that a third of capital funding in government schools is Commonwealth money. If they want to play around with figures they could pick figures out of the triennium report which shows that capital funding to non-government schools is falling. As I have said the basic thing is to take into account not Commonwealth or State money but the total taxpayer assistance.
The real motive behind this motion seems to be not to defend freedom of choice but to undermine it. This motion is not really interested in the needs

Education

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 977

system but it delivers an attack on that small minority of people who, in the exercise of their freedom of choice at whatever personal financial sacrifice they have to make, decide to go to the sorts of schools that the Opposoition is determined to destroy or in any case, greatly weaken-that is, the group I schools. It seems to me to be a very petty and short sighted way of approaching the question of education in Australia today. We have a needs system. We are determined to strengthen it, build upon it and succeed with it. This motion seems to me to be absolutely superfluous.
Mr FISHER (Mallee) (11.56)-1 believe that this Government has shown its support for and concern about the education of our nation's youth in all our schools, whether government or nongovernment, in this year's appropriations. This responsibility has been acknowledged in the charter of the Commonwealth Schools Commission since its inception under the previous government in 1973. I see that the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr Free) has left the House. I hope that he has gone to read his 1973 Hansard because he will find there that our party did not frustrate the Australian Labor Party Government in its efforts to establish the Schools Commission. In fact we supported its establishment and development and voted on it in this Parliament.
In 1982-83 the Commonwealth will spend some $3.792m directly on education, which is an increase of some 13.5 per cent. This appropriation, in these times of economic restraint, is in the long term interests of the future well being of the country and indicates a commitment and a determination to ensure both the preservation and a continuing improvement of the government school system in this country. The Budget figures show that total recurrent funding for government schools is greater this year than last year and will be greater next year in real dollar terms. Therefore, it is not correct-as the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) said-that we have abandoned the needs principle. We have not abandoned the government school system.
This year we have adopted the Schools Commission recommendation that recurrent funds for government schools be increased by 2 per cent in real terms or by $6m. The Government has recognised that government school systems are experiencing cost pressures from rising salaries, superannuation and fluctuating enrolments. The Schools Commission recommendation that government schools capital be maintained in real terms has been accepted. The Commonwealth is to contribute a third of the total capital expenditure in government schools. Government support has increased in real terms at a time when government

school enrolments have declined by some 2 per cent.
I am seriously concerned at the misconceptions and misrepresentations that the Commonwealth has abandoned the government school system as opposed to the non-government school system and that the Commonwealth has favoured these schools by diverting funds from the government sector. Neither of these statements is true. In fact the truth can easily be e!;>tablished by the application of Government policy and by the Budget figures. Government policy quite clearly and intentionally does a number of things: It promotes and encourages equality of opportunity; it ensures that access to education is available to all; it assists in achieving high standards of excellence at all levels; it promotes the freedom of choice in education; and it addresses the problems of the disadvantaged, and the disadvantage, in the school system.
Debate interrupted
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! As it is now two hours after the time fixed for the meeting of the House, the debate on the motion is interrupted.
Motion (by Sir James Killen) agreed to:
That the time for the discussion of notices be extended until l2.15p.m.
Mr FISHER-I shall refer to some of these policy items and indicate the nonsense of the Opposition's general business motion here today. In pursuing the aims of equality of educational opportunity Commonwealth funding policies must take account of the pattern of resources reflected in State government expenditures which are many times greater than the Commonwealth's direct funding role involves. All of us in this Parliament should know that State governments have the constitutional responsibility for the administration and delivery of educational services. Despite this I am pleased that the present and previous Commonwealth governments have assumed a funding role for our schools.
While it can be seen that Commonwealth programs discriminate in favour of certain disadvantaged groups, it is misleading to view the Commonwealth effort in isolation. Commonwealth direct funding complements State effort with the overall objective of directing total public expenditure to maximum educational effect in terms of resource need. State educational expenditure in most cases represents up to 50 per cent of State Budgets, and the greatest proportion quite rightly goes to government schools, both primary and

978 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Education

secondary. I shall give an example of this in quoting some of the figures from the last report of the Schools Commission which indicates that government school sector recurrent funding by State governments reached $3,304.4m in 1979-80. Commonwealth recurrent funding towards government schools was $315.2m. In the capital area-this is for government schools-the State governments provided some $306.6m whereas the Commonwealth provided $129.3m. We see now how the division of responsibility changes in the funding of non-government schools. In the nongovernment school sector recurrent funding by Stllte governments was $165m whereas the Commonwealth funding was $293m. In the capital area-this is the important point which I makeState governments provided no capital funds for non-government schools. It was left to the Commonwealth Government to provide some $33.6m in 1979-80 towards capital programs in nongovernment schools.
I think the complete absence of honesty in the debate on this motion this morning is indicated by the failure to recognise the very clear areas of responsibility that exist for the State and Commonwealth governments. I also believe there has been a very real misunderstanding of the Government's role in the funding program for non-government and government schools. When the Commonwealth Schools Commission refers to standard cost it uses a figure based on the average recurrent cost per student in a government school. In 1982, for example, that standard cost was based on the recurrent cost per student of services funded from State government sources in 1979-80. This was adjusted for price movements to the time of the payment of those grants together with Commonwealth general recurrent per capita grants to the States for government schools in 1982. Standard costs for other years are calculated in a similar fashion.
In 1983, as a result of commitments made in relation to the 1980 Federal election, grants to group 3 non-government schools will rise to 40 per cent of the standard cost. The intention behind this increase is to assist those schools to move their relatively low resource standards towards more acceptable levels of resource use. For Catholic systemic schools funds are paid initially on a block grant basis to the systemic authority which then distributes the grants to individual schools on the basis of need. In each State duly constituted State planning and finance committees-this demolishes the argument of the Opposition that

there is no accountability-scrutinise the distribution of those funds to each systemic school. Systems authorities provide details of fund distribution in advance to the planning and finance committees which must be satisfied that funds will be distributed amongst systemic schools in accordance with their respective needs. Once this is done the system authority is required to account for the way in which the money is applied. State governments, as I have already said-I emphasise this point-have the constitutional and primary responsibility for government schools.
Commonwealth policy on school funding has as its central objective the provision of educational services of the highest standard for all Australians whether they be in government or nongovernment schools. In addressing this objective the Government necessarily takes into account the total resources available to both State and Commonwealth areas. State governments direct less than 5 per cent of their total school budgets to the non-government school area. Commonwealth funding in redressing this imbalance to some extent must therefore provide relatively greater assistance to non-government schools. This simple fact of basic justice seems to have been overlooked by the Opposition-perhaps deliberately. At present non-government schools, with 23 per cent of all enrolments, receive II per cent of total funds for all schools. The average resource levels of government schools have now reached the stage at which they would be classified under the Commonwealth subsidy system for nongovernment schools as being in group I, the highest resource category. Despite this each student at a government school effectively receives from taxpayers-that is, from all government sources-more than twice the amount, about $1,902, received by a student at a nongovernment school, about $824. This is as it should be.
The Commission has reported that the great majority of non-government schools have resources, on average, some 30 per cent below those of government schools. The Commonwealth's concern for these low resource schools has led to continued improvements in their subsidies, from about 30 per cent of the average government school standard cost in 1977 to 38 per cent in 1982. As I said earlier, this will increase to 40 per cent in 1983. This represents an increase in real terms from about $364 to $580 per primary and secondary student in the most needy nongovernment schools in 1977 to $562 and $913 in 1983.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I understand the very widespread concern in the Australian electorate

Education

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 979

at the significant expansion in enrolment levels in non-government schools, necessitating increased capital facilities and also the development of many new schools. This is occurring in my electorate, and I have no doubt that it is occurring in many other electorates throughout Australia. However it is wrong to suggest that this results from Commonwealth Government policy. I disagree entirely with the honourable member for Macquarie, who suggested that as we put more capital into the schools we will have increased enrolments. I believe the trend is the reverse. Increased enrolments in non-government schools are because of a variety of factors which necessitate the Commonwealth's applying more capital to them. As I have already pointed out, there are very severe income assessment procedures to define categories of and appropriate funds for non-government schools, and I reject the accusation that accountability is not applied.
I recognise the divisions that the expansion of the non-government school sector can cause. It is not good socially and it is not good for the efficient use of our resources. Several towns in my electorate, with a little over 1,000 people, have three primary schools. That cannot be good for the long term future of education. We must look at the reasons for this enormous expansion in recent years in the non-government school sector. Some teachers and some administrators by their negative attitude have convinced this nation, parents and students that our government schools are not good. This is a very negative attitude. Our government schools are good; many are outstanding. Most of our teachers and most of our administrators are dedicated and professional people. The parents involved with our government schools have a genuine involvement and a desire to see those schools and their resources improved.
I reject this motion because I believe that all it does is reinforces the belief, once again, in the community that our good government schools are lacking in some resources. I re-emphasise that the great majority of non-government schools have resources about 30 percent below the average cost of educating a student at a government school. This Government remains committed to developing side by side the non-government and government school systems. We support the fine work of government schools and the high standards set by their staff, and we will continue to do so.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (12.11 )-1 want to fill out the few minutes remaining in this debate on this General Business item to return to the track of re-establishing the needs principle in relation to the funding of schools in Australia. One of the

most refreshing things that happened to education in the 1970s was the adoption of the needs principle. At that time no one quite knew what it meant. The Schools Commission had to look at it and see what measures could be used to ensure that children in Australian schools had some equality of opportunity to a high standard of education. The Commission saw the needs principle as necessary to assess an appropriate level of resources; it then aimed to bring schools up to this level of resources. In looking at areas and the factors that could have some influence there, it had to look at a number of social and economic factors which played their role. It was a very important base on which to build this needs principle for the improvement of schools. Unfortunately what has happened is that there has been no reassessment of this needs principle. As has been said by my colleagues there has been a skew distribution of Federal Government financing going into particularly the wealthier, independent non-government schools.
If we have a look at the resource level that is available now we see that many schools have been brought up to and beyond the appropriate resource level. But still a large number of government and parish schools are below the level of necessary resources. They are hidden by the averaging concept. Their resources are being delayed by the government guidelines, which have been given to the Schools Commission to decide what will be done with the finance, to really effect a redistribution not just to non-government schools per se but also to what appears to be a privileged section. I think there is a strong argument that we look at the needs principle and re-establish it on a reassessment of what the minimum resources should be. That must be updated and those resources may in many cases be new.
With new technology questions arise concerning the training of people in computers and the necessity of having personal computers in our school system. Is this now seen as a necessary resource? That must be reassessed. There must be a reassessment of our co-operation with the States so that we learn what they see as the present level of needs and the degree of accountability that they are prepared, to accept in their budgets.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The time allotted for precedence of General Business has expired. The honourable member for Scullin will have leave to continue his speech when the debate is resumed.

980 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence

JOINT COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
Mr KATTER (Kennedy)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, I present the Committee's report entitled 'An Aircraft Carrier for the Australian Defence Force', together with the transcript of evidence.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr KATTER-by leave-I thank the House and I particularly thank the Chairman of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton), for the privilege of being able to table this report. Honourable members may be aware that the aircraft carrier reference was given to the Subcommittee on Defence Matters on 20 April this year. Since then the sub-committee has worked pretty intensively to meet the rather tight deadline of I September. Hearings were held at which both official and non-official witnesses gave evidence regarding acquisition of an aircraft carrier. I wish to express the sub-committee's appreciation to all those people who were involved in providing submissions.
Honourable members will appreciate just how dependent parliamentary committees are on the goodwill and assistance of their witnesses, and those citizens who, out of a sense of public duty, came forward to share their special knowledge deserve recognition for assisting an important and serious work of the Parliament, and what is more serious, the defence of this country. While not wishing by any means to make invidious comparisons I would like to record our appreciation of the assistance we have received over many years-not just with this inquiry-from the Strategic and Defence Study Centre at the Australian National University. In particular I would like to thank Dr Bob O'Neill who, regrettably, has resigned as head of the Centre in order to take up a position in London with the International Institute for Strategic Studies.
As with our previous inquiry into defence procurement, the sub-committee, during this inquiry, enjoyed the services of Commodore Ken Gray as consultant. Our thanks go to him and to Robert King, the secretary, Mr John Needham, the research officer and Mrs Maureen Rockey, the steno-secretary. I would also like to thank other staff, such as Miss Linda Rutter, Miss Robyn Graham, Mrs Brenda Jackson, Mrs Carol Casey, Mrs Barbara Johns and Mrs Gloria Stewart.
The Sub-committee on Defence Matters was diverted from its inquiry into the structure of the Australian Defence Force to inquire into the question of an aircraft carrier. It was something

different. We were given an assignment which was based on a political decision which was made in the Senate. As I indicated when I tabled the report 'Threats to Australia's Security-Their
Nature and Probability' on 18 November 1982, that report was intended as a forerunner to further reports covering particular aspects of the terms of reference to monitor the implementation of the Australian Government's announced defence programs. An inquiry into force structure was the next logical stage in this process. As a result of this background the sub-committee was singularly well prepared to conduct an inquiry into the acquisition of an aircraft carrier over a limited period. I think this helps'to explain why the Committee is able to present a unanimous report to the Parliament on what has been a most controversial subject.
The Committee developed the report in direct relationship to the three clauses of the terms of reference. Chapter I examines, in terms of the various levels of contingencies, the relevance of an aircraft carrier to Australia's current and perceived strategic environment. Chapter 2 establishes the role of an aircraft carrier in the Defence Force structure of Australia, examines its effectiveness in that role and looks at optional capabilities which could perform that role. Chapter 3 considers the effects of the purchase of an aircraft carrier on the future procurement program for the Australian defence forces.
The Committee has acknowledged that an aircraft carrier could provide many functions which would be valuable in the Australian Defence Force. The Committee is of the view also that many of the functions performed by an aircraft carrier can be performed as effectively, or at least as acceptably, by other elements of our air and maritime forces. Though it could be argued that alternative naval vessels and aircraft could perform their individual functions, an aircraft carrier would combine many of them. For example, the aircraft carrier does offer a platform which combines an anti-submarine warfare and command and control function. The report reflects also the view of the Committee that many elements of our air and maritime forces perform functions more closely related to the immediate priority of Australia's defence planning.
The Australian Government's offer, made during the Falklands conflict, to permit the British Government to withdraw from the sale of HMS Invincible. which has been accepted by the British Government, provides a fresh opportunity to review the value of an aircraft carrier to Australia's Defence Force structure and'the priority such a purchase should be accorded. The Committee has

Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 981

noted recent statements by the Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) that all options, including a decision not to purchase a carrier, will be con- .sidered. At the price at which HMS Invincible was to be made available, a good case could be made for its purchase. However, at the full project cost which would be involved in the acquisition of a specially designed ship, in the context of present defence spending levels, it is harder to justify such a purchase. Other desirable acquisitions would have to be curtailed or delayed unacceptably for the Australian Government to purchase such an aircraft carrier.
We have recently been reminded of the stringent economic circumstances in which Australia
is currently placed. Very hard decisions will have to be made on priorities for defence expenditure. If future defence expenditure of a much higher order than hitherto could be contemplated, an aircraft carrier could be included in the capital expenditure program without necessarily distorting the shape and balance of the Defence Force. The Committee did not anticipate that defence expenditure would rise to such a level in the foreseeable future.
The Committee identified a number of roles in which an aircraft carrier would be effective: The role in which it would be most effective is antisubmarine warfare. The Committee reached the conclusion, based on evidence received, that the most substantial requirement for anti-submarine warfare operations would be associated with the consequences of global war. However, the Committee received evidence that the contingency of anti-submarine warfare during prolonged global war, which is seen as remote, has not been a factor in recent or current planning of Australian Defence Force structure. The contingency of global conventional war is not, therefore, seen as a specific factor determining the characteristics of the forces. An aircraft carrier would be effective also in the lower level contingency situations, which are identified in the report. It is then a matter of judgment what priority should be accorded. It is a matter of fact, however, that, except in its command and control functions, an aircraft carrier is a platform rather than a weapons system.
The Committee was presented with varying project costs for the aircraft complement of a carrier. It seems likely that this will cost about $500m. The projected cost of a platform required to make these weapons systems effective would range, now that Invincible is no longer available, up to $1,OOOm or more. A major shortcoming of the anti-submarine warfare STOVL carrier is its current inability to provide airborne early warning. Unless this could be provided, a naval force

would be restricted in the information and warning that it had in respect of the approach of many aircraft or surface units, even when airborne early warning was provided by land-based aircraft. Its availability for the support of naval operations would be limited.
Regrettably, I am confined to a very strict time slot. Other matters are mentioned in my tabling report that I would like to have stressed. I think it is very regrettable that a time slot which is strictly limited is applied in a matter of such vital importance to this nation. I will be discussing the matter at another level at a future date. I am very disappointed that I was confined to five or six minutes. I went over that limit by a couple of minutes. I now have much pleasure in tabling this report. I hope that it meets with the approval of the Parliament generally and the people of Australia.
Mr MORRISON (St George)-by leaveThe report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence comes to the House in spite of the Government's tactics to prevent the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence from considering the matter. The Government refused to consider an amendment that I moved in this House earlier this year to refer to the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence the very matter that has now come back into this House. This report is before us now only because the Opposition was able to arrange for a similar motion to the one proposed in this House and not considered by it to be moved in the Senate. The Senate, despite the opposition of the Government, referred the matter to the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence. This is the result of that consideration.
I think that in the discussion that the Committee undertook on this report we could discern the real reasons for the unaccustomed display of courtesy and generosity by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in allowing the United Kingdom to retain HMS Invincible. The answer for this action can be found in the Budget. The Prime Minister set out to construct an electiontype Budget. To achieve this, the defence expenditure has been slashed. It has been slashed to no more than an increase of one per cent in real expenditure. This is despite all the promises made during the Afghanistan hysteria of a real increase of 7 per cent. So, last year the Government saved $85m on the aircraft carrier. It no longer has a commitment to roughly $200m this year and a further $200m nert year. So, the result was that the Government decided that it could not afford an aircraft carrier.

982 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence

I point out that it should be not just a question of finance that is considered in the acquisition of equipment for our Services. The Committee's re-
port underlines the proposition that appears foreign to this Government. I want to make that proposition clear. It is not enough to say that a particular platform or weapon would be useful; what is essential to be analysed is the opportunity cost. By that I mean that what has to be shown in any proposed purchase is that, in terms of Australia's national security, the options opened
up by that purchase are better than those that the purchase effectively closes off. It is a matter of opportunity cost. On that criterion, the Committee came down with the conclusion that the purchase of the aircraft carrier could not be justified.
Mr Baume-A wrong conclusion.
Mr MORRISON-The conclusion, I must confess, took a lot of study. It is unfortunate that the honourable member for Macarthur does not apply himself to the same sort of study. I want to bring up a couple of points very quickly because my colleague the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) who played a very important part in the deliberations will follow me with only five minutes to speak. In this House I have raised several times the importance of coastal surveillance and a Department of Defence responsibility for coastal surveillance instead of this hotch-potch coastal surveillance with private enterprise-not even Australian private enterprise but foreign private enterprise-running the coastal surveillance of this country. I proposed also on many occasions in this House going back over a number of years the establishment of a maritime command comprising units of the Navy and Air Force. I have
proposed also in this House that the Tracker aircraft-this was before the Invincible purchase but when we knew that the HMAS Melbourne was going out-should be dedicated to coastal surveillance. I am delighted to say that the Committee has recognised in its conclusions the need for a maritime command structure. It has put forward the very sensible proposition that the Tracker aircraft for the remainder of their service life should be dedicated to coastal surveillance. That dedication will bring with it the highly skilled professionals of the Fleet Air Arm.
The Committee has recommended also-I want the Government to take particular notice of this-that we should consider transferring responsibility for some or all of the P3C long-range maritime patrol aircraft to the Fleet Air Arm. The P3Cs in their surveillance task work have to work closely with the Navy. I think the background and training of the Fleet Air Arm personnel mesh in well with that concept. I recommend

further that the east coast surveillance tasks that some of these P3Cs undertake be relocated to the Nowra air base. Under this Government-I notice the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) is here; he has contributed to the Government's policy-the Nowra air base is withering on the vine.
I think the recommendations put forward in the Committee's report will bring about further life for the Fleet Air Arm, which can play an important role. I regret that the Government did not see fit to foster and encourage this report from this Committee. I am delighted that the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence was able to consider the report and I believe the Government should act on that report.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins)-by leave-The report of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence on an aircraft carrier for the Australian Defence Force is a unanimous report. As I have said on previous occasions, during my time on the Committee I have been impressed by the efforts of members on both sides of the Parliament to approach issues with open minds and to judge issues irrespective of party attitudes. It is a credit to Committee members on both sides of the House and the Senate that on a subject as controversial as this one we have a report with no dissent. I was disappointed, however, in the comments made by the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) at the beginning of his speech when he introduced a partisan attitude by raising matters of Budget expenditure and criticising the Government. I point out to this House that when the Senate was considering whether a reference should be made to the Committee the Government in the Senate made no objection to the reference going to the Committee. I think the reference by the Senate to the Joint Committee is a welcome expression of faith in and good will towards the Joint Committee, which comprises members of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
This report is the fourth report on defence matters presented by the Joint Committee since 1977, following a report on threats to Australia's security which was tabled in November last year. That report was praised in part at least by the former Minister for Defence, the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen), who is in the chamber today. The report on the aircraft carrier took last year's report on threats to Australia's security as the basis for its consideration of the relevance of an aircraft carrier to Australia's current and perceived environment. I think it was a timely reference to the Committee because the Committee

Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 983

had, in fact, considered the threats and the nature of threats to the Australian environment.
On the subject of threats, given the current strategic environment, the Committee's convention is that the primary function of the Australian Defence Force should be to deter all levels of threat from emerging. Whilst the current environment is seen as being relatively favourable, the Falkland Islands war has shown us that threats can emerge at short notice from unexpected areas. The general contention of the Committee was reinforced by witnesses who appeared before the Sub-Committee. The Committee further contended that, wherever possible, capabilities acquired by Australia should be relevant to deterrents and that they should have a multiplier effect. This multiplier effect would have a compound effect on any potential aggressor.
Multiplier effects are very important. One is that the existing Fill force and the projected FA 18 force have a potent strike-including maritime strike-potential. However, this potential would be considerably enhanced if they could carry out strikes to greater ranges than can be achieved with their present fuel capabilities. This could be attained by the acquisition of an in-flight refuelling capability. I have long advocated the acquisition of an in-flight, mid-air refuelling capability and it could be provided by converting Boeing 707 aircraft at a relatively small cost. I thank the House for its indulgence.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan)-by leave-I think this report of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence on an aircraft carrier for the Australian Defence Force is an important contribution to our understanding of this issue. In a disciplined manner it considers the value of an aircraft carrier to a comprehensive series of wartime contingencies Australia might confront. In so doing it abandons the vague romanticism that has bedevilled much of the discussion on this matter to this point. As an aspect of the force structure necessary to deal with the threats arising from global contingencies through to the threat of invasion, raids and low level terrorist-type problems, a carrier has been systematically considered by the Committee in a bipartisan fashion and found wanting or, if not found wanting, other weapons systems have been found adequate to perform the carrier's functions.
It is important to remember that it is not just an argument about the economies of defence. Economic questions certainly influence the implementation of priorities but the list of priorities established by the Committee, using largely Department of Defence sources, would not rate

the purchase of a carrier very highly. The Committee has had a cold hard look at STOVL aircraft and has not found them sufficiently valuable to rate their purchase and a platform for them above improving the effectiveness of our land-based maritime strike and surveillance capability. That includes all aspects of its air bases, airborne early
warning and in-flight refuelling. The Committee has gone into some considerable detail on that. I draw attention to the Committee's noted concern about delays in the development of air bases in the north of Western Australia and, for that matter, in the north of Australia generally, from which such aircraft could be deployed.
I also draw the attention of the House to one other feature of the Committee's report and that is the question of the future of the Fleet Air Arm. It is my belief and the belief of a number of members of this Committee that there has been an absence of systematic attention given to the future role of that Air Arm within Australia's defence forces irrespective of whether there is a carrier in the Australian naval force structure. We visited the Fleet Air Arm base at Nowra and had some substantial discussions with the officers there. I rather think that it is time for politicians with a direct interest in this matter, as well as those with an indirect interest, to cease chasing after shadows. The Government has quite clearly excluded from this Budget the possibility of the purchase of an aircraft carrier in the immediate or not too distant future. Thus we should start to come to grips with the question of what the future of the Fleet Air Arm should be.
The Committee makes some specific suggestions. It suggests the transfer of the Orions-some or all of them-to the Fleet Air Arm as part of a maritime command structure. It suggests the usage for coastal surveillance of the Grumman Trackers that are in storage and it mentions the valuable functions they performed in the mid-1970s in the Broome area. The Committee seeks to take out of cold storage the A4 Skyhawks because of the substantial life they still have left in them and because of their valuable role for both training and combat purposes in the rest of the Fleet Air Arm and for training with naval ships practising co-operation with air power in a maritime context. We believe that this can be done only in a appropriately structured maritime command structure. The Committee advocates that in its recommendations.
I thank the staff of the Committee who have co-operated in producing this report very rapidly. The Chairman and the Government members of the Committee took this matter very seriously. The Committee produced a unanimous report

984 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Taxation

which I think will advance our defence posture very considerably if the Government takes it seriously.
Mr Holding-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to make a short statement in respect of this matter.
Leave not granted.
TAXATION
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The maldistribution of the tax burden between wage and income earners and others.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number o/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (12.38)-The matter which is before the House relates to the tax burden now being foisted on the majority of Australians who are classed as pay-asyou-earn taxpayers. I emphasise that this relates directly to the Government's failure in respect of matters which have been highlighted in the last 48 hours in this House by what is known as the Costigan report-the report of the Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. What it means is that, because of the Government's failure to prosecute people who are guilty of criminal conduct in the sense that they are not paying their taxes, we now have a tax evasion-avoidance industry which is deemed to be in the range of billions of dollars. In fact, it could be to such an extent that if we were to give a refund to every pay-as-you-earn taxpayer in Australia we could probably give them about $3,000 each. That shows the magnitude of the problem.
Today I do not want to address my remarks to the question of guilt, which is obvious, but to the statistics which should have been obvious. This question arises in Costigan's report where he talks about the enormous growth in the taxable incomes of individuals and the very slight increase in the taxable incomes of private companies. The Labor Party's economic committee, to which I give credit, made the point that in 1965-66 nonPAYE taxpayers paid one third of total personal income tax. In 1981-82 their contribution had dropped to 18 per cent. Those figures indicate the change in the tax share which has taken place.

There was a reduction in the burden for nonPAYE taxpayers and an enormous increase in the burden of every average Australian who has to pay tax as he earns his wages. This is completely unfair. The Government should have done something about it. It has avoided the issue and, because of bungling and ineptitude in the ministerial area, it is now faced with trying to prosecute people and recover that money.
It is obvious why the Government did not do anything about it when it had the statistics in front of it. Obviously, it did not want to do anything. Mr Costigan, in his report, was able to identify immediately a major increase in the number of companies in State corporate affairs registries. He produced the Victorian figures. There has been an enormous increase in company registration in all States. I have been able to get hold of some figures for New South Wales. They show that in New South Wales between 1976 and 198071,350 new companies were registered. However, the number of annual returns lodged by companies incorporated in New South Wales, which is the normal requirement under State law, rose by only 22,000. So, nearly 50,000 companies were not performing at all. In other words, they were probably the bottom-of-the-harbour group. In a period of four years nearly 50,000 such companies seem to have been established in New South Wales alone. If that is the extent of tax evasion and avoidance in New South Wales-the only real inquiry we have had has been into 923 companies in Victoria-is it not fair to assume that billions of dollars are being lost in tax revenue? Mr Eric Risstrom was quoted as saying, before the Costigan report came to light, that about $7 billion a year in tax revenue was being lost. The graphs in the Costigan report indicate that the increase in the tax burden on PAYE taxpayers, in an endeavour to make up the loss, has been very substantial. They confirm the figures which I have given.
In the few minutes available to me I want to make it clear what the Government has to do. It should immediately try to make the people who have obtained these ill-gotten gains disgorge what they are not entitled to. Untold wealth of massive magnitude is owing to the Commonwealth. The rest of the community has to make it up. Let me refer to other statistics which are available for resident and non-resident taxable private companies. The number of such companies dropped to 88,652. 63,720 in the period 1973-74 to 1978-79. Because the number decreased, the taxable income of those companies obviously did not go up much. The taxation they paid increased from $685m to $745m over a period of about six years. Let us look at what happened in the same

Taxation

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 985

period to individuals who had their tax deducted. Their taxable income increased. The companies' taxable income did not increase, partly because the number of companies decreased which is extraordinary. But PAYE taxation increased from $5 billion to $14 billion, making up the leeway. The statistics should have been obvious to the Government. If it had wanted to it could have looked at the records of the Australian Taxation Office or any of the State corporate affairs statistics.
The number of resident and non-resident nontaxable private companies increased from 98,000 to 130,000. The companies that were not paying tax mushroomed by 32 per cent over this period. It is extraordinary to think that there was a 32 per cent increase in non-taxable private companies, whereas the number of taxable private companies declined by 28 per cent. People can get lost in trying to remember those figures. The most simple aspect is revealed in the 1981-82 Budget. It stated that PAYE taxes would increase by 21.9 per cent. In fact the Government increased them by 23.2 per cent. It thought that company tax would increase by 10 per cent but it increased by only 7.6
per cent. Surely it was obvious to the Taxation Office and the Treasury that they were not getting sufficient taxation revenue from companies over the years. In the end they were virtually preparing Budgets on the basis that the only way to get it was from the poor, unfortunate weekly wage or salary earner whose tax is deducted in advance.
In an earlier report of some months ago Mr Costigan said that he had had discussions with the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation in New South Wales and the Commissioner of Taxation and the two First Assistant Commissioners of Taxation in Canberra. The Taxation Office informed him that it had a great deal of information which caused it to conclude that criminals were involved in tax schemes. It is obvious that the Commissioner of Taxation, the Government and the Treasury knew that revenue was not coming in and that this was related to criminal activity. We will not go back to that argument now, but surely one would have thought that a prudent government and a reasonably active Treasury would have known that the reason they were not able to collect the revenue over a period of years was massive tax evasion and avoidance. The Australian Labor Party was able to ascertain that before it could get the figures which I have cited.
I ask the Government what it will do to stop the continuation of this activity. It will not stop it by merely lodging a prosecution. These hardened white-collar people will hang on to that money and fight through the courts. We expect to get the

money. In fact if retrospective legislation comes in full blast we hope to get double. These people ought to be fined as well as sent to gaol. They still have the money. We are not too worried'-ttbout their personal freedom. From the taxpayers' point of view the issue is what will be done by this Government. Will it just ignore the matter and hope that something turns up? It will not do that. Where is the Government's policy? It talks about legislation which is basically unnecessary in many ways, particularly from the criminal point of view. There is ample evidence to suggest that the existing law is adequate. If the Government wants retrospectivity that will be just an added string to its bow but it should not let it become a shield or a method of hiding from the public the fact that something should have been done earlier. We submit that it should have and there is evidence to prove that.
Is it not time that this Government developed a strategy for collecting the tax as and when it becomes due from those who are getting ill-gotten gains? Is it not important to devise the same method of collection as that which now applies to PAYE taxpayers? In other words, why not tax the income at the source of payment? That should not be beyond the wit of normal people. Whether the Government can find time to introduce ap-
propriate legislation to do that I am not too certain but it would not be very hard. Because of the massive tax evasion which has gone on and the fact that PAYE taxpayers have been burdened and will continue to be burdened by white collar crime which is not being effectively dealt with it is about time the Government developed new procedures so that when the payer makes the payment the appropriate amount of taxation is deducted from it and remitted forthwith to the Taxation Office. That would guarantee at least the collection of some money when it was due and payable, whether it be from the banks, from stockbrokers or in some other way. Also, transfers of shares should bear a charge in respect of tax that mayor may not be payable. The principle which always applied in the days of what was called federal estate duty was that one could not transfer assets after a death if the federal estate duty had not been paid because there was a charge on the transfer of the assets. I think it appropriate that we do something about this.
It is no good blaming the increase in wages for the increase in this amount of PAYE tax revenue. In the year 1980-81 gross pay-as-you-earn taxation payments increased by 23.2 per cent, but average weekly earnings increased by only 14.8 per cent. This indicates that PAYE tax payments increased by \0 per cent more than average

986 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Taxation

weekly earnings. It must be remembered that 60 per cent of wage and salary earners receive less than average weekly earnings. In 1981-82 gross PAYE receipts represented almost 50 per cent of total taxation revenue. In 1981-82 gross PA YE receipts totalled $18.8 billion. This year PAYE taxpayers will be socked a further $3 billion. In other words, PAYE receipts will go up to $21.1 billion. Why? Because the Government has failed in the collection of tax due to it. It has allowed all the criminals, white collar and others, to run away with schemes which on the statistics were very obvious as far back as four years ago. It is obvious that there was legal advice that something should have been done then. Why should we continue to perpetrate a system which clearly indicates that the PAYE taxpayer will still have to bear the burden? So apart from collecting the revenue due, and the double amounts which are the appropriate penalty under section 231 of the Income Tax Assessment Act, what about developing some new concepts of collection so that there is a guarantee that the money is not given into the hands of these people but is paid to the Taxation Office first? We appreciate that now people who dispute their tax liability are at last obliged to pay money in advance. If they win their case, they get the money back. That is a healthy improvement. But I come to the point: Where is the Government's policy to ensure that as from now people who are getting income and not paying tax on it will be obliged to make some contribution immediately that income is received? That would guarantee that there would be no continuation of the loss of billions of dollars. It would guarantee that the burden on PAYE taxpayers would be reduced. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the statements that I mentioned. They relate to company registrations, annual returns, resident and non-resident private companies and tax paid by individuals.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-
COMPANY REGISTRATIONS, NEW SOUTH WALES, 1976-80

Year

Percentage increase in new company
registrations

Number of new companies
registered

1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

48.3

9,413

25.7

11,838

0.7

11,924

32.1

15,753

42.3

22,422

Source: N.S.W. Corporate Affairs Commission Annual Reports, year ended 31 December 1979, 1980.

COMPARATIVE TABLE OF ANNUAL RETURNS LODGED 1971-80
Companies Incorporated in New South Wales

Year
1980 1979 1978 1977 1976

Number
132,758 122,979 108,233 127,911 110,508

Percentage change
8.0 13.6 -15.4 15.7 3.5

Source: N.S.W. Corporate Affairs Commission Annual Reports, year ended 31 December 1979, 1980.

RESIDENT AND NON-RESIDENT PRIVATE COMPANIES
Taxable Income and Net Tax, 1973-74 to 1978-79

Year

Number of Taxable

Net

companies

income

tax

1978-79 1977-78 1976-77 1975-76 1974-75 1973-74

63,720 66,214 72,725 80,739 83,495 88,652

$'000 1,808,759 1,711,570 1,867,908 1,925,677 1,746,233 1,691,230

$'000 745,934 703,418 764,803 738,227 666,693 685,645

Source: Taxation Statistics, Supplements to Reports to Parliament of the Commissioner of Taxation.
During the period shown in this table there was a 28 per cent decline in the number of taxable private companies, and a slight increase in taxable income and net tax payments. This was at the same time as the taxable income of individuals rose almost 300 per cent.
RESIDENT AND NON-RESIDENT NON-TAXABLE PRIVATE COMPANIES
Number of Companies and Taxable Income, 1973-74 to 1978-79

Year

Number of companies

Taxable income

1978-79 1977-78 1976-77 1975-76 1974-75 1973-74

130,124 129,784 123,391 113,494 101,313 98,272

$'000 203,779 224,380 250,483 225,514 189,164 166,333

Source: Taxation Statistics, Supplements to Reports to Parliament of the Commissioner of Taxation.
During the period shown in this table the number of nontaxable private companies increased by over 32%. During the same period there was a 28% decline in the number of taxable private companies.

Taxation

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 987

INDIVIDUALS Taxable Income and Net Tax: 1973-74 to 1979-80

Year

Taxable

Net

income

tax

1979-80 1978-79
1977-78 1976-77
1975-76 1974-75 1973-74

$'000 65,214,407 58,755,428 53,244,731 48,697,757 41,323,419 32,336,395 25,618,324

$'000
14,173,429 12,272,199 11,112,862
10,750,124 8,505,042
6,570,765 5,227,738

Source: Taxation Statistics, Supplements to Reports to Parliament of the Commissioner of Taxation.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I thank the House.
Dr EDWARDS (Berowra) (12.53)-It is clear that the Opposition is bent on extracting the maximum mileage it can out of the report of the Costigan Royal Commission on the Activities of the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union. I remind the Opposition that that report was commissioned by this Government jointly with the previous Victorian Liberal Government. We do not underrate in any way the gravity of the findings of that report. Indeed, the Government has reacted strongly to the report. A special task force has been established and it will pursue with

the utmost vigour the matters to which the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) referred, He succeeded in creating a totally wrong impression-that only Costigan perceived the trends to which he referred. The truth of the matter is that the Government has already perceived these trends. For instance, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) announced in July his intention to legislate with a view to recovering, if necessary from former shareholders, moneys properly owing to the Government. That action long preceded the Costigan report to which the Deputy Leader of the Opposition referred. In every way this Government has a record second to none for recognising, publicising and adopting measures to counter tax avoidance and evasion.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition had a great deal to say about the burden of personal income tax. We recognise that the proportion of total tax receipts raised by means of personal income tax has indeed risen. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which sets out the proportion various categories of tax bear to the total of taxation receipts.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

COMPOSITION OF COMMONWEALTH BUDGET TAXATION REVENUES

Year
1948-49 1949-50 1950-51 1951-52 1952-53 1953-54 1954-55 1955-56 1956-57 1957-58 1958-59 1959-60 1960-61 1961-62 1962-63 1963-64 1964-65 1965-66 1966-67 1967-68 1968-69 1969-70 1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

Personal income tax
41.9 38.5 49.8 43.3 43.5 43.5 38.3 38.4 36.5 37.2 34.1 35.0 36.4 37.5 37.1 39.0 40.9 40.8 42.5 43.7 42.7 44.5 43.8 47.3 48.2 50.2 54.8 54.7 56.3 56.8 55.0

Company Tax
15.3 16.4 12.5 16.3 18.7 14.8 18.2 18.5 19.5 18.4 19.2 18.1 20.2 20.3 18.4 18.5 18.9 19.3 17.9 17.2 18.7 18.6 19.9 19.3 19.3 18.6 17.4 15.5 15.2 15.1 13.5

Customs and Excise and Sales tax
34.7 36.6 30.7 33.5 30.7 34.9 36.6 36.3 37.2 37.7 39.6 39.6 37.3 34.9 36.8 35.0 32.9 32.9 32.4 31.8 31.3 29.9 29.7 29.7 30.0 28.6 26.4 26.8 25.8 24.6 25.1

Crude oil levy
1.6 1.8 2.2 5.3

Other
8.1 8.5 7.0 6.9 7.1 6.8 6.9 6.8 6.8 6.7 7.1 7.3 6.1 7.3 7.7 7.5 8.1 7.0 7.2 7.3 7.3 7.0 6.6 3.7 2.5 2.6 1.4 1.4 .0.9 1.3 1.1

988 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Taxation

Year

Personal income tax

Company Tax

Customs and Excise and
Sales tax

Crude oil levy

Other

1979-80 1980-81
1981-82 1982-83

55.1

13.0

22.7

8.3

0.9

54.0

15.0

20.7

9.6

0.7

56.2

13.4

20.5

8.4

1.6

55.8

12.0

22.1

7.9

2.3

Sources: ABS Australian National Accounts, taxation revenue Australia, Budget Papers-various issues.

Dr EDWARDS-I thank the House. It will be very obvious from that table just when the mass-
ive change to increased reliance on personal income tax contributions first occurred. In 1972-73, for instance, the proportion of total tax receipts raised from personal income taxpayers was 48.2 per cent; by 1974-75 it increased to 54.8 per cent; and it was a similar percentage in 1975-76-very nearly 55 per cent. I concede that there was a peak last year, 1981-82, of 56.2 per cent, but the projected percentage of total receipts for 1982-83 shows a reduction to 55.8 per cent. That reduction would be significantly greater but for the fact that the taxation measures announced in the Budget take effect only from 1 November. Therefore, we recognise the large incidence of personal income tax contributions as a proportion of total tax revenue and have already moved to reduce that percentage.
I take the opportunity of this debate to stress the character of the personal income tax changes which have been effected in this Budget. We are talking about the distribution of the tax burden. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition spoke about certain aspects to which I will come back, but I want to speak about other aspects of this alleged maldistribution of the tax burden. If we consider the tax changes announced in the current Budget the basic change is the increase in the tax threshold-the level of income below which no tax is payable and after which tax is payablefrom $4,195 per annum to $4,595 per annum, an

increase of $400. This is combined with an increase in the spouse rebate for families with dependent children which represents an increase in disposable income of $200, or roughly $4 a week, and there is the rebate which has been granted to those paying off a mortgage. With a typical mortgage of the order of $25,000 and interest at 13.5 per cent per annum, the result of these reductions in tax, the housing rebate and the increase in family allowances of $4.25 a week, is a total saving for a taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two dependent children and earning $300 a week of $19.84 a week, nearly $20 in round figures. This represents an effective increase in the disposable income of such a family of the order of 7.8 per cent. If we look at the measures as applied to a person on a much lower income of $200 a week, the increase is nearly 10 per cent.
Sitting suspended from 1 to 2 p.m.
Dr EDWARDS-Before the suspension of the sitting I was referring to the tax and related changes in the Budget and their impact both in reducing personal tax as a percentage of total tax receipts and on the distribution of the personal tax burden between taxpayers. The point is brought out in a table which I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Weekly earnings
$
200 300 400 500 750
200 300 400

APPROXIMATE WEEKLY BENEFITS FROM 1 NOVEMBER 1982

Reduction in tax

New housing loan interest
Rebates*

Increase in family
allowances

Total savings

$

$

$

Taxpayer with Dependent Spouse and two Dependent Children

8.54

5.05

4.25

10.54

5.05

4.25

16.36

5.05

4.25

16.36

5.05

4.25

16.36

5.05

4.25

Sole Parent Taxpayer with two Dependent Children

8.54

5.05

4.25

10.54

5.05

4.25

16.36

5.05

4.25

$
17.84 19.84 25.66 25.66 25.66
17.84 19.84 25.66

Change in disposable
income
percent
9.6 7.8 8.2 7.0 5.2
9.8 8.0 8.3

Taxation

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 989

Weekly earnings

Reduction in tax

New housing loan interest
Rebates-

Increase
in family allowances

Total savings

Change in disposable
income

$

$

$

$

$

per cent

500

16.36

5.05

4.25

25.66

7.1

750

16.36

5.05

4.25

25.66

5.2

- Assuming a mortgage of $25,000 and interest at 13.5 per cent per annum.

Dr EDWARDS-I thank the House. The table shows quite clearly that for a taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two dependent children the aggregate of the benefits provided in this Budget, though not allowing for the impact of the indirect tax increases, represents an effective increase in disposable income of 9.6 per cent-virtually 10 per cent-for the low income earner on $200 a week and a smaller proportionate increase of 5.2 per cent for the high income earner. The point I make is that such a change, providing proportionately more for low and middle income groups, is the sort of fair go, in tax change that most Australians would want to see. I stress that this thrust is an integral part of the Government's overall strategy in this Budget. For the typical taxpayer to get those benefits-of the order of $17 to $20 a week-through his wage or salary he would require a gross salary increase of $25 and upwards, or something like 9 per cent. What we need is some reasonable co-operation from the trade union movement in dampening wage claims-and I am optimistic that, despite the reaction on Budget night of the President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Mr Cliff Dolan, who described the Budget as 'horrible' there will be a change in stance in that respect. These changes are at once anti-inflationary as the employer will not be subject to the increase in gross wage costs which would otherwise occur. They will also uphold activity and employment. The employer, not being subject to that gross wage increase, will be able to stay in business and maintain existing and provide additional jobs.
The next point to which I refer relates more closely to that raised by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. I refer to the difference that we have observed in recent years in the growth of receipts from the PAYE taxpayer as against other personal taxpayers. Again, I make the point: It has not taken Costigan to draw the attention of the Government to the trend referred to by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. It is recognised by the Government. The estimates of total receipts on page 245 of Budget Paper No. I show that it is anticipated that the receipts of income tax from individuals other than PAYE taxpayers will increase by nearly 15 per cent compared with only an 8.9 per cent increse for PAYE taxpayers

because of the tax measures that I have outlined. The 15 per cent increase reflects several matters. It reflects the determination of the Government that its tax avoidance measures will bite; and bite they will. It begins to reflect also the additional measure that the Government has proposed, that is, to institute a procedure for the taxation of cash payments. A document on that subject has been prepared with great thought and is indicative of the way in which this Government has been continuously concerned with tax avoidance and tax evasion. Doubtless, an important part of the trend referred to is the increasing resort by individuals not only to form themselves into companies of which they are both employee and shareholder, thereby resorting to legitimate-if I may use that word-forms of tax avoidance, but also to significant engaging in tax evasion of the cash-inhand or cash economy variety.
I do not enlarge on the other principal point raised by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. He suggested that there was a disparity between the registration of companies with the various State corporate affairs commissions and the comparitive growth of income that might be attributable to those companies. There are so many factors involved in that matter that the one on which he put emphasis, again making reference to Costigan, would be the smallest. I say that without in any way substracting from the gravity of those aspects.
The final point I make in the debate on this matter of public importance is that Australia's tax system relies very heavily on personal income tax and only to a very small extent on consumption taxes-taxes at the point of spending. Australia ranks fourth out of 22 member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in its dependence on personal income tax and sixth in relation to corporate taxes. We rank second out of 22 countries in those two forms of direct taxation taken together. In contrast, we rank twenty-first out of 22 countries in relation to consumption taxes. This shows Australia's relatively low dependence on such taxes. It is the Government's policy to move to less reliance on personal income tax and more on consumption

990 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Petitions

taxes. The Australian Labor Party has the opposite policy. It is the party of high personal taxation.
There is a variety of good reasons for the Government's policy, but the overriding one is precisely that taxes imposed at the point of spending-consumption taxes-are more difficult to avoid or evade than income tax. The Government has already taken important steps in this direction. Everybody, including the beneficiaries of the cash economy, the tax evader and the capital gainer-that should please the Opposition's heart-are caught at the point of spending. This Government has embarked on a gradual process of reducing personal income tax and increasing indirect taxes with a view to making everyone pay his or her fair share of taxation. It is important, in connection with the question of tax avoidance and tax evasion that was raised by the Opposition, that this process be continued.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Dr EDWARDS-Mr Deputy Speaker, this Government is concerned about these matters.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The discussion has concluded. The honourable member will resume his seat.
Dr EDWARDS-Under the tenure of this Government and the Treasurer, the honourable member for Bennelong, Mr Howard, we have a record in combating tax avoidance and evasion second to none.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. If he persists in talking after being called to order by the Chair I shall have to deal with him.
PETITIONS
The Deputy Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Mr Jose Ramos Horta
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens showeth our concern that Australia is the only country to have refused a visa to Jose Ramos Horta and our desire that he be permitted to enter the country to testify before the Senate Inquiry on East Timor and to address Australian audiences.
Your petitioners therefore pray that Jose Ramos Horta be granted a standard visitors visa.
by Mr Duffy, Dr Everingham, Mr Howe and Mr Milton.
P'!titions received.

Taxation
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that whereas the current rates of personal income tax are onerous and destructive of personal incentive, particularly since the cessation of income tax indexation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formerly call upon the Parliament assembled to legislate such changes to the current taxation law as will-
raise the minimum level at which income tax is first payable to at least $4.500.00,
proportionately increase the figures at which the higher rates of tax attract,
allow taxpayers to claim the full amount for each item within the Concessional Expenditure Rebate, and
adjust the rates of tax payable so that no higher rate of tax is payable than fifty per cent of income earned.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage and Mr John Brown.
Petitions received.
Slaughter of Seal Pups
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the present hunt for harp seals in Canada is carried out in a cruel and inhuman manner.
That the population of harp seals has not been clearly shown to be increasing.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government formally call on the Canadian Government to end the harp seal hunt and use its constitutional powers to halt the importation into Australia of products derived from the harp seal, Pagophilus groenlandicus.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child and Mr Dawkins.
Petitions received.
Funding of Health Care Services
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we strongly condemn the Commonwealth Liberal Government for its inhumane policies, implemented in May 1982, of transferring funds for public health to private enterprise.
We point out that resultant severe cuts in funding to public hospitals, community health and ambulance services have caused enormous unnecessary suffering and hardship for people who must use these facilities.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government immediately restore the previous level of funding and introduce a genuine National Health Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrBaume.
Petition received.

Petitions

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 991

Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That we are concerned that an increasing number of Australian families are facing financial burdens beyond their capacity to meet.
2. That we are concerned that the amount of financial assistance being afforded to families is inadequate.
3. That there has been no increase in family allowances for most families for some years.
4. That family allowances in all instances have declined in real value since 1976.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, will:-
I. Ensure that there is an increase in family allowances in the 1982 Budget so that family allowances are at least restored to the real money value of their 1976 level;
2. Ensure that provision is made for the automatic and regular indexation of family allowances;
3. Ensure that proper consideration is given to the introduction of a Homemakers Allowance.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
University of Queensland
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth that:
The students and staff of the University of Queensland express their dismay at the lack of adequate Federal Government funding to our University, which has resulted, inter alia, in the erosion of our library facilities-we note that:
The opening hours of our main library have been reduced from 93t hours a week in 1975 to 72 hours a week in 1982.
The number of new books purchased per year has fallen from over 50,000 in 1976 to under 23,000 in 1981.
The number of books in storage and inaccessible to students and staff has risen from none in 1977 to over 40,000 in 1981.
The number of books discarded in 1976 was over 6,OOO-by the end of 1981 over 70,000 had been discarded.
We believe this to be educationally retrograde and economically wasteful.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that government funding levels be increased to a level sufficient to allow the University to restore our previous library facilities.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Proposed Student Loans Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the introduction of a comprehensive student loans scheme will:
I. Restrict Access to Education--People from poorer backgrounds will be deterred from studying by the prospect of incurring large debts. These people, if they

enrol, will be forced to amass loan debts. Richer students do not face this handicap.
2. Undermine the Tertiary' Education Assistance Scheme-TEAS should cover the basic living costs of students. Currently the scheme only assists 38% of full time students and the maximum level of TEAS is a mere $49.67. Government statements indicate TEAS will be further downgraded if loans are introduced.
3. Disadvantage Women-Women students would be disadvantaged by a loans scheme as they have a lesser ability to repay loan debts, because on average women earn less and have a higher unemployment rate.
4. Disadvantage Mature-Age Students-Usually mature age students forego income to study and already have large financial commitments. They could not return to study if it meant incurring substantial debts.
5. Distort Educational Choices-Mounting loan debts would force students into studying shorter courses or not continuing with post-graduate study.
6. Result in Massive Attrition Rates-Students will attempt to undertake extensive part-time work or overload courses to minimise their loans. Increased failure rates will result forcing students to "drop-out" rather than continuing study and increase their debts.
7. Cause Administrative & Financial DifficultiesOverseas experiences shows high default rates will occur on student loans. Government money will be channelled away from TEAS to paying off banks. The government will also bear the administrative burden of pursuing defaulters.
Therefore, the proposed student loans scheme will have disastrous effects on tertiary education, which we believe benefits the whole community, not just the individual student.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject the introduction of a student loans scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of the proposed Plant Breeders' Rights legislation. The reasons are as follows-
(I) We believe it will eventually lead to the restriction of sales of many varieties of seed:
(2) We believe it will cause the disappearance of many useful plant varieties as evidenced by similar legislation in Europe:
(3) We believe that it will cause the Australian seed industry to become foreign controlled:
(4) We believe that a full public debate has not taken place and should take place before any laws are passed on the patenting of a life form.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take positive action as soon as possible to arrest the implementation of such legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.

992 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Petitions

Government Aid Projects to the Philippines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Federal Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we the undersigned Australian taxpayers and citizens oppose the present Government aid to the Philippines (80 per cent of funds are for road construction in Northern Samar and Zamboanga Del Sur).
Recent reports released by 'Community Aid Abroad' and 'Catholic Commission for Justice and Peace' indicate that these roads are having no impact on poverty and are helping military oppression.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that these Government aid projects be stopped.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received,
Census Forms
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament asembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth
That the Commonwealth Government, on the advice of the Bureau of Statistics has rejected the view that all census forms should be retained, as they are in Britain and the United States. These forms contain much vital information of an historical, medical, and sociological nature which should be available to future generations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this decision be reconsidered, especially since the view of a majority of the members of the Australian Law Reform Commission was in favour of retaining individual census returns.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Leo McLeay.
Petition received.
Port Wakefield Proof and Experimental Range, South Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that objection is made to any proposal for the extension of the Port Wakefield Proof and Experimental Range.
Your Petitions therefore humbly pray that no such extension shall take place and that such proposal will be rejected by Parliament. And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
Excise on Wine
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
that any sales tax or excise on Australian wine would adversely affect employment in the wine industry, place a disproportionate burden on grapegrowers and ensure a larger future surplus of grapes;

the reduction in the demand for wine will also threaten the existence of many wine producers and reduce the range, quality and variety of wines offered in the market.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will reject any proposal for a sales tax or excise on Australian wine;
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE
Mr BUNGEY (Canning)-In accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, I present the reports relating to the following proposed works:
Redevelopment of Brisbane International AirportRemainder of works of Phase I; and development of RAAF Base Derby, Western Australia, Stage I
Ordered that the reports be printed.
AUSTRALIAN EMBASSY, TEHRAN
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-I present the report, together with appendixes, of an investigation into allegations of improper financial dealings at the Australian Embassy, Tehran, carried out by the Department of Finance.
Motion (by Mr Street)-by leave-agreed to:
That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of the Report, together with appendixes, of an investigation into allegations of improper financial dealings at the Australian Embassy, Tehran, carried out by the Department of Finance.
Mr STREET-by leave-On 29 April in the Parliament, Senator Primmer made a series of very serious allegations against a senior officer of the Department of Foreign Affairs and against the Secretary of that Department. He alleged, without providing any evidence to justify his allegations, that Mr I. G. Bowden, formerly Australian Ambassador in Tehran and now a senior officer in the Department of Foreign Affairs, had been guilty of extensive financial wrong-doing, that this had been covered up by the Secretary of the Department, Mr P. G. F. Henderson, that I had been lied to by officials of my Department and that, as a result, I in turn had lied to Senator Primmer and thus to the Parliament. On 30 April, I made a statement deploring actions taken under protection of parliamentary privilege which impugned the integrity of individuals and which described allegations as 'facts'. I said that I had already initiated an investigation by the Department of Finance into allegations made earlier by an officer of my Department, Mr D. W. Witheford, about alleged embezzlement in the

Australian Embassy, Tehran

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 993

Australian Embassy in Tehran, and that the Secretary of the Department had invited the Australian Federal Police to consider the results of the investigations being conducted by the Department of Finance. I made it clear that I believed that anyone, including a member of parliament, who made an allegation was under a clear obligation to bring forward any facts in his possession which ought to be investigated. Senator Primmer has not produced any facts or evidence other than the allegations made in the adjournment debate on 29 April.
On 20 July, I made a statement confirming that the final report made by officers of the Department of Finance had been received from the Minister for Finance (Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle). I said then that I was not able to comment in detail at that time, first, because I was waiting for a report from the Federal Police on this case, and second, because, as this matter had been raised in Parliament I should make a detailed statement to Parliament. I did say in that statement, however, that the investigating officers were, and I quote, 'satisfied that, on the evidence available, there is no basis for action against Mr Bowden by the Commonwealth in respect of the financial matters examined'. I made this statement at that time because serious allegations had been made and that, in view of the widespread publicity given to the allegations, it would be quite unfair to the officers named to wait until Parliament resumed to say what could be said at that time. I now inform the House in detail of the results of those investigations, and of the subsequent consideration of the allegations and the finance report by the Australian Federal Police. I think it is important first to set out precisely what the allegations are and how and by whom they were made. On 9 April Mr D. W. Witheford, an officer of my Department, submitted to me a statement making the following allegations:
(A) Related irregularities (fares to Australia from the United Kingdom): It was suggested that in 1960 there was an irregularity in the payment of the Bowden family completion-of-posting fares by the Commonwealth from England to Australia in that a nanny to the Bowden children was included as part of the family.
(B) Related irregularities (fraudulent conversion of a cheque in Hong Kong): Reference was made to the fraudulent conversion of a cheque issued by the Australian Commission in Hong Kong when Mr Bowden was Commissioner there. It was not suggested that Mr Bowden was directly involved.

(C) Tehran: Payment to children: Mr Witheford questioned the necessity-and perhaps the propriety-of Mr Bowden as Ambassador in Tehran employing his sons from time to time, at Commonwealth expense, to remove snow from the official residence in Tehran. It was further suggested that Mr Bowden effected certain administrative changes because certain administrative officers refused to certify the necessary transactions.
(D) Tehran: Purchase of air tickets for children over 18: It was suggested that Mr Bowden may not have declared income of the children over the age of 18 years when arranging for reunion entitlements during his term of office in Tehran.
(E) Tehran: Servants' wages: It was suggested that Mr Bowden had for some time been retaining a substantial portion of the salaries of his two domestic waiters or stewards although he was receiving the full amount in reimbursement from the Embassy.
(F) Tehran: Misuse of cars: It was stated that Mr Bowden, his wife, and on one occasion a private guest of the Bowdens, used official cars for private purposes and suggested that there were improper uses of official cars. Mr Witheford referred to an alleged complaint by former Prime Minister McMahon that he was not provided with an official car on a visit to Tehran in 1975. The statement was made also that Mr Bowden would not permit official cars to be made available for transporting officers' children to and from school.
(G) Tehran: Representation allowance: The suggestion-was made that Mr Bowden may have been unduly secretive about his representation allowance files and that there were irregularities in the reimbursements claimed by Mr Bowden.
(H) Tehran: Further irregularities: Under this heading Mr Witheford's statement refers to his recollection of '20 or 30' irregularities listed by Internal Audit at the time of visiting the Embassy in 1975. The Department of Finance conclusion in respect of each of these allegations was:
(a) As to the nanny's fare, the report notes that, although Mr Bowden did not volunteer the information that the nurse's travel was included in the family booking, there was no loss of public moneys as Mr Bowden paid for the nurse's fare on request. The report further notes that there was a failure to comply with prescribed procedures and that the relevant papers suggested that at the time both the general understanding of officers as to their entitlements and the administrative procedures in the Department in this regard were then less than satisfactory. I note here that the

994 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Australian Embassy, Tehran

procedures in force at that time-22 years agohave been amended since that time and the administrative weaknesses apparent at the time have long since been rectified. In particular, travel at official expense must be preceded by the completion of the necessary movement requisitions and approval by the Minister's delegate.
(b) As to the fraudulent conversion of the cheque in Hong Kong there was, in this case, a loss of public moneys amounting to $8,734.99. When the matter was discovered in October 1973, some 12 months after it happened, it was investigated by the Hong Kong Police and the Commonwealth Police Force, but the offender or offenders could not be identified. The fraudulent conversion occurred before Mr Bowden took over the post and while it was administered by the then Department of Trade. The inconclusive outcome of the police investigations was accepted by the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Treasury. The delay of a year in reporting the loss to Canberra was noted by the Department of Finance as refiecting adversely on the administration of the post at the time the fraudulent conversion took place, but the report notes that the period concerned coincided with the handover of the administration of the mission by the then Department of Trade to the Department of Foreign Affairs and that 'the post was in some administrative disarray on the financial side at that time'. The report goes on to say that: 'it seems clear that when Bowden and Meredith-the senior Foreign Affairs Administrative Officer-learned of the matter, proper follow-up action was taken reasonably promptly.
(c) The report concludes that claims for Mr Bowden's sons for clearing snow were submitted in the proper manner and payments made in the prescribed manner. Mr Bowden has explained to the Department of Finance investigation that the job of clearing snow from the fiat roofs of residences was not regarded in Tehran generally as a function of the gardeners employed, but was normally performed by casual labourers. The gardeners assisted with other snow clearing tasks, including clearing the driveway, steps and outbuildings. Mr Bowden merely substituted the employment of his sons for the employment of such casual Iranian labourers. Comparison of accounts submitted for this snow clearing with other clearing accounts at the time suggested that the claims made were reasonable. Snow clearing from the Ambassador's residence was a legitimate official charge. The propriety of members of the family of the Ambassador or indeed any

Australia-based officer engaging in Commonwealth employment has been a matter for personal judgment. No guidelines have been issued on this subject and it is a matter for the head of mission and the officer appointed by the Minister-not normally the Ambassador-to approve expenses. The report notes that it is not uncommon for members of the families of Australia-based officers to obtain permanent and/or temporary employment at overseas posts. I believe that there should be some clarification of the circumstances under which this practice is acceptable. I have asked my Department, in conjunction with the Public Service Board and other departments with staff serving overseas, to establish a set of instructions to regulate this practice.
(d) As to reimbursement for Mr Bowden's sons' air fares, the issue in this matter arises because, in respect of children over 18 years who are entitled to be reunited with their parents at a post, any income earned by the children must be taken into account in calculating the amount payable by the officer as a contribution to the reunion fares. At the relevant time Mr Bowden's sons were beneficiaries of income from a trust; they had no access to this income, which was used mainly to meet expenses connected with their education. Mr Bowden was not, under procedures in force at the time, asked to disclose the children's income when applying for the visits. If he had been, it would have been a question of interpretation as to whether there was in fact any income to declare under the regulations, which are not clear about what constitutes income. The report notes that according to the Public Service Board advice Mr Bowden's boys would have received sufficient income to warrant a parental contribution to reunion fares. The report notes on the other hand that it appears from the Department of Foreign Affairs files that according to normal practice Mr Bowden was not asked to disclose the children's income when applying for visits-nor, if such information was sought, would the Public Service Board's interpretation of the determinations relating to overseas service be necessarily the one applied. The Department of Finance concludes that the point at issue was one of unsound Central Office procedures, which it notes have now been changed, and an imprecise wording of the relevant provisions which the Department of Finance will suggest should be amended. I should make it clear that the departmental procedures referred to by the Department of Finance had been changed long before the present investigation was made.

Australian Embassy, Tehran

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 995.

(e) As to the wages paid to stewards, the circumstances of the matter were that Mr Bowden, through the Bangladesh Ambassador in Tehran, replaced two Iranian stewards with two stewards recruited from Bangladesh. The Department of Foreign Affairs had agreed to this before the arrangement was made on the understanding that Mr Bowden personally should meet the air fare to Tehran, provide accommodation and the return air fare at the end of the contract. The Department had expressly approved that Mr Bowden pay the air fares in the first instance and that he be reimbursed an amount up to the wage level approved for Iranian servants-who lived out-so that he could progressively reimburse himself for this expense out of the difference between this figure and the amount paid to the Bangladeshi servants. The records clearly show this approval as well as the amounts of deductions made. The money collected to cover the cost of their return fares was retained, together with the necessary documentation, and handed over on Mr Bowden's departure to a member of the Embassy for Mr Bowden's successor. The Department of Finance states that its examination of the papers did not reveal that there was any breach of the law or any misappropriation of public money. Mr Bowden was acting with full knowledge of the Department of Foreign Affairs.
(f) Under the terms and conditions of his appointment, Mr Bowden was provided with a car for the official use of the head of mission. A substantial deduction is made from the head of mission allowance at the post to take account of the additional use of official vehicles to which he is entitled. Mr Bowden denied that he, his wife or friends misused official cars and there was no corroboration of Mr Witheford's allegations from other officers. There is no record of any complaint having been made by former Prime Minister McMahon that he was refused Embassy transport and enquiries of the Department of Administrative Services indicate that in any case he would not have been entitled to the use of an official car in Tehran. Nevertheless, it is understood that an official of the Embassy met Sir William at the airport on his arrival and Mr Bowden himself drove Sir William back to the airport on his departure. As to the refusal by Mr Bowden to authorise the use of official cars to transport children to school, the Department of Finance noted that this calls for no comment as it is simply an exercise of the authority vested in the Ambassador. The regulations provide that the actual cost of school bus transport may be accepted for reimbursement but no provisions are made for the transport of preschool children.

(g) As to suggestions that Mr Bowden was unduly secretive about representation allowance files and that there were irregularities in the reimbursements claimed by him, the report notes that there is no indication in the papers of any departure from the requirements contained in the Public Service Board determinations or departmental instructions. Reimbursements in respect of representation expenditure were made directly between the Ambassador and Canberra. The officer who is said by Mr Witheford to have been refused when he asked to have access to the Ambassador's representation files could not remember why he wanted to see them. The Department of Finance notes that scrutiny by the Department of Foreign Affairs of representation returns was comprehensive and followed a set pattern. The Department did not dispute the level or cost of Mr Bowden's representational activities.
(h) With reference to financial irregularities, the Tehran Embassy was subjected to internal audit reviews in 1975, 1977 and 1978. The 1975 review was extremely critical of the financial administration at Tehran; the 1977 review was requested by the Embassy and that review and a subsequent inspection in 1978 reported a progressive improvement in financial administration. Mr Bowden arrived at the post in July 1974 and remained until March 1978. None of the reports which were made by appropriate officials suggested that any improper official dealings had occurred at the post. The competence or veracity of these reports has not been questioned. The report examines other matters raised by Mr Witheford which are essentially matters of procedure. One matter raised by Mr Witheford, that of the procedures for the payment of salaries to Australia-based staff, would appear to have arisen from a misunderstanding by him of those procedures. The Department of Finance concluded that it was obvious from the adverse 1975 internal audit report that the Treasury regulation 132 certificates then used did not represent the true position at the post; their use was in any case discontinued in 1977. They have been replaced by a more truly representative system of reports. As I have said, the Department of Finance report notes that subsequent audit inspections in 1977 and 1978 reported a progressive improvement in financial administration.
With respect to all allegations, the Department of Finance's conclusion was that the investigating officers were 'Satisfied that, on the evidence available, there is no basis for action against Mr Bowden by the Commonwealth in respect of the financial matters examined'.

996 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Australian Embassy, Tehran

In order that there should not remain any element of doubt about whether there had been any irregularities, and because of the terms of the allegations made in the Parliament by Senator Primmer, the Permanent Head of my Department requested, as I indicated earlier, that the Australian Federal Police consider the result of the Department of Finance investigation, particularly to see whether any other action of any kind was warranted. The Australian Federal Police considered the report by the Department of Finance and interviewed persons having direct knowledge of the matters, including Mr Witheford and Mr Bowden, and persons described by Mr Witheford as his informants. Subsequently the Federal Police sent to the Secretary to my Department a report on the matter.
Mr Witheford has complained that the police investigation was not properly conducted and has made a complaint to the Ombudsman against the police investigators themselves. Under the provisions of the Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 this compaint must itself be the subject of an investigation by the Internal Investigation Division of the Australian Federal Police. This is now being pursued. In the meantime, the police have advised that I have their agreement to use the following words:
After investigation of all of the matters raised by Mr Withe ford the following points became apparent to investigating police:
The matters raised do not all come within the ambit of the criminal jurisdiction and hence, did not warrant police investigation.
Mr Witheford possesses no evidence in the strict sense of the matters alleged.
None of the alleged informants of Mr Witheford possess evidence to support the allegations made by Mr Witheford.
None of Mr Witheford's informants placed the same construction on events as Mr Witheford and do not support his contentions.
In summary, therefore, the police report that their 'inquiries reveal no evidence which would substantiate any of the allegations made by Mr Witheford. Indeed, there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that Mr Bowen acted in an improper manner, let alone criminally.' I have a letter from the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) containing the quotes which I have just made, and I table that too. In my statement of 30 April I reiterated publicly that anyone, including a member of parliament was under a clear obligation to make any relevant information available. Some four months have now elapsed since this request was made. With the exception of Mr Witheford there has been no response to this request.

All persons holding public office must be accountable for their actions. Any allegations or evidence of wrongdoing must be examined and action taken if it is warranted. If, moreover, any person believes that there have been wrongful acts committed, that person, and particularly an officer of the Public Service, has a clear duty to bring forward his or her concerns and, of course, must be entitled to protection against any possiblity of vindictive action simply because allegations have been made.
There should be no equivocation or hesitation by officers themselves or by the Government in discharging the obligation to dispose of any suspicions that wrongful actions have been committed. But this obligation must be discharged with a proper regard for the rights of all individuals involved. In particular, where allegations are made they must be treated as no more than allegations until they have been investigated. In my statement of 30 April, I deplored the fact that a member of this parliament had, under privilege, made unsubstantiated allegations as though they were facts, in complete disregard of the rights of the individuals concerned.
But Senator Primmer went further than simply making allegations against Mr Bowden. He also said of the Permanent Head of my Department that he had protected Mr Bowden; that both Mr Henderson and Mr Bowden were members of 'a well-known faction, namely the Geelong Grammer Mafia'; that Mr Henderson had lied to me; that he, Mr Henderson, ought to be suspended from duty, implying that Mr Henderson was a dishonest officer; Mr Henderson had denied promotion to 'honest' officers; questioned whether Mr Henderson had been guilty of 'white collar crime' and 'a massive cover-up'. There has been no evidence produced to support any of these allegations.
These allegations depend on the propOSitIOn that Mr Bowden had been guilty of wrongdoing. That has been clearly disposed of. But some might even then argue that Mr Henderson or the Department had resisted any investigation for fear that there had been a wrongful act, or out of special knowledge. There is absolutely no evidence to support this either. I believe that Senator Primmer, having presented as facts allegations against a loyal and dedicated public servant, who has served successive governments with great distinction for over 30 years, must now ask himself a serious question. Have his actions been consistent with the standards expected of a member of this Parliament?

Australian Embassy, Tehran

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 997

I believe it is important that the House should be provided with as detailed an account as possible of this matter and accordingly table, for the information of honourable members, the Report of the Department of Finance of the Investigation Into Allegations of Improper Financial Dealings at the Australian Embassy in Tehran.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)- by leave-I do not know whether I should spend a lot of time on this matter which relates to something that occurred in the Senate. I think this matter might more appropriately be discussed in the Senate. I have not discussed this matter with the honourable senator named in the statement, nor do I intend to do so. I am aware that he did not have any knowledge of this statement and I should think it proper and fair that the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) would arrange for his statement to be read by his colleague in the Senate so that the senator concerned could make an appropriate response.
Mr StreetThat has been done.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I am glad to know that, but I can assure the Minister that until 10 minutes ago the honourable senator had no knowledge of the matter. I note that the Minister made a statement on 30 April last. I understand it was a Press statement. This is the first time this matter has been before the House, and I hope it is the last time because I do not think we should have a great deal of discussion about what we consider to be the standard of conduct in another place. The rules provide that each House should control its own members. I think that is important, but nevertheless let me refer to a couple of interesting points.
I think that the matters complained of clearly show that there certainly was incompatability between two officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs. I do not intend to use their names. One was an ambassador and the other was his secondin-command. It must have been an unhappy association because the situation lasted only 18 months. The number of matters complained of show that there seems to be-I think this is acknowledged by the Minister-some question of a disgruntled officer. The fact that he complained about matters which occurred 22 years ago seems to give some evidence of his discontent. I will not discuss any of those matters.
I note that there has been an investigation by the Australian Federal Police, that complaints have been made to the Commonwealth Ombudsman and that there will still be some further investigation by the internal division of the Federal Police. I do not think I should make too many

comments lest it be thought that I am prejudging the issue. I think we can all agree on this point: People holding office on behalf of Australia and using taxpayers' funds ought to be able to account for those funds and there ought to be some strict control. The Minister mentioned that matter. There have been allegations about misfeasance and misuse of official funds. I find it intriguing to note that when snow was falling in Tehran there were gardeners employed. I do not think there would have been much growth. It appears that the ambassador used members of his family to shovel snow off a roof. That matter has been investigated and adequate explanations have been provided.
But what we need to know is whether there were what the Minister calls 'unsound central office procedures'. Apparently, unsound procedures applied in the case of a nanny and in the employment of dependants. There was also the matter of fares for dependent children who were in receipt of income. These matters have been tightened up-I hope so, because I think the nanny travelled 22 years ago. I wonder what the officer did when he returned from the post in 1976. I should have thought that he would have complained about these matters then. If he did, were those complaints investigated? If not, why not? The Minister's statement does not tell us anything about that matter. I do not want the Minister to go into any more detail but he might privately address his mind to the matter.
Bear in mind that I have not discussed this matter with any officers of the Department of Foreign Affairs, but it is unusual for the officer concerned still to be in Canberra some six years after his return from Tehran. The gentleman does not seem to be having a lot of success in being posted abroad again. Maybe he feels that there has been some impediment to his career because of reports that might have been made about his service in Tehran.
I think that would include some of the aspects that might encourage anybody to go to a member of parliament to state-rightly or wrongly-that he feels that some improper motive is retarding his career.
A member of parliament has an obligation to raise matters. How he raises them of course can be a matter of judgment. Today the Minister for Foreign Affairs has made a judgment. Often people give wrong information to members of parliament. Therefore it is appropriate for a member of parliament to indicate that he has been given wrong information. Obviously, judging from

998 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Export Market Development Grants Bill

the Minister's statement, that is what has happened in this case. I think that the honourable senator will take the appropriate action. The gentleman who returned from Tehran, obviously a little unhappy-certainly after only half his period of service had elapsed-made a complaint. How does the Department of Foreign Affairs handle these matters which can be described as personality clashes? Is some counselling and advice given to make certain that there is no need for public allegations? Is there a proper method of investigation?
There is also the question of whether locally engaged employees always provide good service. What is the standard that ought to be required in Tehran? Apparently a lack of knowledge of the local language and customs creates problems. If we are to improve financial controls we must require our staff to be trained in financial matters and they must be competent in judging the people who are being employed. Also it would certainly help efficient administration if they had the appropriate language skills.
I will not say any more about the matter except that the Opposition notes it. The time of the House is precious. I have no doubt that we have not heard the last of this matter but I hope that we have heard the last of it in this House.
EXPORT MARKET DEVELOPMENT GRANTS AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Anthony, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (2.42)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
On 19 July the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) outlined the Government's decisions on industry and related policies which followed its consideration of Industries Assistance Commission reports on industry assistance, protection and export incentives. In my subsequent statement of 19 July I elaborated the decisions taken on export incentives. This Bill gives effect to those decisions.
The Government has decided that the Export Market Development Grants Act should be substantially amended so that it can more effectively stimulate the market development activities of Australian exporters and that the Export Expansion Grants Scheme should be allowed to lapse on 30 June 1983. This decision should be seen in the context of the total package of industry assistance

announced by the Prime Minister. The Government's decision to terminate the EEG Scheme and to increase benefits under the EMDG Scheme reflects its view that the EMDG Scheme provides a more cost effective means of stimulating the growth of exports. The majority of EMDG claimants are firms producing technologically advanced products which, by their nature, must rely heavily on innovative marketing and promotion to ensure success against international competition. The Government was also cognisant of international attitudes towards performance based export incentives and sees its decisions as being consistent with Australia's objective of achieving a multilateral reduction in subsidies to international trade.
I should now like to draw the attention of the House towards the specific measures aimed at further increasing the effectiveness of the Export Market Development Grants Act. The EMI)G Scheme, which was introduced in 1974, provides financial incentives in the form of taxable grants based on eligible expenditure incurred in such activities as overseas market research and development, advertising, the cost of participating in overseas exhibitions, fares incurred in overseas travel and the cost of bringing agents or buyers to Australia where the promotion of export sales is the objective. The Act was subsequently amended in 1978 when a single grant rate of 70 per cent of eligible expenditure was introduced and benefits were extended to the tourist industry.
Taking into account the present difficult international trading climate, the Government is anxious to ensure that exporters are able to make use of the increased benefits as soon as possible. These benefits will therefore apply from the grant year commencing 1 July 1982 for a further six years. Exporters have therefore been provided with a stable base on which to plan long term marketing strategies.
The main changes now proposed for the legislation are as follows: The maximum annual grant available to a claimant will be raised to $200,000, compared with the present level of $100,000, with an additional $25,000 for expenditure incurred in Government sponsored promotions. This latter provision will be deleted in line with the recommendation of the Industries Assistance Commission. The Government has accepted the view of the Commission that deletion of the provision will improve the effectiveness of the scheme by allowing firms to determine for themselves the form of export promotion which would give the greatest returns in terms of export sales. The doubling of the basic $100,000 ceiling will restore the benefit to a real level commensurate with that

Export Market Development Grants Bill

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 999

existing at the commencement of the scheme in 1974.
Over the period of operation of the Export Market Development Grants Scheme there have been changes in the relative importance of the different elements which make up the costs of market development. Expenditures on accommodation and sustenance are now significant charges which previously had been fully borne by the exporter. It has now been decided that the Government will make a contribution to these costs. This contribution will take the form of the payment of an amount of $50 for each full day of the visit up to a maximum of ten days. This is a set figure and will not be subject to an application of the 70 per cent grant rate. The amount has been set at a level consistent with the 'shared cost' principle inherent in the scheme. All claims for the payment of an amount under this provision will be subject to detailed scrutiny by the Export Development Grants Board in accordance with procedures developed by the Board in its examination of eligibility of overseas fares. Claimants will be obliged to substantiate to the Board's satisfaction that .each visit was undertaken primarily and principally for the purpose of export market development.

tourist promotions as approved by the Department of Trade and Resources and the Department of Industry and COmmerce will continue to be exempt from this provision even though the provision for Government sponsored promotions will be deleted.
The Construction Industry
A new provision has been introduced which takes into account the special problems encountered by the construction industry when contracting for overseas business. Australian firms competing for overseas construction tenders are often obliged under the terms of the contracts to include certain inputs from local sources. At present the legislation generally results in claims being allowed only in the same proportion as the Australian inputs bear to the total contract value. The legislation has been liberalised to allow all tender-quotation costs to be admissible when Australian input is not less than 20 per cent of the contract value and for a proportion of costs, according to a sliding scale value, to be eligible when Australian input falls below 20 per cent. Eligible expenditure will therefore reflect more satisfactorily the costs incurred in tendering for these contracts.

Increased Benefits for the Tourism Industry
In its report the lAC drew attention to certain anomalies in relation to the treatment accorded to the tourist industry under the legislation. The Government has accepted the proposition that wherever possible benefits provided for tourism should be consistent with those offered to other industries and has therefore decided to extend certain benefits accordingly. Regional tourist bodies will no longer be subject to incurring eligible expenditure only in relation to Government sponsored promotions. The costs of tenders and quotations for the supply of special tourist tenders will now be eligible. A similar provision already exists in respect of the export of goods and services.
The Bill provides also that where discounts are offered to overseas tourist industry representatives as an inducement to buy Australian tourist services one half of the amount of the discount may be admitted as eligible expenditure. This is also consistent with the treatment of free samples provided to overseas clients by manufacturers under the existing legislation. The existing requirement that tourist industry claimants must spend at least $5,000 other than on fares to have a grant entitlement will be retained. Recognised

Other Amendments
The opportunity has been taken also to introduce certain amendments which will clarify the legislation and simplify the administration. These include a redefinition of the eligibility requirements when two or more persons who are relatives travel outside Australia at the same time. In order to simplify administration and to clarify the position a discretion previously exercised by the Export Development Grants Board will be removed. Because of this it is proposed that these amendments will not come into operation until the grant year commencing I July 1983. Other changes include an extension of the concept of approved bodies to cover those associations promoting the export of services, industrial property rights and know-how and an extended power of delegation to all members of the Board.
It is estimated that the increased EMDG benefits made available to exporters will be of the order of $36m in the first grant year of operation. Their effects will be felt in the Budget from 1983-84 onwards. The new EMDG scheme should provide a new impetus to develop export markets. Coupled with the other assistance measures being made available for industry the means now exist to stimulate further expansion in Australia's international trade with resulting

1000 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982 States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill

benefits for the economy as a whole. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
STATES (TAX SHARING AND HEALTH GRANTS) AMENDMENT BILL (No.2)
1982
Bill presented by Sir James Killen, on behalf of Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Sir JAMES KILLEN (MoretonVicePresident of the Executive Council and Leader of the House) (2.54)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The main purpose of this Bill is to amend the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 to provide for: Firstly, the implementation of the State tax sharing relativities adopted at the June 1982 Premiers Conference for the purpose of calculating States' tax sharing grants for the years 1982-83, 1983-84 and 1984-85; secondly, the phasing-in of those relativities over the three years ending 1984-85 at the rate of 33t per cent each year; and, thirdly, a Commonwealth guarantee that the total tax sharing grants payable to each State will not increase by less than 2 per cent in real terms in 1982-83 and by one per cent in real terms in both 1983-84 and 1984-85.
The new tax sharing arrangements are the culmination of a process begun in 1978 when the question of the distribution of the States' tax sharing grants was referred to the Commonwealth Grants Commission for inquiry and report. The Commission was required to assess whether any change was desirable in the per capita relativities between States' grants on the basis of the principle that each State should have the fiscal capacity to provide standard levels of service without imposing taxes and charges significantly different from those imposed by other States.
The Commission's report on State tax sharing entitlements 1981 was considered at the 20 June 1981 Premiers Conference. It was decided that there would be no change in the relativities contained in the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 at that time in respect of the year 1981-82 and that the Commission should be asked to produce a further report on its assessment of State relativities in the light of submissions to be put to it by States and by the Commonwealth. However, in recognition of the likelihood that, following the further review, relativities could be adjusted in favour of the three more populous States the Commonwealth agreed to provide additional grants of a total of $60m to

New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland in 1981-82 as part of the total contribution by the Commonwealth towards assisting States to adjust to the new relativities.
The Commission presented its second report on 31 May 1982. In it the Commission confirmed the view expressed in its 1981 report that a change was desirable in the existing State relativities. The June 1982 Premiers Conference adopted a proposal put by the Commonwealth regarding the distribution of tax sharing grants to apply in 1982-83, 1983-84 and 1984-85. This Bill gives effect to these new tax sharing arrangements. The Commonwealth Grants Commission's 1982 assessed relativities have been modified so that the benefits of South Australia's and Tasmania's hospital cost sharing grants, which continue for the next three years, do not adversely affect their tax sharing grants. This modification is consistent with clause 7.1 of South Australia's and Tasmania's continuing hospital cost sharing agreements with the Commonwealth which states that any above average per capital hospital cost sharing grants paid to those States are not to be offset by the Commonwealth against general revenue payments. Clearly, the Commonwealth has honoured these agreements. The relativities so modified are to be phased-in over the three years ending 1984-85 at the rate of 33t per cent each year. The phasing-in provisions take account of the financial difficulties that would have been created for the three less populous States if the assessed relativities had been implemented in full in 1982-83.
In addition, the Bill provides for a guarantee that each State's tax sharing grant will increase by at least 2 per cent in real terms in 1982-83, and one per cent in real terms in each of 1983-84 and 1983-84 and 1984-85. An amount will be set aside from the tax sharing pool to be used, in the first instance, to fund this guarantee with any portion not required for this purpose being distributed among six States. The amount to be set aside, totalling about $149m in 1982-83, represents the escalated value of the $60m provided by the Commonwealth to the three more populous States in 1981-82, to which I referred earlier, plus the escalated value of the next budgetary gains accruing to South Australia and Tasmania from the Commonwealth payments to those States in return for the transfer of their railways to the Commonwealth in 1975-76. The Commission had assessed that, under the fiscal equalisation principle, South Australia and Tasmania should not continue to have a higher share of tax sharing grants on account of these additional grants.

States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Bill 26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1001

To give effect to the decisions taken at the June 1982 Premiers Conference, the Bill provides that the total tax sharing grant in respect of each of the three remaining years of the tax sharing arrangements will be divided into two pools: Firstly, a basic tax sharing pool, equal to 20.323 per cent of total Commonwealth tax collections in the previous year and, secondly, a supplementary tax sharing pool, equal to 0.397 per cent of such collections. The distribution of the basic tax sharing pool among the States in each year will be calculated on the basis of the populations of each State at 31 December in the relevant year weighted by the new phased-in per capita relativities adopted at the June 1982 Premiers' Conference.
The distribution of the supplementary tax sharing pool among the States is, in the first instance, designed to fund the guaranteed minimum tax shares, with any portion not required for that purpose being further distributed among the six States on a specified basis. A State that receives a payment as a result of the guarantee is not entitled to receive a total tax sharing grant greater than the guaranteed amount. The total amount of tax sharing grants payable to the six States in 1982-83 is $7,772.5m, an increase of 16.2 per cent over the previous year. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a table which contains the latest estimates of the tax sharing grants payable to each State in 1982-83. This distribution is subject to revision in accordance with revised estimates of the States' populations and the respective capital city consumer price indices.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
STATE TAX SHARING ENTITLEMENTS 1981-82 (ACTUAL) AND .982-83 (EST)

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania
Total

Percentage 1981-82 1982-83 increase

$m

$m Per cent

(actual) (estimate) (estimate)

2034.6 2357.6

15.9

1502.5 1739.8

15.8

1259.7 1530.0

21.5

761.0

866.4

13.8

809.9

914.9

13.0

322.0

363.8

13.0

6689.7 7772.5

16.2

Sir JAMES KILLEN-I thank the House. The main features of the existing tax sharing arrangements will continue under the new arrangements. I refer in particular to the retention of the right of the States to impose surcharges or to give

rebates under stage 2 of the federalism arrangements as provided in the Income Tax (Arrangements with the States) Act 1978 and the retention of the Commonwealth's right to be able to declare an increase in, or rebates of, any Commonwealth tax to be a 'special surcharge or rebate', and hence excluded from the total tax sharing base. One of the provisions of the Bill is that the previous guarantee that the State's grants in any year will not be less in money terms than they were in the previous year is replaced by a significantly more generous guarantee that each State's tax sharing grant will increase by 2 per cent in real terms in 1982-83 and by 1 per cent in real terms in each of the years 1983-84 and 1984-85. In view of the generosity of the guarantee and the phasing-in arrangements for the new relativities, the Commonwealth required, and the States accepted, that no special grants will be paid by the Commonwealth during the phasing-in period of three years.
The Commonwealth Government has acted responsibly and equitably in respect of the appropriate relativities to apply during the next three years. Clearly, changes to the distribution of the tax sharing grants between the States have to be made consistent with the principle of fiscal equalisation. Equally, the provisions of the Bill will ensure that the changes take place at a pace compatible with the fiscal capacities of the States. No State will suffer a decline in the real value of its annual tax sharing grants. As a result of decisions taken at both the Premiers Conference and the Loan Council meeting in June 1982 the States will have available in 1982-83 a substantially increased volume of funds from Commonwealth assistance and borrowing programs-excluding electricity authorities-approved by Loan Council. It is currently estimated that the States will receive an increase in such funds of over 13 per cent-a significant real terms increase. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT FUND BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Street, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs) (3.6)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to authorise a contribution by Australia of $A212.33m towards the third replenishment of the Asian Development Fund. Honourable members will know that, since the Asian Development Bank was established in

I002 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Asian Development Fund Bill

1966, Australia has been and remains a strong and active supporter of the Bank. We continue to regard it as an efficient and effective organisation for providing aid to developing countries in our own geographic region. The main role of the Bank is to assist the economic development of its developing member countries and to foster economic and social growth and co-operation in the Asian and Pacific regions. It does this by lending funds, promoting investment and providing technical assistance on a scale that bilateral donors could not achieve alone. The Bank has continued to approach its complex development task with flexibility and vigour, especially over recent years during which it has been confronted by the growing resource constraints imposed by the global economic recession.
Since its establishment the Bank has lent about $USIO billion for projects covering all the major sectors of economic development with emphasis on the development of transport, communications, industry and electric power as well as projects for agriculture, education, water supply and urban development. In recent years an increasing proportion of the Bank's lending activities has been devoted to agricultural development and to social development-for example, in health, population and water supply projects. The Bank's lending activities are divided into ordinary and special operations. Ordinary operations are financed on the basis of the Bank's capital resources and its borrowings on the international capital market at commercial or near commercial terms. Special operations involve loans made on highly concessional terms to the Bank's poorest and least developed member countries and are funded from the Asian Development Fund.
Australia played a leading role in the establishment and subsequent growth of the Asian Development Fund which was set up in 1974 and first replenished in 1976. The Fund operates in the Asian and Pacific regions in a similar fashion to the World Bank's soft lending affiliate, the International Development Association. Australia contributed $A97m or 5.14 per cent to the last replenishment target of $US2.15 billion, to cover concessional lending for the period 1979 to 1982. By the end of this year the Bank will have fully committed the resources from this-secondreplenishment. In July 1981 donor countries commenced negotiations for a third replenishment of the Fund, to provide resources for the period 1983 to 1986. Bank management originally suggested a replenishment target of $US4.1 billion in order to maintain growth in the Fund's annual rate of lending at around 17.5 per cent. Australia supported this target and announced its willingness to

maintain its share in the Fund at around 5.14 per cent. However, when it became clear that the United States intended to reduce significantly its level of contribution, the target was revised to $US3.2 billion. Agreement and donor commitment were achieved earlier this year on this level which will enable the Fund to maintain the level of its concessionallending over the next four years in real terms.
In order to help meet the agreed target and to maintain a position appropriate to our standing in the Bank, Australia decided to increase its share in the Fund to approximately 7.2 per cent. This represents about the same funding level as the previous 5.14 per cent share of the original target of $4.1 billion and is commensurate with our share in the Bank's capital stock. Australia's decision to increase substantially its share in the fund proved to be critical at the final donors' meeting in April this year at which the target of $US3.2 billion was reached. The exact level of our contribution to the third replenishment of the Asian Development Fund has been set at $A212.33m. This amount will not be subject to future adjustments in exchange rates. In accordance with past practice with respect to similar contributions to the Asian Development Fund and the International Development Association, Australia will make its contribution by lodging non-negotiable, non-interest bearing promissory notes cashable on demand as and when funds are actually required for making loan disbursements. This will limit the impact on the Budget in the next year or so, as cashing of these notes is not expected to begin before 1983-84.
The Asian Development Bank and its Asian Development Fund have a most important role to play in continuing to foster economic and social development in the region of immediate interest to Australia. Our contribution to the third replenishment of the Fund will confirm our willingness to continue helping the poorest developing countries in our region with highly concessional assistance. While Australia is fully prepared to play its role as one of the few developed country regional members of the Bank, it is a matter of concern that some non-regional donors have significantly reduced their level of support. Australia appreciates that global economic difficulties have required domestic economic restraint by donor governments, but it should not be forgotten that it is the developing countries that have been hardest hit by the economic problems of our times. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.

Statute Law Bill (No.2)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1003

STATUTE LAW (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL (No.2) 1982
Bill presented by Mr N. A. Brown, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr N. A. BROWN (Diamond Valley~ Minister for Communications and Minister Assisting the Attorney-General) (3.13)~1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill continues the practice of introducing an omnibus miscellaneous amendments Bill during each period of sittings of the Parliament as an expeditious way of making amendments of a noncontroversial character to a large number of Acts. Some of the amendments made by the Bill correct printing or drafting errors. Others make drafting or other technical amendments. Those provisions do not call for particular comment. Other provisions go into matters of substance in varying degrees. I propose to explain in some detail the nature and effect of those provisions. In addition, a detailed explanatory memorandum covering all the clauses of the Bill has been circulated.
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Part VI of the Bill inserts in the Acts Interpretation Act 1901 a definition of 'the Department'. It is hoped that this general definition will overcome to a large extent the need to define desparateIy the word in particular legislation. having regard to this amendment, the opportunity has been taken, in regard to the formal machinery of Government amendments contained in Schedule 12 to the Bill, to relay as much as possible on that general definition. Particular amendments made by various Parts of the Bill remove express references in Acts to particular departments or to particular Permanent Heads of departments. Honourable members will recall the commitment the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) made to the Parliament in a statement concerning parliamentary disallowance of delegated legislation on 26 May 1981 in relation to certain reports of the Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances. The Attorney-General then said that a careful study would be made of existing disallowances provisions with a view to also bringing those into line with the Government's policy that future disallowance provisions should, unless there is good reason to the contrary, incorporate the substance of the principles contained in sections 48, 49 and 50 of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901. That study is now well under way and the amendments to the undermentioned Acts bring those Acts into

conformity with those sections of the Acts Interpretation Act to the extent practicable in the particular case:
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders (Queensland Reserves and Communities SelfManagement) Act 1978;
Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act 1976;
Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976;
Customs Tariff Act 1966;
Dairy Industry Stabilization Act 1977;
Defence Act 1903;
Defence Amendment Act 1979;
Explosives Act 1961;
Representation Act 1905;
Seat of Government (Administration) Act 1910; and
State Grants (Petroleum Products) Act 1965.
Amendments to other legislation, if any, which should also be subject to the provisions contained in sections 48, 49 and 50 will be brought forward and identified.
Audit Act 1901
Section 628 of the Audit Act 1901 restricts the investment of moneys standing to the credit of the Trust Fund maintained under Part IX of the Act to Commonwealth and State securities, deposits in a bank and in the purchase of coinage. Part VII of the Bill amends section 628 of the Audit Act so as to provide wider avenues of investment of such moneys. The amendments will permit investment in securities issued by government authorities, on loans to authorised dealers in the official money market, in certificates of deposit and in clean bills of exchange. Also the Minister for Finance will be empowered to approve other suitable forms of investment.
Australian Federal Police Act 1979
Part XI of the Bill makes a number of amendments to improve the operation of the Australian Federal Police Act 1979. Section 26A of the Australian Federal Police Act 1979 provides that former Narcotics Enforcement Branch staff may, if qualified and suitable, be appointed to the Australain Federal Police. Arising from recent legal advice the Government has become aware that persons so appointed might not, by reason of the legal preference contained in section 73 of the Act, have equal rights to promotion and transfer within the Australian Federal Police as former

1004 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Statute Law Bill (No.2)

officers of the former Commonwealth Police Force and the Police Force of the Australian Capital Territory. The Bill makes the necessary amendments to the Australian Federal Police Act to ensure that equality.
Banking Act 1959
Part XII of the Bill adds a new Part IIA to the Banking Act 1959 to facilitate the operation of State and Northern Territory legislation relating to the merging of the banking businesses, respectively, of the Bank of New South Wales and the Commercial Bank of Australia Limited, and of The National Bank of Australasia Limited and The Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney Ltd.
Legislation now passed, or in course of passage, in each of the States and the Northern Territory will assist the merging banks and their many customers by removing the administrative burden that would otherwise be involved in completing the merger of the banks' businesses in those jurisdictions. Within the Australian Capital Territory ordinances will shortly be made to facilitate the merger of the banks' businesses in the Territory.
The amendments made to the Banking Act by Part XII of the Bill will remove a range of uncertainties arising from potential inconsistencies between various areas of Commonwealth legislation and the above mentioned State and Territory legislation. The amendments made by the Bill to the Banking Act will avoid the possibility that, by reason of any such inconsistency, some portion of the relevant State or Northern Territory legislation might be held to be invalid. In addition, the amendments to the Banking Act provide for the States and Northern Territory legislation to bind the Crown in the right of the Commonwealth, of the Northern Territory and of Norfolk Island.
Provision is also made by the Bill for the amendments I have outlined to be applied, at the discretion of the Treasurer, in the event of any future bank merger being implemented by the same method as has been adopted for these mergers. No such merger is, of course, contemplated at this time, and I remind honourable members that in g~nting his consent under section 63 of the Banking Act to the present mergers the Treasurer pointed out that it should not be assumed that consent would necessarily be forthcoming in respect of any future merger proposals. Nevertheless, in the event, at some future time, of a merger being duly considered and accepted, this provision would obviate the need for further Commonwealth legislative action to ensure that no constitutional difficulties arise from the enactment of State and Territory facilitating legislation.

I should point out that the amendments of the Banking Act made by the Bill will not have the effect of altering the substantive rights and obligations which presently exist between the continuing banks and their customers. It simply ensures that the business of the merged banks is able to be transferred to the continuing banks with minimum disruption to the service provided by the banks.
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
The amendment made by Part XVI of the Bill allows licensed premises to be used as polling booths provided the Chief Electoral Officer is satisfied that no intoxicating liquor is available for sale on those premises whilst they are being so used. Typical examples of such premises would be licensed town halls in larger towns and the cities.
Companies Act 1981
The Bill provides for two categories of amendment of the Companies Act 1981. The amendments have been approved by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities.
The first category, which involves amendments to sections 509 and 417 of the principal Act, is designed to ensure that there is greater consistency in the obligations imposed on different types of corporations as to the amount of information which they must disclose on documents such as cheques. This consistency is to be achieved by a reduction in the amount of information required.
Pursuant to the amendments made by the Bill, it will no longer be necessary for any corporation to indicate on bills of exchange, promissory notes, cheques or other negotiable instruments any details as to the State or Territory in which it is incorporated, registered as a foreign company, or formed, as the case may be. It is mentioned that under the Companies Act 1981 as it presently operates, an officer of such a corporation who signs such a document in the Australian Capital Territory could be liable to the holder of the document if he does not indicate the requisite details.
The amendments will also relieve any corporation, which has limited liability but does not have the words 'Limited' in its name, of the need to indicate in those same documents that it has limited liability.
Both types of information covered by the above mentioned amendments will still be required in any business letter, statement of account, invoice, order for goods, order for services, receipt, official notice or publication of a company.

Statute Law Bill (No.2)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1005

The second category of amendment to the principal Act involves amendments to sections 5 and 581. Those amendments are designed to preserve the operation of the provisions of three Australian Capital Territory Ordinances which are dependent on the relevant companies legislation in force in the Australian Capital Territory at any particulartime.
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904
The amendment made by Part XXI of the Bill allows a deputy president whose present appointment to office ran until he attains the age of 70 years to be appointed as President of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission without any diminution of the right to serve until he attains the age of 70 years. The amendment ensures that if such a person is appointed as President he is not required to retire at the age of 65 years which would otherwise be the case with all new appointments to presidential office in the Commission.
Defence Service Homes Act 1918
At present, assistance under the Defence Service Homes Act 1918 cannot be given to an eligible person if he or his spouse owns another home. One effect of this provision is to exclude from assistance a person who does not own a home and who is permanently separated, but not divorced, from his spouse if that spouse owns a home. The proposed amendments will enable an advance to be made in such circumstances notwithstanding the separated spouse's ownership of a home.
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975
Part XXXVI of the Bill amends sub-section 66 (5) of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975 to overcome a practical problem which has become evident in the light of experience with the preparation of zoning plans for newly declared areas of the Marine Park.
Sub-section 66 (5) of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act provides that regulations shall not apply to an area within the Marine Park in respect of which no zoning plan is in force if more than 12 months has elapsed since that area became part of the Marine Park. Experience has shown that, because of the timing requirements in the principal Act relating to the preparation of zoning plans, the period of 12 months has proved to be insufficient. The amendment to sub-section 66 (5) made by the Bill will allow regulations to apply to such areas for a period of up to two years from the date an area becomes part of the Marine

Park. The amendment will avoid interim regulations lapsing before a zoning plan comes into effect.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976
The amendments made by Part XLIV of the Bill seek to overcome certain technical deficiencies in the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976. They will ensure that the Government's long standing policy intentions, in respect of the provision of encouragement by way of commencement grant to companies to commence systematic research and development activities, are given full effect.
The Act was intended to provide that entitlements of any company to commencement grants be restricted to five consecutive years, with this entitlement reduced by one year for each grant received under the preceding grants scheme. This policy was announced when the Act was first introduced in the House in 1976. It has been very well publicised since.
However, amendments made to the Act in 1981 did not adequately secure this policy of limited entitlement. The proposed amendments to sections 25 and 26A will overcome these deficiencies. The much simplified section 25 will establish the term of available assistance. Amended section 26A will prevent circumvention of the intent of section 25 by ensuring that the device of corporate restructuring is not available to beneficiaries as a means of securing additional assistance under the commencement grant provisions or the preceding grants scheme.
The amendments made by Part XLIV of the Bill also relate to the cut-off date for lodging of applications for commencement grants. Previously similar provision had been made for this purpose by regulation but recent legal advice has expressed doubt about the validity of that regulation. The provision now to be made in the Act will provide for a cut-off date of 30 September next after the end of the grant year. Also there will no longer be a discretion to extend that date. The amendments will provide an automatic extension for lodging an application to 30 November next in each grant year provided the company concerned had notified, before 30 September, that it would be unable to meet that cut-off date. Where an application covered by that automatic extension to 30 November is received, the amendments made by the Bill will provide for deferral of payment of a commencement grant to the next financial year.

1006 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Statute Law Bill (No.2)

Navigation Act 1912
The main feature of the amendments made by Part XLVIII of the Bill to the Navigation Act 1912 is to provide that regulations made pursuant to section 232 of the Act may empower the Minister to make orders in respect of matters able to be prescribed by the regulations made under that section. The Bill also inserts a new section 295B in the Navigation Act to give effect to an agreement between the Commonwealth Government and the Government of Victoria to exempt historic shipwrecks and relics within the waters of that State from the provisions of the Act governing the salvage and disposal of wrecks. The amendments made by clauses 176 and 177 give to historic shipwrecks and historic relics within the meaning of a law of a State or of the Northern Territory relating to such shipwrecks or relics the same exemption as have Commonwealth historic wrecks from certain provisions of the Act.
Two further amendments made by the Bill will provide procedural improvements in the administration of the Act. A ship survey authority will be able to be approved by ministerial instrument rather than by the regulations. Furthermore, dangerous goods are now to be identified for the purpose of the carriage provisions of the Act, by express reference, to the International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code, which is an extensive and frequently amended publication of the International Maritime Organisation.
Overseas Telecommunications Act 1946
Under the original provisions of the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967, laws in force in the relevant States and Territories, including Commonwealth Acts, are applied to activities connected with petroleum exploration and exploitation activities in the off-shore 'adjacent area' of the State or Territory in question as defind in the Schedules to that Act. With the entry into force of the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act 1980, however, such Commonwealth Acts will cease to apply automatically in adjacent areas. The scope of the application of Commonwealth Acts will then be a matter to be provided for specifically in the particular Act.
At present, the Overseas Telecommunications Commission (Australia) operates services to oil exploration and drilling platforms or structures on the continental shelf. Without the amendments made by part L II of the Bill to the Overseas Telecommunications Act 1946, the validity of the services provided by the Overseas Telecommunications Commission (Australia) in adjacent areas would be in doubt when the Petroleum

(Submerged Lands) Amendment Act 1980 comes into force.
These amendments therefore apply to the Overseas Telecommunications Act 1946 in the off-shore 'adjacent area' when the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act comes into force. Similar amendments are also required to the Postal Services Act 1975 in respect of services provided by the Australian Postal Commission and to the Telecommunications Act 1975, in respect of services provided by the Australian Telecommunications Commission. The necessary amendments are made by Parts LVII and LXX III respectively of the Bill.
Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979
The main purposes of the amendments made by Part Llil of the Bill to the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979 are to: Enable the Parliament House Construction Authority to delegate its powers, except for the power of delegation, to the Chief Executive or another officer of the Authority; change the title of the Executive Officer of the Authority to that of Chief Executive; and enable a resolution to be deemed to have been duly passed if a majority of the members sign a document or documents stating that they are in favour of the resolution of the Authority as set out in the document or documents.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967
In part LIV of the Bill the boundaries of the Queensland adjacent area under the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967 are amended to take into account the Australia-France Maritime Boundary Agreement signed on 4 January 1982. The Agreement requires the removal of a small portion of the Queensland adjacent area and allows the extension of the area over part of Australia's continental shelf not previously covered by the off-shore petroleum legislation.
Public Accounts Committee Act 1951
The Public Accounts Committee Act 1951 provides for the formation of sectional committees of three or more members and that the provisions applying in relation to the Committee, with some exception, apply to the sectional committees. Since the 1979 amendments to the Act difficulties have arisen in application of the quorum provision to those sectional committees which have only a small number of members. The amendments made by the Bill to section 9 of the Act specify the quorum of a sectional committee depending on the number of members of the Committee.

Customs TariffBill

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1007

Science and Industry Research Act 1949
Part LXVI of the Bill amends the provision made by the Science and Industry Research Act 1949 which established the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Organisation State committees in each of the six States. In 1981, following representation from the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory, the Government established a committee in the Northern Territory administration. The amendment made by part LXVI now puts the Northern Territory committee on a statutory basis.
Primary Industry Legislation
Finally, a number of amendments of a minor nature are made by the Bill to certain primary industry legislation designed to facilitate the operation of various statutory bodies and to make other improvements related to the administration of that legislation. These provisions are explained in the explanatory memorandum that has been circulated. The Parts in question are Parts VIII, X, XV, XXV, XXVI, XXXI, XXXII, XLII, XLIII, XLV, XLVI, LV, LVI, LVIII and L1X. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
CUSTOMS TARIFF BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (3.39)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Customs Tariff Bill 1982 now before the House provides for a new Customs Tariff Act to replace the Customs Tariff Act 1966. The requirement for a new Act results from the Government's decision to introduce a simplified tariff based on recommendations made in the Industries Assistance Commission's report of 30 November 1981 on Customs tariff simplification. The recommendations do not substantially affect the assistance afforded to Australian industry. In general the changes in rates of duty do not exceed plus or minus five percentage points with equivalent changes for rates not expressed in ad valorem terms.
The Bill contains some changes to the lAC's recommendations to take account of Government decisions taken on particular industry reports after the lAC had submitted its simplification report. It was also necessary to make a number of

other minor changes in line with the overall simplification objectives. Other variations have been made to take account of obligationsunder the General Agreement on Tariffs and TradeGATT-and bilateral trade obligations such as those under the Papua New Guinea-Australia Trade and Commercial Relations AgreementPATCRA-and the Canada-Australia Trade Agreement-CAN ATA. On 13 April the Government announced its decision to introduce a simplified tariff and indicated that the changes I have just outlined would be made to the lAC recommendations. In addition it was decided that the current tariff structures and rates of duty should continue for the time being where goods are covered by an lAC report not implemented at 2 July 1982 or due for report before I January 1983. It is intended that the new Act should come into operation on I January 1983. Amendments to take account of government decisions made before then, together with amendments to provide for New Zealand rates and some developing country rates yet to be decided, will be made by Gazette notice after proclamation of but before the date of operation. In its announcement earlier this year, the Government recognised that the Australian tariff had become, for the public and private sectors alike, an increasingly difficult document to work with.
This Bill includes a major revision of the sections of the current Act and a reduction in the number of schedules of rates of duty. Provisions for parts directions and concentrates orders have been eliminated, together with all references to support duties and primage duties. Significant reductions have been made in the number of tariff classifications and the number of different rates of duty contained in the present tariff. As lAC reports not yet finalised or still under consideration are implemented, it can be anticipated there will be further reductions. In summary, the simplified Customs tariff is easier to read with less complex schedules, and improved precision and clarity in description of goods and rates of duty. I am confident that users will find the new tariff better to work with than the present document. I know my colleague, the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) who will lead for the Opposition, would wish to join me in warmly congratulating the team of officers who have taken on the task of introducing, for this notion, a simplified tariff. As I said, this Bill replaces the Act which has been in existence since 1966. I believe all officers in the Department are to be complimented along with parliamentary counsel. We have made a giant step forward in giving the business community of Australia a simplified

1008 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Customs Legislation

tariff from which to work for the benefit of their business and for the benefit of the community. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
CUSTOMS TARIFF (ANTI-DUMPING) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (3.43)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill amends the Customs Tariff (AntiDumping) Act 1975. It is complementary to the Customs Tariff Bill 1982 which I have just introduced. The Bill amends sections 8 and 10 of the principal Act where references are made to schedules of the Customs Tariff Act which have been renumbered in the Customs Tariff Bill 1982. I have much pleasure in commending the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
CUSTOMS TARIFF (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL 1982
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (3.44)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill amends the following Acts: The Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977; the Consular Privileges and Immunities Act 1972; the Customs Act 1901; and the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935. The Bill is complementary to the Customs Tariff Bill 1982 which I have just introduced and, with the previous Bill, makes the Customs trilogy. The amendments take into account the redrafting of the sections and renumbering of the schedules to the Customs Tariff Act, to which references are made in the various Acts. The only change of substance is the redrafting of the sections 151 and 151 A of the Customs Act 1901. These new sections need to be read in connection with the new section 15 of the Customs Tariff Act 1982 when determining the conditions under which certain

goods from specified countries are eligible for preferential tariff treatment. I commend the Bill to the House. I think that the officers who put these Bills together can enjoy themselves tonight.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
TARIFF PROPOSALS
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce) (3.47)-1 move:
Customs Tariff Proposals No. 20 (1982).
The Customs tariff proposals I have just tabled relate to proposed alterations to the Customs Tariff Act 1966. Proposals No. 20 (1982), which operates from tomorrow, contains tariff changes resulting from the Government's decisions on recommendations by the Industries Assistance Commission in its reports on: Miscellaneous manufacturing group B: Dolls, toys and models; miscellaneous manufacturing group C: Articles of adornment including clothing and toilet accessories, et cetera; and fluorescent and filament lamps. In respect of miscellaneous manufacturing group B: dolls, toys and models, the Government has decided, except for some minor variations, to accept the Industries Assistance Commission's recommendations. For most goods under reference the lAC recommended that the general tariff rate reduced from 34 per cent to a rate of 20 per cent. The Government has decided to adopt a program of phased reduction to give the industry time to adjust to the lower duties. The duties to apply are 30 per cent general on implementation, 25 per cent after one year and 20 per cent after a further year. These reductions should assist in facilitating an orderly adjustment of production and related assembly and packaging operations especially on the part of those sheltered workshops involved. There are many throughout Australia. Young retarded and handicapped people in sheltered workshops play an important role in this industry. 'Toy' books and microscopes will continue to be dutiable at minimum rates and 'toy' radio remote control apparatus at 30 per cent general. In respect of 'toy' radio receivers the Government considered that the slight tariff simplification that would result from the lAC's recommended rate of 30 per cent general does not justify departing from the uniform rate of 35 per cent for all other radio receivers.
In respect of miscellaneous manufacturing group C: articles of adornment, including clothing and toilet accessories et cetera, the Government has decided in most cases on long term rates in accordance with the recommendations of the lAC.

Tariff Proposals

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1009

The long term rate of 20 per cent on buttons of synthetic and certain other materials will be phased in over a period of two years. Local production of these types of buttons has been assisted by specific rates which have provided a very high rate of assistance when applied to the cheaper utility type of button. In the main area of local production immediate introduction of the long term general rate could have led to a rapid increase in imports of this type of button and to a substantial consequential disruption of the local industry. The Government has decided that local producers should be allowed time to adjust to the revised duty regime. The phasing arrangements will not apply to button blanks.
In respect of picture frames imported with paintings, drawings and pastels executed entirely by hand, the Government has decided that minimum rates should apply instead of the 15 per cent recommended by the Commission. The general rates to apply to the goods under reference are: Buttons other than those referred to earlier, blanks for buttons, certain press fasteners, slide fasteners and parts there for, studs, cuff links, combs and hair slides will be dutiable at 20 per cent with the by-laws for button blanks being cancelled.
I come now to lay figures. I like to try to understand what these matters are about.
Mr John Brown-What are lay figures?
Mr HODGMAN-I am about to inform the honourable member. The words 'lay figures' puzzled me somewhat. I sought from the Department a definition of what was a lay figure. The reference is to 'lay figures other than tailor's dummies '. I can assist the House by saying that, according to the definition, lay figures are representations of the human body or parts of the human body-for example, the head, trunk, legs, arms and hands-used to display articles of clothing, headgear, stockings, gloves, et cetera. I do not take it further than that. But that is what lay figures are. I hope that everybody in the House and in the rest of Australia is now fully educated. Lay figures other than tailor's dummies will be dutiable at 25 per cent. Other goods covered by the report will be dutiable at minimum rates.
In respect of fluorescent and filament lamps the Government has accepted the lAC's recommendations for long term assistance. Fluorescent lamps will now be dutiable at 20 per cent and filament lamps will continue to be dutiable at 10 per cent. The previous long term rates on fluorescent lamps and filament lamps were 15 per cent and free-plus the 2 per cent special duty-respectively.

Mr Young-How much will that make them in the shop?
Mr HODGMAN-I am sure that my wife and the wife of the honourable member will find out a lot quicker than we will. These rates were subject to short term additional rates of 10 per cent and 8 per cent respectively since I April 1981 following the Government's consideration of an interim report by the Commission.
The proposals also contain tariff changes exempting sodium nitrate mixed or combined with potassium nitrate and horseshoe nails from the 2 per cent special duty. These changes are necessary to meet Australia's international trade commitments under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Administrative amendments are also contained in the proposals. The wording of tariff item 42.03.3 is aligned with the format used elsewhere in the tariff, and the scope of tariff item 60.05.15 is clarified to remove a tariff classification-quota category anomaly which has occurred. This amendment ensures that those knitted tops which are the like of shirts and blouses are dutiable at the same rate as shirts and blouses.
A comprehensive summary setting out the nature of the changes has been prepared and is being circulated to honourable members. I commend the proposals to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting the Minister for Industry and Commerce)-For the information of honourable members. I present, on behalf of my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services, the reports of the Industries Assistance Commission on miscellaneous manufacturing group B, dolls, toys and models and miscellaneous manufacturing group C, articles of adornment including clothing and toilet accessories, fluorescent and filament lamps.
REMUNERATION AND ALLOWANCES AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 19 August, on motion by MrNewman:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (3.55)-ln supporting this proposal, I have a few comments to make in relation to some views which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm

I010 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Remuneration andAllowances Bill

Fraser) has expressed on this matter, that is, specifically, his proposal that the rate of increase in the salaries of parliamentarians this year, cut back below the rate of increase in the cost of living, should be seen as a sterling example of wage restraint to be pursued by the rest of the community.
First of all, I make it clear that the Opposition supports the proposals which are before the House. It should be noted for the record that, over many years, if one traces the graph outlining movements in the consumer price index as a measurement of inflation in this country against salary movements for members of parliament, the movements in the salaries of parliamentarians have been below the movements in the cost of living. Similarly, movements in the salaries of parliamentarians over time, as a rate of increase, have been below the rate of the increase in average earnings. In those circumstances, we find no embarrassment at all in accepting or supporting the proposal which is before the House.
The proposal is for a 7 per cent increase in the salaries of members of parliament not effective until I October, which effectively means that the rate of increase is cut back to something like 5 per cent. That takes place in a year in which it is expected that the cost of living will move by something like II per cent. The Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Bill 1982 also makes provision for adjustments in other emoluments provided for members of parliament and in the salaries and emoluments provided for senior public servants and members of the judiciary. We quibble in no way at all with the proposals which are before the House.
However, I wish to dwell for a few minutes on the Prime Minister's proposal that this rate of increase of 7 per cent in the basic salary of parliamentarians for the period for which it applieseffectively 5 per cent over a full year-is a compelling example for the rest of the community to follow. I find it no such thing. Certainly it is no substitute in any way at all, even as an ingredient, in some sort of proposed wages policy. I am not quite sure what the Prime Minister is talking about when he talks about this and a range of adjustments which took place in the Budget in connection with income tax and certain welfare benefits as being a wages policy. They are no such thing.
Let us look at the issue of wage restraint. Certainly the rate of increase of 7 per cent for members of parliament for the period in which it applies or 5 per cent over the year falls well below the rate of inflation. Let us look at this in money

terms and focus on it in the way in which average members of the community would, that is, address themselves to it in the light of the experiences that they have had from day to day as they live in our society. They see us seeking to moralise about wage restraint on our part when we will get an increase of nearly $50 a week in our income.
A tradesman, for instance, on $250 a week, being expected to accept an increase of only 7 per cent in his wage over the course of this year, would see his income falling by $10 a week in real spending terms. I do not think anyone-certainly no one in this House-could suggest that $250 a week represents an ample inco,me for a very generous, comfortable standard of living for a man supporting a wife and two children today, more especially with the obligations of paying off a house, Already the interest rate policies of the Government-they are the interest rate policies of this Government-are designed to attract money from overseas into this country by establishing an extraordinarily high interest rate regime. The purpose is to paper over a very big hole in the balance of trade and the balance in current account to give an overall balance in the balance of payments. That is a very high cost for the rest of the community to pay. It represents about $20 a week extra in housing mortgage repayments. It is avoidable through other measures which I outlined in the course of my speech on the Budget.
The same family will be expected to pay an extra $2 a week in health insurance because of the Government's squeeze on State governments in relation to the provision of funds for their public hospitals. The consequence of that is that charges for non-public ward forms of inpatient treatment will be, and in some cases have been, substantially increased. Allowing for the fact that there are fairly stringent means tests for non-paying public ward treatment in all States except Queensland and Tasmania, there is very little choice for most families as to whether they pay this extra health insurance, The extra $2 will further deplete their income. The point I make is that in many ways it is an offensive nonsense for the Prime Minister to stand on any platform available and claim that we are exercising wage restraint when we will get an extra $48 a week and to go on and say that people on moderate to middle incomes should exercise similar restraint and settle for a 7 per cent increase. That means that they will suffer a reduction of $10 a week in their spending power in real terms. That is a savage depletion of people's living standards, Nothing that the Prime Minister says can be interpreted as a wages policy.

Remuneration and Allowances Bill

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1011

In any event, for a prices and incomes policy, which is the only thing we can credibly talk about, to be put in place it must cover things besides wages and salaries. It must cover non-wage income, profits and prices and it certainly must involve an effective smashing of the tax avoidance and tax evasion industry. That industry alone, as we graphically saw this week, apart from involving the mandarins of the Liberal Party at various State branch offices such as Western Australia, means that tax evaders are evading something like $3,500m a year in income tax and the avoiders are evading a similar amount, some $7,000m a year. It means that ordinary families have to pay it-that is pay an extra $35 a week on average for Australian households. Unless the Government cracks down and smashes this industry as one of the many ingredients of a fair and mutually agreed upon prices and incomes policy it is nonsense to talk about wage restraint.
The Australian Labor Party has been putting in place a wages and incomes policy and it recognises the case for justice, for fairness and for action on all those fronts I mentioned. The Budget proposals are derisory, just as their so-called benefits are illusory. My colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) has put together a series of unassailable calculations which show that a man supporting a wife and two children on average weekly earnings will be less than $3.90 a week better off in November when these benefits commence. That is a one per cent increase in spending power for someone on average weekly earnings in a year when the cost ofliving will increase by more than 11 per cent.
The trade union movement has sophisticated research units backing it. Some of the best qualified young people graduating from our tertiary institutions work in those research units. They are backed up by an array of other information sources. They quickly divine the fabrication behind the presentation of this sort of Budget. They immediately recognise that it is nothing more than a thin confidence trick. Accordingly, they will not cop this sort of moralising posturing, as empty as it is, on the part of the Prime Minister that he is giving them some big deal. He is giving them some big nonsense. Until the Government gets down to productive discussion with the trade union movement based upon the presumption that there is mutual respect between the consulting parties and until that is projected in those negotiations, this country will get nowhere. The Labor Party is getting somewhere. It has made a lot of headway in respect of a prices and incomes policy. The principles we are adopting in a general sense and our approach have

been endorsed by the Australian Council of Trade Unions. Much more detailed negotiation is to be undertaken. Unless we have a prices and incomes policy in operation, a cornerstone of successful economic management has been yanked out of the system. Being wrenched out of the system inthat way, the system will distort and lurch badly.
Unless we have this policy in place it is sheer fantasy ever to expect, in the difficult economic conditions prevailing here and internationally, to work for sustained growth of a higher order than we have been used to in the past few years. Growth will work. It worked in 1981. We saw a five per cent economic growth then; we saw employment levels coming down and the work force start to grow; we saw more prosperity than we had seen for quite a while. It was generated by a series of measures which expanded demand, but it was snuffed out. In 1981-82, in the wake of this, wage movements started to accelerate and ran over the contractionary measures of the Government. Why did they start to accelerate? Very simply, it was because in the past seven years the Fraser Government has applied a series of taxation policies and pricing policies on things such as health insurance, petrol, sales tax and excise duties which, apart from being very inflationary, also depleted people's living standards.
The trade union movement with its research knows that for an average family today to have the same standard of living in terms of real spending power it would have to have something like $40 a week more than it is getting today. In those circumstances any time economic recovery starts to show up there will be wage pressure as wage earners apply that pressure to their union movement to try to restore living standards, and the pressure comes from families in this country. If we had a prices and incomes policy we would have agreed guidelines. While real living standards could be sustained the rate of adjustment and progress could proceed according to those guidelines. Offsets could be built into the system to make allowances for benefits which are contributed. Our universal health insurance scheme would provide cheaper health insurance for three out of four families, and cover everyone in the community. We would have a better retirement allowance system. Benefits of that nature would be covered, as would reductions in the tax regime-real reductions, not the Mickey Mouse ones we have at present which, as I have illustrated, do not take us very far at all. It is very important that we understand that and get away from the empty propagandising of the Prime Minister. It deludes no family which is trying to make an ever-shrinking wage packet do as much as it

1012 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Remuneration and Allowances Bill

did seven years ago. Mr Deputy Speaker, I have nothing further to add to the matter.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (4.10)~1 will not delay the House more than a few seconds. It is proposed to move an omnibus amendment. I will seek leave to move it in one part because it covers a number of parts of the Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Bill.
Leave granted.
Mr SCHOLES~ The purpose of the amendment is to transfer the power of disallowance in respect of decisions of the Remuneration Tribunal for the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly to the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly. In this Bill the Government is, in fact, transferring powers relating to Norfolk Island to the Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly. This amendment is in exactly the same terms and achieves exactly the same purpose in respect of the Australian Capital Territory. I apologise to the Leader of the House (Sir James Killen) for not having distributed the amendments. We have just received them. I think it is appropriate that the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly should accept responsibility for determining whether it will accept the determinations of the Tribunal in exactly the same way as the Parliament accepts responsibility in respect of conditions fixed for this Parliament. The Government has done that in relation to other bodies which have a legislative or an elected function. The amendment has the effect of transferring to the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly the power to disallow determinations of the Tribunal in respect of the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly. I move:
(I) Page 6, clause 14, line 7, leave out 'section is', insert 'sections are'.
(2) Page 7, clause 14, after proposed new section 7A, add the following section:
Determinations relating to certain Australian Capital Territory public office holders
'7B. (I) In this section-
'Chairman of Committees' means the Chairman of Committees of the House of Assembly;
'House of Assembly' means the House of Assembly of the Australian Capital Territory;

'Minister' means the Minister for the time being administering the Seat of Government (Administration) Act 1910;
'Speaker' means the Speaker of the House of Assembly; and
'the Territory' means the Australian Capital Territory.
'(2) Where the Tribunal makes a determination under subsection 7 (3) relating to remuneration or allowances payable to a person who holds an office in or in connection with the House of Assembly that can be held only by a member of the House of Assembly, the Tribunal shall furnish a copy of the determination to the Minister.
'(3) The Minister shall furnish a copy of a determination furnished to him under sub-section (2) to the Speaker or, if there is no Speaker or the Speaker is absent from the Territory, the Chairman of Committees.
'(4) The Speaker or the Chairman of Committees, as the case may be, shall cause a copy of a determination furnished to him under sub-section (3) to be laid before, the House of Assembly within the period of 2 months after the determination is received by him.
'(5) If the House of Assembly, within the period of 2 months after a copy of a determination has been laid before the House of Assembly, passes a resolution disapproving of the determination, then--
(a) if the determination has not come into operation-the determination shall not come into operation; or
(b) if the determination has come into operation-the determination shall not have any force or effect in respect of the day on which the resolution was passed or any period after that day.
,(6) If, before the expiration of the period of 2 months after a copy of a determination has been laid before the House of Assembly-
(a) the House of Assembly holds its last meeting before a general election; and
(b) at the expiration of that meeting the House of Assembly has not passed a resolution disapproving of the determination,
the copy of the determination shall, for the purposes of subsection (5), be deemed to have been laid before the House of Assembly at the first meeting of the House of Assembly held after the general election.
Sir JAMES KILLEN (Moreton~ Vice President of the Executive Council) (4,12)~The Government does not accept the amendment. From what I have heard from the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) it could raise implications going far beyond the immediacy of his amendment. The Government has not had an opportunity to consider all of those implications, As a consequence the Government rejects the amendment.
Amendments negatived.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Sir James Killen)~by leave~read a third time,

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1013

AIR NAVIGATION (CHARGES) AMENDMENT BILL 1982
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 19 August, on motion by MrFife:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
(Quorum formed).
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (4.15)-The purpose of the Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Bill 1982 is to provide for increases in air navigation charges of 20 per cent in respect of domestic, trunk and regional airlines and 12 per cent for general aviation. We do not oppose the Bill as it is part of the Budget package. I stress that application of these increases will be from I October 1982, a date two months earlier than the traditional date of increases in air navigation charges. This Government then will grab an additional two months revenue-an extra $2m-from the domestic and general aviation sectors which will come, in fact, from passengers pockets. The latest imposts will increase cost pressures on the domestic airlines at a time when the industry is suffering an economic downturn and when traffic is almost stagnant. The increases will add at least I per cent to the overall operating costs of the airlines. The airlines will therefore seek to raise domestic airfares to recover the additional air navigation charge costs and this fare increase will, I believe, follow another which is already in the pipeline or is about to enter the pipeline of air fare increases.
The air navigation charge increases maintain the continuing attack of this Government on the domestic aviation industry. Instead of encouraging the airlines to be innovative in their marketing approach the Government is intent on adding to airline operating costs and ripping off air passengers through air fare increases that emanate from increases in government charges. Since the Fraser Government seized power in November 1975 there have been 14 air fare increases, the cumulative total of which is a massive 220 per cent. The effect of those increases and the effect of this Government's policies is that air travel is being increasingly priced beyond the reach of Australians. The accelerating level of air fares has hit hardest those people who live remote from the major capital cities, people in the north and far north of Queensland, such as Cairns, Townsville, the surrounding towns; in the Northern Territory; in the Pilbara; and in the north west of our continent.
The tourist industry throughout Australia, already suffering from government induced economic stagnation and inflation, is being further

damaged by the irresponsible high air fare policies of this Government. The detrimental impact of the Fraser Government's mismanagement can be seen in the fact that the number of air passengers carried in 1981-82 increased by a meagre 0.8 per cent over the previous year 1980-81. The hall marks of the Fraser Government's administration of aviation are incompetence and maladministration. We have seen this over the past seven years in the understaffing of the Department of Transport, the degradation of the supervision of air safety standards, the infamous treatment accorded the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares, the Walter ultra-large fire tenders fiasco, the crippling shortages of air traffic controllers that led to the closure of Brisbane airport, the chaos that has been caused in the air services to Canberra-our national capitaland the massive 220 per cent increase in air fares since 1975,just to mention a few examples.
However the Government's irresponsible attitude to transport climaxed last May in the sacking of the Minister for Transport from his aviation responsibilities and in chopping of the ministry of Transport into a separate ministry of Transport and Construction and a ministry of Aviation. This action was not the result of any reasoned research or a competent assessment of national transport needs. It was not the result of representations from industry or the public. Rather it was the result of widespread dissatisfaction with the performance of the then Minister for Transport-the present Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt)-and brawling in the government Caucus room. The Liberals, on the one hand, wanted this Minister removed from transport while the National Country Party members, on the other hand, were not going to let control of road funds out of the hands of their Minister, especially when he was the kind of Minister who could ensure that scarce national road funds could be allocated to little used roads in his own electorate in preference to important coal export roads which were carrying 50 times as much traffic.
The creation of two separate ministries to handle transport administration is a backward step. In no comparable Western democracy is national transport administration split between separate ministries. The fact that it has been split in Australia where transport is absolutely vital to our economic performance, shows the low priority that national transport policy is now accorded by this Government. Let me, howev~r, compliment the former Minister for Transport In that he did have the wisdom to implement the

1014 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

Australian Labor Party's policies of having a separate organisation to set air fares and providing financial incentives to assist the expansion of Australia's international shipping fleet. They were two good things that he did. On this side of the House we say: 'Thank you, Mr Minister, for implementing our policies.' To his detriment, he confirmed earlier this year the Government's lack of concern about the level of air fares. He said that I should have known that air fares were not a concern of the Government. I know that very well
and I repeat it to the House and to the people of Australia.
His colleague the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife), who is at the table, has the unique distinction of being the Minister who busily lauded the performance of the Narcotics Bureau, then under his supervision, while it was being steadily infiltra-
ted by criminals and people were being murdered. He is the Minister who sits on the edge of his seat alert and attentive every time the name Nugan Hand is mentioned in this place. He is also the Minister who suddenly discovered that there was a problem with Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. We welcome this new-found concern for Sydney Airport displayed by the Minister and the Government. It is rather interesting that this Minister was also a Minister in the Askin Government in New South Wales when it obstructed the attempts by the then Whitlam Government to de-
velop a co-operative solution to the problems of Mascot airport. In fact, he was the Minister for Transport in New South Wales for some part of his career. But that is enough of the two Ministers to whom transport and aviation have now been handed down.
I mentioned earlier that general aviation would
incur a 12 per cent increase in air navigation charges under the provisions of this Bill. General aviation is already struggling under the burden of increased sales taxes from last year's Budget and this year's Budget and from increased fuel and wages costs, all of which are combined with a fall-off in demand for the services of general aviation. There have already been widespread retrenchments in general aviation. The increased sales taxes and the increased air navigation charges provided for in this Bill will exacerbate the industry's plight. I mentioned that last weekend Mr Bill Bedser, the Vice-President Administration, of the General Aviation Association (Australia), who is recognised as an able administrator in the industry, called for an independent evaluation of costs in different types of aviation. In the report, which I will not read, in the Australian of 25 August 1982 Mr Bedser referred to the need for an independent analysis of the cost

attribution among the various sectors of the aviation industry. He referred to the need for vigilance in ensuring that there was efficiency of provision of the service that aviation needs. He referred to the need for an outside group of people to look inside into the Public Service, to look inside into the attribution of the costs of the services that are provided to the various sectors of the industry. As I mentioned, those remarks are provided in detail in the report of yesterday's Aus-
tralian that I referred to earlier. I believe that Mr Bedser's remarks were pertinent and appropriate because general aviation has been treated as the poor relation of the aviation industry during the seven disastrous years of Fraserism and its misguided policies. Mr Bedser's call for an independent evaluation of aviation sectors is sensible and reasonable. It ought to be adopted.
The provision of airport facilities, safety and meteorological and air navigation services generate the main expenditure that the imposition of air navigation charges seeks to recover. It is essential, therefore, that the provision of these services is responsibly planned and that those services are efficiently provided. Neither of these criteria has been met by the Fraser Government or its conservative predecessors since World War II. During the 30 years of conservative administration since 1949 this Government and its conservative predecessors have not been able to develop a comprehensive national airport program. Decisions on airport development are made on an ad hoc, unplanned basis, the main factor in the decision making process being the date of the next election and the narrowness of the margin by which the Government holds a seat. Scant regard has been paid to the priorities expressed by the industry or to the impact on the air fare structure of the future costs being generated by airport investment or by the provision of the services that are involved.
Let me stress: There is no strict accountability for the financial performance of the major airports. There is no attempt, nor has there been any attempt by this Government or its conservative predecessors, at a reconciliation of the costs and revenues of major airport operations. The Government knows how to hound the pensioners getting 20c a week too much or how to knock off benefits if somebody's income rises 10c above the fringe benefit means test level but the Government does not know how and does not want to reconcile the massive expenditure, on the one hand, and revenue on the other hand, that is involved in the provision of airport services.
Whilst classes of airport revenues can be identified to a fair extent from departmental accounts,

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1015

classes and apportionment of airport expenditure cannot be similarly identified. One would have thought that a government that asserts that it has a commercial background, that asserts that it is able to manage competently and that asserts that it understands enterprise and commerce, would ensure that there was proper accounting and identification of expenditures and that such procedures would be a basic requirement for the management of the millions upon millions of dollars involved in the provision of airport services, the cost of which air navigation charges seek to recover. The failure to provide detailed accounting for airport management means pork-barrelling decisions and hand-outs to favoured regions, and also that inefficiencies and waste can be more easily concealed. The result is that the industry is loaded with avoidable costs which at the end of the day have to be reflected in, on the one hand, higher air fares or, on the other hand, poorer services for air travellers in this country.
The problems of Sydney Airport are a prime example of the Fraser Government's incompetence. For 15 years the conservatives have fiddled with the airport needs of Sydney, preferring to politicise the issues involved rather than seek a co-operative and sensible solution to the problem. I mentioned earlier the new Minister for Aviation. He was a member of the Askin Government during the time the Whitlam Government was in power back in 1972-75 when it was seeking to find a sensible, co-operative solution to Sydney's air transport needs. It seems quite a long time ago. The conservatives then followed the same track-politicisation in Sydney in the New South Wales Parliament and here. Even today the Country Party-the party of the Minister for Transport and Construction, the former Minister for Transport-is conducting a political campaign throughout New South Wales country towns and local government bodies in an attempt to embarrass politically the Wran Government in New South Wales. Again politics is being given preference over proper planning and common sense in the provision of airport services.
I make it clear that to improve the provision of airport facilities and services a Labor government when it comes into office, whether it is this year or next year, will establish a national airports authority. That authority will have the responsibility for planning, developing and operating the major airports. It will have its own charter and it will for the first time be able to ensure that there is strict and full accountability for the financial performance of our major airports. It will give priority to the provision of efficient, improved services to the public and to the aviation industry.

I mentioned earlier the detrimental impact on Australia of this Government's high air fare policy, and how its policies have produced a massive 220 per cent increase in air fares since 1975. But there are other damaging aspects of the Government's attitude to air services that worsen the situation for those people for whom air travel is essential and is often the only means of transport. As air fares are forced higher and higher by this Government's mismanagement of the economy and by its ever increasing charges on the industry, it is imperative that every opportunity is utilised to minimise costs. Again, in this area the Government's performance has been deplorable.
For several years the Opposition-the Australian Labor Party-has pushed for the introduction of frills-free air services. By frills-free services we mean simple, safe, punctual services at the cheapest possible fare and those people who want the expensive extras pay the full cost of those extras. We believe that air services as a major segment of long distance public passenger transport should be available to as wide a range of the community as possible. We believe that Australian families should have the choice between low cost, safe, simple air services and the high cost premium-type services with their free alcohol and specialty foods for those who want them. In each case the fares charged for each type of service should fully reflect the cost involved in providing those services. Presently, the situation is that first class air passengers are still being subsidised by the fares paid by other passengers.
When Trans Australia Airlines offered a trial frills-free service at a 50 per cent off the standard fare rate last April it was rushed by passengers. Of course it was rushed. The frills-free half price fares enabled many thousands of Australians to visit their friends, to rejoin their families and to see their loved ones in other cities and towns. The frills-free concept-the 50 per cent off fare-has widespread support in the community. I believe its costs could be reduced even further on selected routes by the replacement of the prepaid fare, reserved seat system with, for example, a service with a set timetable where people find their own seat and paying their own fares after boarding the aircraft on a shuttle type air service along the lines of that which operates in some of the other Western democracies. This type of service works well in the United Kingdom and the United States of America. I have seen it in operation. I believe that at the very least it is the type of service which, with its minimum type fares, could be introduced on a trial basis on travel between some of the eastern ports of this country.

1016 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

Unfortunately, despite the success of TAA's frills-free service, it was frowned upon by this Government. The chief executive of Ansett Airlines of Australia, Sir Peter Abeles, had labelled the frills-free fares as a gimmick. Although Ansett fell into line with the frills-free service it was opposed to the concept. Trans Australia Airlines' analysis of the April experience showed a considerable increase in new patronage of air services. About two out of three of those passengers who travelled on the 50 per cent off fare during April were new customers. They were additions to the passenger market. However, as I have said, Ansett did not want the frills-free service. Within this Government-remember that this Government is a captive of the proprietors of the Ansett grouppressure was brought to bear to discourage Trans Australia Airlines from further reintroduction of the 50 per cent off fare or the frills-free service.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! I interrupt the honourable member. He is ranging fairly widely in his remarks. I invite him to be a little more relevant to the Bill before the House which, by its very nature, is relatively restrictive.
Mr MORRIS-Mr Deputy Speaker, with your forbearance, let me say that the record will show that on every other occasion when this type of Bill dealing with this kind of legislation-the imposition of air navigation charges and the ramifications that holds for the provision of air transport services-has been debated, these types of matter have been raised. I draw your attention to the Minister's speech in which he refers to recovery rates, the impact on the aviation infrastructure, the costs being paid by the airlines and the impact on the total airline policy.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-That is understood. It was on that premise that the Chair heard the honourable member thus far. He is invited to proceed.
Mr MORRIS-With respect, my remarks will be directed in the same direction; that is, the provision of services.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I will hear the honourable member further.
Mr MORRIS-Some honourable members opposite predictably may try to deny what I have just said but I believe that the facts speak for themselves. The 50 per cent fares did not return despite the success of the April experiment and TAA has now been obliged to follow Ansett's lead in concentrating on massive advertising campaigns aimed at the upper end of the travel market. This strategy, which the airlines now pursue,

is directed at changing market shares when, instead, at a time of economic stagnation and increasing costs for the industry, the industry needs more than anything else not a change in market shares but an expansion in the market. More people should be able to use the services, the costs of which this Bill now seeks to recover from the airline industry. Again we can see the results of the Government's determination to protect the interests of Ansett, no matter what the cost is to the public. Why should it not? As I have said on many occasions, the Government's political survival depends on the proprietors of the Ansett transport group. As one Government member said this morning, 'this Government will be remembered as the Government which allowed its officers to run a brothel from the office'. That will be to its detriment.
I want to turn to another cost aspect of the airline industry-a matter about which this Government remains mute. I refer to the recent television advertisements by Ansett which depict the DC9 passenger liner as being decrepit and, by inference, unsafe. The DC9 aircraft has a great record of performance around the world and until recently was used by both Ansett and TAA. I find the derogatory type of advertising concernedparticularly that displayed on television-to be negative and fear-inducing. As I said earlier, at a time when the airlines desperately need new passengers this type of advertising is more likely to discourage intending first time air travellers from going by air rather than attracting them to travel by air instead of some other mode of transport. I understand that in some countries derogatory advertising of this nature is prohibited. I certainly do not believe that its cost should be borne by air passengers. It is a cost that passengers and the industry could well do without. Let the airlines concentrate on the positive side of the services they provide.
I want to deal now more specifically with the provision of air services to and within Western Australia. We have seen from time to time a phoney campaign from a number of Government back benchers partly against their Government's obnoxious two-airline agreement and partly in relation to air fares between the east and west of Australia. On both counts the campaign has been a masquerade designed to deceive Western Australians. Let me list the facts. This nation will be burdened with the inflexibility of the two airlineagreement and its heavy protection for Ansett for at least seven years. The same members who mutely endorse the long-standing monopoly of the principal intrastate services in Western Australia by the Ansett subsidiary Airlines of

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1017

Western Australia at the same time are carpingly critical of the performance of Trans Australia Airlines. We should remember that they, as members of the Government of the day, are responsible for the management of that airline. Those same members constantly criticise eastwest air fares but are mute on the level of fares of Airlines of Western Australia. I point out that it costs almost as much to fly north to south in Western Australia as it does to fly east to west across Australia. In fact, on a distance travelled basis, the north to south journey in Western Australia or vice versa is much more expensive than is the journey across Australia. We believe that TAA should have the right to operate intrastate air services within the boundaries of Western Australia.
At present the State Government, to protect its political friends, has denied TAA entry on to
those services and, therefore, has denied Western Australians the right to freedom of choice in the air services they wish to use. Various Western Australian Liberal Governments have, over the years, continually harassed and denied TAA's right to operate on intrastate air routes. Western Australian travellers have suffered through higher air fares and freight charges. The entry of TAA to the northern route to Darwin some years ago, after several years of court disputation, immediately brought competition to that route. It immediately resulted in the lowering of air fares and the improvement of overall services. There was an end to the take it or leave it service that had been provided by the State operator to that point and,
most importantly, for a limited part of the routes the people of Western Australia were given some choice.
For too long the Liberal State Government and this Government have made political decisions on domestic aviation within Western Australia without any thoughts as to the needs of the users, the Western Australian public, and Western Australian taxpayers who pay the costs of providing the infrastructure services that the airlines use. An incoming Federal Labor government would encourage competition in air services where economically possible and encourage TAA to operate intra-State air services on the main internal Western Australian routes. It would do so for one basic reason, that is, to give the people of Western Australia a fair go in the provision of services within that State. The tourist industry needs it and the people of the State need it. The people who have to live in the north and who are isolated from their families need a fair deal in services in Western Australia. Let us have an end to the cant in this place from honourable members from Western Australia with their blinkered eyes who

see only across Australia. They cannot see up and down in their own State and know that the people in Western Australia are being fleeced when it comes to air travel within that State.
Another damaging aspect of this Government's administration of aviation is its endorsement of
the declared policy of Ansett Airlines to confine ongoing travellers from regional feeder and commuter air services to the Ansett jet network. The so-called free market members opposite and this so-called free enterprise Government know full well that Ansett Airlines already owns Airlines of Western Australia, Airlines of New South Wales, Airlines of South Australia and Airline of Northern Australia. They know that Vodas Pty Ltd, which is owned by Sir Peter Abeles and Mr Rupert Murdoch, has purchased the Aeropelican Intercity Commuter Air Service operating be-
tween Belmont and Sydney, the fastest growing and most profitable commuter service in Australia. They already know that Bushies of Queensland-Bush Pilot Airways Ltd, which has now been changed to Air Queensland-has entered into an exclusive arrangement for oncarriage of travellers with Ansett Airlines, whereas previously Bushies allowed its ongoing traffic to be split between Ansett and TAA. Similarly, Wings Australia, whose head office is in the TNT building at Alexandria and which operates extensive commuter services in New South Wales, also feeds its passengers exclusively into the Ansett jet network. Just a few days ago a former senior Ansett executive, Mr Brian Grey, gained control of East-West Airlines, the last remaining regional regular public transport operator outside the Ansett umbrella. East-West Airlines has traditionaHy operated in association with Trans Australia Airlines and we would be strongly opposed to any change in those arrangements.
This Government's two-airline agreement provides for equal capacity between T AA and Ansett on the major air routes. It is thus predicated upon passengers having equal access to both jet networks. The monopoly policy being pursued by
Ansett, which is denying passengers ready choice between the airlines' jet networks, we believe is contrary to the public interest and it undermines the Government's own two-airline agreement policy. In strict commercial terms, its endorsement by this Government constitutes a further featherbedding of the Abeles-Murdoch group at the expense of the publicly-owned airline Trans Australia Airlines.
In summary, this Bill continues the upward pressure on aviation industry costs. It will force air fares higher and higher under the policy of this Government. It will make greater difficulty for

1018 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

the general aviation industry. On coming to government, the Australian Labor Party will encourage the expansion of low cost air fares. We will establish a national airports authority to plan, develop and operate major airports. We will ensure that there is proper accountability of infrastructure costs and their attribution. We will ensure that there will be improved efficiency in the provision of services to the Australian aviation industry and, most of all, that travellers in this country, after many years of conservative administration, will get a fair deal.
Mr GROOM (Braddon) (4.45)-The honourble member for Shortland (Mr Morris) made quite a number of reasonable points-he made many points with which I would totally disagree-but he spoiled his speech, I believe, by his personal attacks, on the former Minister responsible for aviation, Mr Hunt, on the present Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) and on the very active members from Western Australia on this side of the House who have taken a very active and concerned interest in the whole subject of air fares and airline services, particularly between Western Australia and the eastern States. In the Budget Speech last Tuesday night, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) announced that there would be some increases in navigation charges-a 20 per cent increase for domestic trunk and regional airlines and an increase of 12 per cent for general aviation aircraft. The Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Bill which we are now debating gives legislative effect to the announcement made by the Treasurer last Tuesday. Of course, the increases will apply from I October this year.
Total rt"venue from air navigation charges in 1982-83 is estimated to amount to $119.3m compared with $101.8m from this source in 1981-82. That is an increase of $17.5m. Of that increase $7.lm is attributable to the payment early in 1982-83 of amounts payable in respect of 1981-82 and the balance of $1 O.4m relates to the full effect of the 1981-82 variations to the charges, industry growth and increased revenue resulting from the increases in the charges which are now proposed. By themselves, the increased rates of charges for which this Bill provides are expected to yield additional revenue of $8.4m in 1982-83 and $12.5m in a full year. But, of course, the point has to be made that this money is directed towards improving the aviation services provided by this Government.
Honourable members will be aware that, since 1961, successive governments, of whatever political flavour, have pursued a policy of eventual full

recovery of costs properly attributable to the aviation industry for the provision and the maintenance of the aviation infrastructure around Australia. The decision taken by the Government to increase air navigation charges is in line, of course, with that policy. Overall cost recovery in 1982-83 is estimated, after adjustment for 1981 "82, at about 53 per cent. That is the total figure. The 1981 airlines agreement fully recognises the Commonwealth's entitlement to recover up to 100 per cent of its costs. The 20 per cent increase in air navigation charges for domestic trunk airlines is expected to achieve a recovery rate approaching 90 per cent for that sector in 1982-83. The increases in charges for regional airlines and general aviation are expected to lead to 1982-83 recovery rates from these sectors of about 25 per cent and IS per cent respectively.
What we are dealing with here is the user pays principle. I do not think anyone could argue against that kind of principle. But, at the same time, when the Government seeks to recover the real costs involved in providing these services from the industry and, ultimately, from members of the public, there is an obligation on it to ensure that the Department responsible for providing these services is efficient and, therefore, that the cost which is passed on to the fare paying passenger is reasonable. We have been told by the Minister for Aviation that the charges that we are concerned with in this Bill will increase the total costs borne by airlines by about one per cent. So there should be a very marginal impact on air fares around Australia. Mr Deputy Speaker, if you will permit me, I will make some general comments. I believe they are relevant to this legislation because it is concerned with costs. Those costs are ultimately borne by people who have to pay air fares around Australia. I make a couple of points which I put in a submission to the Independent Air Fares Committee.
Mr Good luck-A good submission.
Mr GROOM-I thank the honourable member for Franklin. I am not very far away from the views put earlier by the honourable member for Shortland because I believe we have to be concerned about the costs borne by people paying air fares in Australia. We have to realise that Australia is a big country and that our transport services generally are vitally important to our economic and social progress. In particular, because our population is spread so thinly around a very vast continent, our air services are absolutely vital and essential. So we need a well organised air transport system if we are to continue to progress as a nation, particularly economically. We have to have a system which gets

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1019

people from point A to point B at a reasonable cost while maintaining our safety standards. It is essential that, whilst we are concerned with costs, we do not overlook the fact that we have in this country a very efficient but also a very safe airline system. Above all else, we must maintain the safety of the system. We must also ensure that people can travel in reasonable comfort, but there are limits as to how far we should go. I believe that we must look very carefully at some of the cost factors involved which have tended to push up air fares.
I believe that the Government's decision to create a separate Department of Aviation is a good one because, as I have said, aviation is so vital to the future of this country. We now have specialists in this very specialised department which can look after the interests of the aviation industry and, more importantly, the interests of the general public of Australia. The industry has been pushing for some time for a separate department and no doubt people involved in the industry will be very pleased with the decision made the Government to create a separate Department of Aviation. In talking about aviation and about air fares we should recognise that we have in Australia a very good airline system. Those of us who have had the chance to travel around the world would agree. The honourable member for Franklin nods his head. I am sure that he agrees with this point.
Mr Good luck-The best airlines in the world.
Mr GROOM-We have the best airlines in the world. When we compare the system in Australia with those operating in the United States and Europe we must agree that our system, if we look at it fairly, is superior to those operating in most if not all other countries. We have a good deal to be grateful for. It is an efficient and safe system. We have a reasonably good basic infrastructure of airports and other facilities available around Australia. But I think improvements can be made. We should not sit back and be satisfied with the position. Obviously the Minister and the Governmentare not doing that. It is clear from the Budget decisions that every effort is being made to provide even greater improvements to the airline system and its infrastructure around Australia. We have a two-airline system and we can argue as to whether we should have it or not. Those people who believe very much in the free enterprise system might suggest that we should not have a system which really shields two major airlines from competition from other airlines. I think it is basically a good system. It is not a competitive system. We need to have a reasonable degree of competition within that system, but it is a system that should rely basically on co-operation between

Ansett Airlines of Australia Ltd and Trans Australia Airlines. There should be co-operation and also rationalisation. These things are more important than competition.
In most areas of industry competition is a good thing. It provides the best service at the cheapest cost. It provides the best product. However, I do not believe that argument can necessarily be applied to transport, whether we are talking about ships, roads, buses, trains or whatever else. There is a need for regulation and a degree of control and rationalisation to provide the public with an appropriate service. I see a problem emerging in this mad competition between Ansett and TAA. This tends to lift up the costs that must be borne by ordinary air fare paying passengers. I am talking about some of the things the honourable member for Shortland mentioned earlier, such as advertising and the Golden Wings Club that is spreading its wings around Australia. It is provided by Ansett-
Mr Good luck-and TAA.
Mr GROOM-TAA now has a similiar type of service provided for people who belong to a club and pay a fee for passengers with a first class ticket. Of course, there are free drinks-
Mr Good luck-Too much.
Mr GROOM-Yes, I think that too much is often provided by way of the services-lavish meals and particularly the drinks and the champagne. The honourable member for ShortIand mentioned discount fares. When fares are slashed by 40 per cent or 50 per cent somebody ultimately has to pay. They were really not frill-free services but basic services at a very much reduced cost. Somebody ultimately has to pay, and the people ultimately paying are the basic air fare paying passengers. We cannot really afford these luxuries because travelling by air in Australia is not a luxury. It is a basic essential service. People who travel by air might be pensioners or low income earners-
Mrs Kelly-They cannot afford to travel any more by air.
Mr GROOM-Yes, they are still travelling by air. They are struggling, I admit. We have to be concerned about the hikes in air fares; I do not deny that. I am being frank in my comment. But low income earners are still travelling by air. Pensioners somehow are batting along; they are raising the money and are managing to travel by air. The situation has developed to the extent that some people travel to work by plane these days. They commute to work by plane. People may

1020 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

have to travel by air for medical services. Therefore, these airline services are essential. The sort of Peter Stuyvesant image pervading the airlines is wrong. 1 refer to the air hostesses, the beautiful ladies, and the stewards-1 will not say beautiful stewards-who provide the services. All the luxury surrounding airlines-the grog, cigarettes and all this sort of thing-I think is going too far. If one wants to travel from, say, Burnie, my home town, to Launceston it takes about an hour and half by bus or car. One sits in one's car; one does not want a meal or a drink or a scotch. One is quite happy to drive that distance without such luxuries. It is only about an hour's flight from Wynyard or Devonport in my electorate to Melbourne, yet somehow people expect to have a drink. 1do not think they really expect it, but that is what they receive. These are luxuries.
1 believe we have to get down to basics and provide a basic service, a frill-free service, at basic cost so that ordinary people in the community can afford to use our airline system. This means that we need to have rational co-operation between the airlines, encouraged by the Government. It means that the airlines have to forget about the millions of dollars that they are spending on, say, advertising. The expenditure of millions of dollars on the Airbus advertising-there were pages of big advertisements-was silly. Someone had to pay. Again, the air fare passengers had to pay for that.
1 wish to make a general point. I am told by the Deputy Government Whip that I have to wind up. I was just getting wound up and 1 am told to wind down. We have to recognise the fact that the Government, the Minister for Aviation and the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt), are doing a substantial amount to improve the air services in this country. The Budget figures speak for themselves. An amount of $400m was provided last year and $517m will be provided this year. The Minister for Aviation has announced a huge capital works program involving $580m to be implemented over a four-year period. 1 am very pleased that he has included the Wynyard Airport, the Devonport AirportDevonport will receive $4.2m-and the Hobart Airport in this program.
1 would like to have time to go through the whole range of decisions made by the Government to improve the basic infrastructure and the airline service provided around Australia. In summary, I commend the Government for establishing a separate Department of Aviation. 1 believe that that was a wise and a good decision. It will certainly eventually ensure that the airline system in Australia is improved despite the fact that we

already have a very good airline system. 1 also congratulate the Minister for Aviation, Mr Fife, on the range of very important and significant decisions contained in this year's Budget.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (5.2)-1 have listened with interest to the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) speaking in support of the Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Bill. As 1 understand it, the argument he has put today for an increase in the air navigation charges is based on the user pays premise. The question that 1 put to him is: Which user pays? We find from the appropriation in the Budget Papers for the Department of Aviation that a Tasmanian travelling from a port in Tasmania to Melbourne is not charged according to a user pays principle but according to a subsidy principle. The amount of money provided in the Budget for the subsidisation of this leg is $4.4m. This is an incredible increase. Expenditure in this area in the last financial year was $1. 7m.
Mr Groom-What is that for?
Mrs KELLY-That amount of money is the air fare subsidy for travellers on route between Melbourne and Tasmania. The Government does not just work on the basis of the user pays principle in Australia generally, it works on the principle that if one is coming from Tasmania one does not have to make the same contribution to air fares as one would if one were flying from any other capital city or the national capital. Let us take the national capital. People who fly on the CanberraSydney route are the ones who have really been bearing the brunt of the burden increases in air fares over the last 12 months. Since April last year we have seen a massive increase of 58 per cent in the air fare between Canberra and Sydney. Who gets the benefits? The honourable member for Braddon knows about the user pays principle. He says: 'That is fine, providing it all goes back into aviation services and the people get benefits'. Again, I ask: Who are getting the benefits? We look around Australia and we look at the announcements in this Budget about the upgrading of airport terminals and tarmacs throughout Australia. Who are getting the benefits? It is not just those in the greatest need. A number of airports throughout Tasmania are being upgraded. There is to be an increase in the facilities at Hobart Airport in particular. Yet the Canberra terminal has a 50 per cent greater number of passengers and the facilities at Canberra airport are still not to be upgraded.
The Opposition does not oppose the Bill before the House but a few points need to be made about

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1021

the effect of these increased changes on the industry as a whole. The industry has suffered badly in recent years as a result of inadequate policies on fares, routes, capital works projects and the structure of the industry as a whole. Despite all the intervention by the Government, the result has inevitably been to the detriment of the consumer-higher fares, fewer services and less comfort at airport terminals. The situation in Canberra clearly illustrates this problem. All honourable members of this House will be aware of this because they all use the Canberra Airport. They are all well aware of the incredible need to upgrade facilities at that terminal. First of all, as I have said, Canberra travellers have been forced to pay a massive 58 per cent fare increase on the Canberra-Sydney leg since April last year. Even after the recommendation of the Independent Air Fares Committee that fares on this route be reduced by 7t per cent, it is likely that projected fare increases in the pipeline will wipe out this small measure of relief in the near future. Naturally, passenger numbers have declined dramatically. Passenger numbers through Canberra have dropped from 951,000 in 1980 to 827,000 in September 1981. Figures available from the Department of Aviation to June this year show that there has been a further decline of 5.7 per cent. This is an appalling situation which has had a very serious effect on the local economy and which, in particular, constitutes a major barrier to the development of the tourist industry in Canberra.
There is no doubt that the massive air fare increases have caused a serious distortion of traditionalload factors on this route. Just to emphasise this, I refer to the reply received by the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) to a question on notice to the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife). The question dealt with the number of Trans Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia flights on the CanberraSydney leg and the Canberra-Melbourne leg that had been cancelled. The figures supplied in the answer are very disturbing. They show that between 28 August 1981 and 26 March 1982, 180 Ansett flights between Canberra and Sydney, representing 7 per cent of total flights on that leg, were cancelled. The number of TAA flights cancelled on the same leg amount to 18 per cent.
This has a very damaging effect on the number of people using this air link. If people cannot be sure that the aeroplane on which they are booked will actually take offI think many people in this chamber have found when they have turned up at an airport that their service has been cancelledthey are discouraged from using this service. A

great number of these flights were, in fact, cancelled because of the low load factor. The same thing applied on the Canberra-Melbourne leg. Be-
tween 28 August 1981 and 26 March 1982, 5.8 per cent of Ansett flights between Canberra and Melbourne were cancelled and the figure for TAA was just over 12 per cent. This does nothing at all to encourage the people to use the air service out of Canberra.
While it is true that the air navigation charges are a relatively small component of air fares, nevertheless the imposition of a further 20 per cent increase in air navigation charges, coming on top of a 12t per cent increase last year, will definitely put further pressures on air fares. Additionally, the Government's policy on airport development works appears to be highly discriminatory. Last week the Minister announced a large number of major development projects at airports throughout Australia, but there was no mention of Canberra. It would appear that Canberra air travellers are expected to cop the massive fare in-
creases, over-crowded and inadequate terminal facilities, an inconvenient schedule of flights and fewer services and yet at the same time pay more and more in charges and fees for the operation of the airport. I remind the Minister that as far back as the 1980 Budget a commitment was given to spend $16m on a new terminal, tarmac and taxiway at Canberra Airport to be completed by 1985. Apparently this promise has been allowed to lapse during the term of the current Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) although the Hobart project has got the go ahead, despite the fact that Hobart had only about half the number of air passengers as Canberra. I hope the Minister concerned will be able to inform us when the promise to upgrade Canberra's airport will be kept. Canberra travellers and local transport and tourist operators are sick and tired of continually paying large increases in charges while getting no improvement in facilities and services.
The general aviation industry already experienced considerable difficulties as a result of Government decisions in recent years to increase the cost of avgas and airport charges. Combined with the serious problems faced by all business in Canberra in recent years as a result of the Government's Canberra bashing policies, those measures mean that the general aviation industry here is in serious trouble. The latest round of increases in air navigation charges will only exacerbate the problems faced by these businesses. The problems I have outlined regarding Canberra's situation exist in general terms throughout Australia. Australia is a very large country where

1022 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

an efficient air network is a necessity rather than a luxury. It is important that all Australians should have the opportunity to see their own country, especially their national capital, as well as travel
here for business and family re-asons. At present, however, the structure of the industry prevents many Australians enjoying such travel. The major barrier is the enormous cost of air travel. The ordinary family person these days can no more think of buying an air ticket than flying to the moon. Some possible remedies for improving the situation are available and some of them have been mentioned in the debate today by both the
honourable member for Shortland and the honourable member for Braddon. One of these is the no-frills service, which I think needs to be
explored a lot further.
One other suggestion, which was put forward in the report of the Independent Air Fares Committee, was for a system to reflect the different costs associated with peak and off-peak flights, not only as between days of the week but also as to time of the day and time of the year. We need to have a much more flexible approach to looking at discounting and all the diferent types of ways of making air travel much more accessible to all people in Australia.
In relation to increases in navigation charges, while the principle of cost recovery in the aviation industry is not disputed, nevertheless it remains highly questionable whether increased charges should be levied without a corresponding fair share of improvements in infrastructure. The honourable member for Braddon says the increase in air navigation charges should be directed at an increase in aviation services. I have attempted to argue here today that that should be based on needs. It has been clearly demonstrated that there is a need to upgrade the facilities at Canberra Airport. We need a commitment from this Government that it will live up to its 1980 promise and follow that through. That promise has not been kept by this Government. It is not just a promise made to the people who live in Canberra; it is a promise that should be kept to the people of Australia because Canberra after all is the national capital and the gateway to Australia.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation) (5.15)-in reply-I wish to take two or three minutes of the time of the House to respond to a couple of points which were made during this debate. In the first instance I remind the House that during my second reading speech I drew attention to the fact that the total revenue from air navigation charges in 1982-83 is estimated to amount to $119.3m compared with $101.8m from this source in 1981-82. I also advised the House that

the 20 per cent increase in charges for domestic trunk and regional airlines is estimated to increase total airline costs-I emphasise the word 'cost'-by around only 1 per cent on the basis of
the information that has been published so far. The honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom), and I think also the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris), drew attention to the cost recovery rates that are at present operating. The estimates for 1982-83 show that there will be full cost recovery for the international services. In 1982-83 the domestic trunk airlines will still provide only 90 per cent of the costs; the regional air-
lines, 25 per cent; and general aviation is meeting only 15 per cent of the costs. I mention those figures again to draw attention to the fact that the Government is still not requiring the industry generally to meet all of the costs. Such a burden could not be carried by the industry and the travelling
public at this time.
I am aware of a recent newspaper report re-
lating to a call by the General Aviation Association (Australia) for an inquiry into these costs. However, up to date I have not received any formal approach, but no doubt it is on the way. Because I have not received a formal approach from the Association I am not acquainted with the pre-
cise nature and scope of the inquiry which the association has in mind. I have noticed in the published reports the concerns that have been expressed by the General Aviation Association about the costs which the general aviation sector is being asked to bear. I think it is relevant to mention that the Aviation Industry Advisory Council has, in recent years, reviewed and reached broad agreement on principles for allocating aviation infrastructure costs amongst the various sectors in the industry. Of course, the General Aviation Association is represented on this body. Moreover, I should inform honourable members that my colleague, the Minister for Transport and Construction (Mr Hunt), and I are completing arrangements for a study by the Bureau of Transport Economics of the methods of calculating the overall level of cost to be attributed to the aviation industry for cost recovery purposes. I hope that this study will be of considerable assistance in providing a better understanding of the present cost recovery practices as they affect the industry. My predecessor with responsibilty for this portfolio, the present Minister for Transport and Construction, undertook to allow the Aviation Industry Advisory Council-that is the body I have just referred to-to scrutinise the departmental expenditures. This undertaking given by my predecessor is being put into effect. I believe that it also will assist the industry in understanding the cost and

Air Navigation (Charges) Bill

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1023

how those costs are met by both revenue on the one hand and charges on the other.
Another point I would like to touch on very briefly is the comment made by the honourable member for Shortland in relation to discounting by airlines. I did not hear him clearly but I think that he either said or inferred that the Government had brought pressure to bear on Trans Australia Airlines in relation to discounting. I want to make it abundantly clear that at no time have I indicated to TAA that it should desist from whatever commercial practice it desires within the law. That obviously applies to discounting. The House needs to be reminded that there is an Independent Air Fares Committee-the concept of that Committee has the support of both sides of this House-which determines fares. It also has a responsibility in relation to discounting. The Independent Air Fares Committee Act makes specific provision for the approval of discount fares at the request of an operator. In considering an application the Independent Air Fares Committeeis required to be satisfied that the fare will improve profitability and be unlikely to result in an increase in the trunk operator's economy fares, and that the fare conditions are reasonable and non-discriminatory. I give that undertaking. I give an undertaking also that I will not be interfering in the commercial activites of TAA in the way that I understood the honourable member to imply.
The only other point I wish to make in the time that is available to me is that the Commonwealth Government recognises that a large number of airports throughout Australia need to be upgraded. A large number have already been included in a program. Cairns, Townsville, Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth, Hobart, and a large number of other regional cities just to mention a few, are included' in the four-year program to which the honourable member of Braddon has referred. I am aware that others are still to be included in the program.
Mrs Kelly-When?
Mr FIFE-Priority has to be determined. Let me respond to the honourable member for Canberra. The program that this Government has approved and announced in the context of this Budget is the largest and most ambitious airport upgrading program in the history of Australia.
Mrs Kelly-But when is Canberra coming into it?
Mr FIFE-The honourable member knows that approval has been given in principle for a new terminal in Canberra. Indeed, she reminded the House of this fact during her speech on this

Bill. I am unable to say at this stage when it will be programmed in the same way as I am unable to say when a number of other projects around Australia will be programmed. In 1982-83 a record sum in real terms will be spent on airport development in Australia. I see that the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) is in the House and is taking note of what I am saying. She will be interested to know that a large part of the money allocated to the four-year program is being spent in Queensland, and in particular in Brisbane. These projects are very costly and obviously have to be spread over a period.
I thank those honourable members who have contributed to this debate. I again give an undertaking to the House and to the people of Australia that the Commonwealth Government will continue to be sensitive to the needs of the aviation industry and, in particular, to the travelling public.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT BILL (No.4) 1982
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 25 August, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KENT (Hotham) (5.24)-During the first part of my speech which I made in this House yesterday I drew the attention of the House to the similarities of this year's Fraser Budget with that of 1977. The 1982 Budget, like the Budget of 1977, is based on rubbery and shonkey estimates. It offers illusory instead of real tax cuts. I predicted also that the Budget will disintegrate in a few months time. However, I still welcome some of the concessions that the Government made in this Budget, no matter how reluctantly they were made by our mean Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). We fought this Government for years until it grudgingly agreed to increase the family allowance, and to give other long overdue assistance.

1024 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

I welcome these measures even though the Government acted too late and gave too little. The fact that this Government gave grudgingly is illustrated by the fact that the benefits offered~ little as they may be~start in November and, in one case, in May next year while impositions such as the tax slug is immediate. It is not just a case of the Fraser Government taking away with its right hand what it gives with its left. But the hand that slugs is moving fast while the motion of the other hand is somewhat tardy to say the least. The electors of Hotham, as indeed everywhere else, have lost their faith in this Government. To put it another way, the Fraser Government has lost its credibility with the Australian voters. It is no
wonder that this is so as the Government cannot fool all of the people all of the time. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) cannot get away with offering illusory tax cuts while budgeting to collect more tax revenue than that which was collected the year before. Of course, the electors are asking where the money is coming from and who will pay for the small electoral bribe that the Prime Minister is flashing around. We do not have to look too far for an answer. I quote now from the Melbourne Age editorial from which I quoted yesterday. It states:
The Treasurer has summed up his package of surreptitious take and conspicuous give as a 'family Budget'. It could be more aptly and accurately described as a voter's Budget. Its concessions are aimed at middle Australia: the family man with a wife at home and two children at school who is paying off his home, owns a few shares and doesn't drink or smoke. He is, of course, not the only one to benefit, but he will do best. Or appear to do so. Mr Howard gives the example of such a family man on average weekly earnings and calculates that, after allowing for the effect of indirect taxes (including those on beer and tobacco), he would be better off by about $17 a week. What Mr Howard didn't mention is that inflation will claw back most of this apparent generosity. As for the poor, the jobless and the homeless, most of them can expect to remain poor, jobless and homeless.
Indeed, while the Treasurer was delivering his Budget Speech last week and extolling its virtues the economy around him was collapsing due to the Fraser Government's economic mismanagement.
As I have said before, due to this Government's policies we are entering into the worst period of economic recession since the Great Depression. For seven years the Fraser Government has been promising that recovery was just around the corner. A couple of years ago our Prime Minister said~1 am glad that he is in the House now~that interest rates would fall by 2 per cent and would keep falling. There has been nothing of the sort. Our interest rates are the highest in the world and are still rising. The Prime Minister promised that his Government would bring down inflation. In fact our inflation rate is rising and is higher than

that of our trading partners. The Prime Minister announced that there would be jobs for all who wanted to work, yet this Prime Minister presides over the highest unemployment in our post-war history. There is more to come~~
Mrs Darling~It is a sick economy.
Mr KENT~Of course it is a sick economy; there is a sick Prime Minister too. There is more to come unless we get rid of this corrupt Government. For seven years honourable members opposite have been fooling the Australian people by promising them economic recovery. Honourable members will remember the promise which was made about a resources boom. An amount of $30m was to be invested in our mineral resources. According to the Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) and his colleagues that should have occurred and should have made us all rich.
Mr Scholes~An honourable member opposite just made a racist remark.
Mr KENT~ Who is being racist in his remarks? Who is the bastard? I will give him one. I ask the honourable member to come here and to make the racist remark and he will get one from me.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)--- Order! The honourable member for Hotham~
Mr KENT~Mr Deputy Speaker, it is your duty to have stopped the honourable member. It is a disgrace.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~Order! The honourable member for Hotham will use parliamentary language.
Mr KENT ~ Where is that resources boom? The Treasurer did not mention it in his Budget Speech.
Mr Malcolm Fraser~Mr Deputy Speaker, the honourable member for Hotham used words which are unparliamentary. I ask that they be withdrawn.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~Order! The honourable member for Hotham used unparliamentary words. I ask him to withdraw.
Mr KENT~If the racist remark that was made is withdrawn I will withdraw whatever I said. I will not cop racist remarks here. The people of Hotham did not send me here to cop racist remarks.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~Order! I ask the honourable member for Hotham to withdraw the unparliamentary words that he used.
Mr KENT~I withdraw. Where is the resources boom? The Treasurer did not mention it

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1025

in his Budget Speech. As a matter of fact he was all gloom and doom. He could not hide any longer the failure of his Government to manage the economy. Of course the Treasurer and the Prime Minister are desperately trying to find some excuses. The Treasurer must have remembered the story of an American President who had a sign on his desk that said: 'The buck stops here'. 'Good', thought little Johnny Howard, the Treasurer, 'I will pass the buck up there'. So he is now blaming the American economy for the Fraser Government's failure. But even that misfired; the American interest rates fell in the last few weeks while ours soared. When our interest rates went up, Mr Howard said that the rise followed rises in the United States interest rates. Why is it that, when United States interest rates fall, ours do not follow? I do not think Mr Howard can pass the buck on this one; he has to accept the blame himself.
While I am talking of interest rates, let me mention that the Government has desperately tried to confuse Australian home buyers. It scrapped its home savings grants scheme, introduced another one instead with a means test and introduced a tax interest rebate scheme which will not benefit the poor or the pensioners who are struggling to pay off their homes. Whilst this scheme may slightly assist some home buyers, the Melbourne Age warns in the following terms:
However, the beneficiaries of this election bait should beware: It may be a prelude to further relaxation of controls over housing interest rates, leaving them worse off than before.
It is obvious that the Government has lost the little remaining credibility that it had. Only yesterday, the Government was exposed for harbouring tax evaders. It refused for years to prosecute the tax bludgers while at the same time it harassed invalid pensioners and other social security beneficiaries. This lenience towards tax dodgers resulted in a loss of $10 billion to $15 billion. This is in stark contrast to the Government's eagerness to prosecute pensioners. A total of 3,697 social benefit recipients were mercilessly prosecuted in the last two years whilst there was not a single prosecution initiated by the Treasurer against his tax avoiding mates.
Let me turn briefly to one other aspect of the Budget. It fails to assist our manufacturing industry to extricate itself from the crisis that this Government's policies caused. Some time before the Budget, there was an announcement of concessions to business and industry. But honourable members should keep in mind that the concessions will not cost a single penny this financial year. When the benefits which are due start

operating next financial year, having regard to the Government's track record, they will most likely be withdrawn. In contrast to that, the Treasurer introduced a new tax on cheque transactions to start this financial year. That will have an immediate detrimental effect on business and industry as well as slug the individual cheque account users. I wonder whether this tax was introduced by the Treasurer to deter his colleague Mr Sinclair from signing too many cheques and thus reduce the risk of another scandal for this scandal-prone Government.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Hotham will resume his seat. The honourable member for Hotham is apparently unaware that he must not refer to honourable members by their name but rather by the electorate they represent or the ministry they hold. Whilst I have his attention I also caution him against oblique reflections on members of this House.
Mr KENT-My apologies, Mr Deputy Speaker. This Budget stands condemned. Out of its disorder, the Fraser Government will be consigned by Australian voters to the scrap heap of history in the next elections. The sooner that happens the better for Australian families.
Mr Cohen-Mr Deputy Speaker, before the Prime Minister speaks, I would like the indulgence of the Chair.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member wish to speak on a point of order?
Mr CohenYes, Mr Deputy Speaker. I was in the chamber when I heard a remark passed by members in the House about the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent). They referred in a sneering way to his accent. The honourable member for Hotham reacted quite rightly with some strength and was asked to withdraw. The honourable member for Hotham is a new member of this place. He was not born in Australia-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If the honourable member will pardon my interrupting him, I think he has established his point.
Mr Cohen-If it ever happens again when I am in the House, I will call them more than what he called them.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Robertson will resume his seat. As the House is aware, I have just assumed the chair. I share the honourable member's grievance; such a practice is to be totally deplored.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) (5.35)-The Budget that was brought

1026 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

down by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) a few days ago has been welcomed by--
Mr Kent-Look at that big bastard there; he supported the racist remark.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order! The honourable member for Hotham will remain silent.
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. The Prime Minister will resume his seat. In the disorder generated within the House, not from one side only, the Chair was denied the opportunity of hearing the remark to which honourable members apparently object. It will facilitate the proceedings if the honourable member remain silent and enhance the prospects of the Chair in discharging its duty. I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Budget brought down by the Treasurer a few days ago has been welcomed right around Australia by many different groups because it has been directed to the specific and real needs of Australians as they face the problems ahead in 1982-83. The tax cuts announced by the Treasurer are substantial and significant. It is worth noting that the Australian Taxpayers Association, which is an independent body, has sent out a document to its members which largely substantiates the Government's view that the cuts as they relate to Australian families from 1 November onwards are substantial and significant. The home interest relief goes right to the heart of the matter that is very important to a very large number of Australian families. We all know the difficulties that have been brought to the fore as a result of rising interst rates overseas and the impact of them on Australia, and the measure of support and relief that the Government has given will be of help to many hundreds of thousands of Australian families.
The additions to the housing finance and welfare housing will be particularly welcomed not only because of the additional people who will be assisted through the course of this year as a consequence but also because it will add to activity and to employment in a depressed period. The level of welfare housing is up by 27 per cent. Family allowances for the first two childen have been very significantly increased by 50 per cent, bringing over the last two years a total increase of 50 per cent in the family allowance system which this Government pioneered. On top of that, this Government has come forward with a further major first in the social security and social welfare area, the family income supplement, to offer special and particular support to families with

children, lowest paid working families, who might otherwise be better off on the welfare system than working. Every member of this Parliament will be able to go out and say that single income families with children no matter what the circumstances, will be better off than they would be if that same family were on welfare. That is a very substantial improvement on the earlier system. A number of families will be $10, $20, $30 or $40 a week better off as a result of this Budget, dependent of course upon the number of children that they may have.
The spouse rebate has been increased where there are children in the family. I think it is particularly important that the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance for tertiary students and the secondary allowance to cover low income families to try to persuade them to keep their children at school for the last two years of secondary schooling have been increased substantially. The means test for the secondary allowance has been increased by 44 per cent, making it the same as the TEAS allowance. As a result a much larger number of low-income families will be covered by the allowance. I think all honourable members know that it is those young Australians who leave school at the minimum age or as soon as they get past the compulsory school age who are the most at risk in a difficult world because they leave school often with a sense of frustration and without any particular academic or manual skills. To persuade these young Australians to stay in school or to stay in training is an important objective of the Government and is one that I am sure is supported by an overwhelming majority of Australian families.
The employment and training programs are related to this group also. Much larger sums are being provided this year. Over 250,000 Australians will be assisted through those programs in 1982-83. While pensioners will experience benefits from the general reductions in taxation or the lift in the threshold and the reduction in the tax rate from 32c to 30c, the special pensioner rebate is also being introduced to give further benefits to pensioners with some income of their own. In addition, the income test free area has been significantly improved and the income allowable before a pensioner loses the pensioner health card has been significantly expanded. These improvements are being widely welcomed.
A development of a different kind is the Australian Bicentennial Road Development Program. It is an imaginative program, which over the period to 1988, will give this country a road network of which it can be truly proud. That and other changes we are introducing will lead to

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1027

more efficient transport and more efficient competition between road and rail. The program also will be of special benefit to local government in this difficult period through increased funds for local roads and increased expenditure on arterial roads. Significant funds also will be available under the program for urban transport proposals and urban arterial roads. That program will come to be appreciated in the years ahead by an increasing number of Australians as they see the benefits of the work done.
Against that background, the speech of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) was somewhat disappointing. Towards the end of it he said:
What Australia needs is a new outlook altogether.
However, if one reads through the speech one will find that only one new out1ook~it is as old as the Australian Labor Party itse1f~really seemed to come through; that is, that large additional wage increases are appropriate at the present time. The Leader of the Opposition attacked the Government quite vigorously for trying to achieve this year wage settlements significantly less than the rate of inflation. He indicated that that was a quite unreasonable thing to do. Against a background in which Australian industry is losing competitiveness~not insignificantly because of the wage increases of last year and not insignificantly because of the shorter working hours of last year~and against a background of very substantial real wage increases of several per cent over the last two years, quite plainly the views of the Leader of the Opposition on that subject would only lead to even higher unemployment and greater hardship amongst the people he is purporting to help.
There were some curious ideas from the Leader of the Opposition. He said that he thought his front bench had ideas to offer. He describes it as the most active and creative front bench this Parliament has seen in years. What a front bench! The strange activities of the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) have not been supported entirely by the Leader of the Opposition over the last six months. The honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) has engaged in some rather curious activities. He has been a very active member of the front bench during certain periods. We remember clearly the honourable member for Blaxland stating:
Not only has the left jeopardised the unity and solidarity of the Caucus by its offer to Mr Hawke, but in responding to pressures from Messrs Carmichael and Halfpenny, the left (in their support of Mr Hayden) have left the Party open to charges of outside inHuence.

The honourable member for Blaxland was only recognising the reality of something that we have always known existed. The honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) was also active over the same period. There was some doubt about which side he would ultimately be on, and then he stated:
The re-election of Bill Hayden was an achievement of the left collective.
It would be interesting to know what is the honourable member for Reid's definition of the left collective, but I have no doubt that that was well noted. The Leader of the Opposition also ought to have included the activities of some private members of his party in his praise of their active interest in certain events over the last few weeks and months. The honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) said very plainly:
But once Hayden was endorsed by Communist Party officials outside I think it's impossible for us to win with him as leader.
Then there was the curious interjection of the Leader of the Opposition when the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) said during the Leader of the Opposition's speech on the Budget:
Your followers are asleep.
The Leader of the Opposition responded with this brilliant remark:
One scarcely notices the difference.
If the Leader of the Opposition does not notice the difference whether they are awake or asleep, how could he really understand whether they are active or inactive?
Mr Hayden~ You and I know that you are much safer when you are asleep.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER~You are both very vulnerable and that makes no difference. It is perfectly plain that the Australian Labor Party has no alternative policy. It offered vague, confused proposals and, of course, condemned the Government, but had nothing to put in its place except the same tired, damaging policies that were pursued by Mr Whitlam and the Leader of the Opposition when they were in partnership. Those policies are irrelevant to the circumstances of 1982-83. There was no analysis of the world economy and no analysis of the impact of falls in commodity prices of 30 per cent to 40 per cent on the Australian economy and, necessarily and unfortunately, on the living standards of this nation. There was no recognition of the wage strike damage that has occurred over the past 18 months, only an incitement to higher wage claims. Therefore, no practical help was given by the Leader of the Opposition in his speech. It is worth noting

1028 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

that in Labor's wages policy there is clearly a commitment to full quarterly wage fixation. The Hayden-Dolan statement of 20 August states:
The adoption by industrial tribunals of a system of full quarterly cost of living adjustments will be strongly advocated.
The honourable member for Wills stated:
We are pressing for full indexation. There is no trap in this situation.
Labor's industrial relations platform refers to automatic, full quarterly indexation of wages and salaries in accordance with movements in the consumer price index. We all know, of course, that indexation is only a floor upon which other claims are built. However, it is not just a question of higher wages. There are other unspecified benefits in that strange social document which the Leader of the Opposition and Mr Dolan embraced. The document states:
In formulating claims for improved wages and conditions at the national level, the unions will have regard to Government policy and will consult the Government on the amount of such claims.
Knowing the affiliation of the Labor Party and the union movement, I suppose that would mean slipping a note to the Labor Budget Cabinet~if there ever were a Labor Budget Cabinet-saying: 'This is what we demand on top of full quarterly wage indexation'. Under those circumstances it would be the unions which would be governing the country. There is no deal with the unions. The Australian Council of Trade Unions committed itself to nothing. It could not have committed itself to anything because what would the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union or the Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union, which is affiliated with the Labor Party, have said in these circumstances? These policies would be damaging to Australia. They would ruin our competitiveness. They would lead to higher inflation and higher unemployment.
The Leader of the Opposition made great play of having a domestic deficit of $1 billion to $1.5 billion. I would like to assume the higher figure. Honourable members will find that I am being charitable in taking the $1.5 billion deficit, which would give him about $1.6 billion or $1.7 billion more to spend than is the case under our Budget. That would give him an overall deficit of about $3.4 billion. Presumably he would want to keep within that. Let us analyse for a minute or two what he said and let us see how that figure comes out. Honourable members will find that it is much more than $3.4 billion. It is interesting to note that the Leader of the Opposition was engagingly honest in saying how the deficit would be funded.

He said: 'We will fund it by printing money'. He stated:
A Budget deficit could be financed by Treasury bills bought by the Reserve Bank of Australia.
That is the panacea of socialists wherever they may be-go to the Reserve Bank, go to the printing presses, and cause enormous damage right throughout the community. The Leader of the Opposition, on his own figures, should have $1.7 billion to play with, but we have had no details as to how he would break it up. What would he do? Where do we come out when we try to analyse what he actually said in his response to the Budget. The first clue to this was given by the honourable members for Wills, who said that 150,000 job opportunities would be created. That, according to the proposal of the honourable member for Wills, represented 80,000 for community works and 70,000 for private sector wage subsidies. It is worth noting that Mr Simmonds from Victoria has stated:
Public sector job creation programs are expensive. The cost of each job created . . . . is unlikely to be less than $15,000.
On that basis and taking the assumptions of the honourable member for Wills the cost of that program is a cool $900m that is not giving them jobs for a year; it is only for nine months.
Mr Hawke-You don't know what you are talking about, as usual. Wrong again!
Mr MALCOLM FRASER~Anyone can work that out. That is not wrong. The honourable gentleman tries to offset that figure by saying that there will be discounts in other areas. But there will be no discounts because Labor policies would drive up inflation, drive up unemployment and bring about even higher, not lower, unemployment benefits. In addition to that the Labor Party calls for a private sector wages subsidy. This 30 per cent subsidy would cost $113m. So, the total cost for the part of the operation which involves the honourable member for Wills is about $1 billion. Well, it is not surprising that the Leader of the Opposition would be generous to the honourable member for Wills who is now embracing him in a way which he has not done for months or even years. It is a pretty sight to see. We only wish that we had a camera.
Then we had a proposal for an extra $170m for public housing. With that there was a proposal to provide more to help with the deposit gap. Our current spending on that is about $147m. So, how much more would the Labor Party provide? In an ealier speech the Leader of the Opposition referred to a means tested home ownership grant, which would probably be $5,000, designed to help

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1029

to solve the deposit gap problem. Let us say this will be only 50 per cent more than our proposals which are in force. This was, in fact, much less than the $5,000 that the Leader of the Opposition was indicating. That would mean about another $70m. The total expenditure on housing would be $240 to $250m. Our running total at this point is $1.25 billion out of a maximum of $1.7 billion.
In addition, the Leader of the Opposition comitted himself to more funds for capital works, for infrastructure, involving the Commonwealth, the States and local government. How much will that be? There are no spending details. The current spending, excluding housing, is approximately $3,600m. Would that be 10 per cent more at $360m or 20 per cent more at $720m? Let us take the modest figure-in spending the Labor Party has never been known for modesty-and say that it is only $360m. That takes the new spending commitments up to $1.6 billion-a total deficit already of $3.3 billion. How much is left for tax cuts-genuine, real, effective tax cuts-which the Leader of the Opposition keeps on talking about? It leaves only $100m. What is the Leader of the Opposition going to do about that? That means a quarter of a cent reduction in the standard rate. That really will be felt! Or there might be a $75 increase on the tax-free threshold. These are the genuine, real, effective tax cuts which the Leader of the Opposition talks so much about.
The Leader of the Opposition claims also that the Budget figuring is wrong by $850m. That is not true, of course. But if one accepted his figures in relation to that the deficit he would be already up to, without tax cuts, would be about $4.2 billion. The reality of it, of course, is that he would probably try to make the tax cuts real. Let us say that they will just be the same as ours through this year-about $1 t billion. If we add on that figure we then have a deficit of $5.6 billion or $5.7 billion to meet the commitments that the Leader of the Opposition has spoken about. This business of having only a $3 billion to $3t billion deficit, of course, always was lunacy. The Leader of the Opposition is trying only to maintain the assumed respectability which he sought to put on at the only time he had a chance to bring down a Budget.
Mr Hawke-Why don't you say something about your own miserable Budget?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If the honourable member had been in the House on time he would have heard it. The honourable member for Wills, of course, last Sunday told us what the Labor government would do when in office. He made it very plain. He said:

What a Labor Party in Government will be about is trying to adopt a more expansionary program. This Government and its talk about 1 per cent, the deficit being 1 per cent of GDP as though they have reached the limit of capacity is blatant nonsense. The average of 13 OECD countries for whom the figures are available for 1982, have a deficit which is about 4 per cent of GDP.
He said that on 22 August. A deficit of 4 per cent of gross domestic product in Australia would be $6t billion. That is obviously the figure that the honourable member for Wills wants to legitimise. Well, if he has that kind of deficit does he want the United Kingdom's unemployment rate of 12.1 per cent or the Belgium unemployment rate of 12.8 per cent? (Extension o/time granted). Does he want the Canadian unemployment rate of 10.9 per cent or the United States rate of something approaching 10 per cent? That, of course, would be the result of Labor's policies.
We know quite well why the Australian Labor Party and the Leader of the Opposition have been so vague in response to this Budget. They know that it is a very good Budget. They know that it is addressed to the needs of Australians in 1982 and 1983. They know that their big spending proposals will be totally and utterly condemned by Australians right across the nation. This Budget has the right balance with tax cuts which will improve family benefits, with greater assistance to the young to help them to stay in school or get into tertiary training and with greater funds available for the training programs themselves. The Bud&et attacks tax avoidance in a way that the Labor Party never even dreamt of. It helps shield people from the difficulties of the world trading scene through this year. It does much to help people. We have gone as far as we can within the bounds of economic responsibility to address Australia's problems.
This Budget is very much a social document and one which is meeting the needs, alleviating the hardships and difficulties, of Australian families and Australians generally. In addition to that, as Mr Risstrom has made very plain, I hope this Budget will be recognised as one in which it is valid to ask for and to expect wage restraint. Again, I turn to the Taxpayers Association. In a note which it put out on 23 August that independent body stated:
Our independent analysis should encourage him-
The 'him' happens to be the Leader of the Opposition in this account-
To seek ACTU support for moderation in wage demands.
The Leader of the Opposition could really earn his place as Leader of the Opposition if he took a national view and sought to encourage the ACTU to achieve wage restraint through this year. That

1030 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Iron and Steel Industry

would earn him much more credit than knocking off the honourable member for Wills.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
Sitting suspended from 5.58 to 8 p.m.
TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE TO IRON AND STEEL INDUSTRY
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Aviation and Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce)- Pursuant to section 30B (2) of the Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973 and on behalf of the Minister for Industry and Commerce I present a report prepared by the Temporary Assistance Authority on certain flat steel products, pipes and tubes of iron or steel. I seek leave to make a statement relating to the report.
Leave granted.
Mr FIFE-The Temporary Assistance Authority report recommends that a 10 per cent temporary duty be imposed on certain pipes and tubes and that the developing country preference accorded imports of the goods under reference from the Republic of Korea be removed. The report also recommends that an import watch be placed on all goods under reference except certain pipes and tubes. The Government has given long and careful consideration to the question of temporary assistance to those sectors of the iron and steel industry covered by the report. We have decided that the Authority's recommendations would not provide adequate short term assistance during the period until the Government's decision on the Industries Assistance Commission's long term report on the industry. The Government felt that temporary assistance in excess of that recommended by the TAA was necessary in view of the seriously depressed situation in the industry and the impact of import pressures when global demand is also at a depressed level and serious world overcapacity exists.
A system of tariff quotas will be introduced to allow individual importers to import at their 1981-82 levels at the current duty rates. Imports above the quota level will be subject to an additional temporary duty of 150 per cent. Assistance by way of tariff quotas was chosen because it preserves a degree of flexibility of choice for users. At the same time the Government recognised the effect of additional protection, and of any resultant steel price increases, on costs within the community generally, and in particular on the competitiveness of user industries. It also did not wish to discourage any restructuring the industry might take to improve its long term viability. The tariff

quota levels have been set with a view to providing the industry with a breathing space until the Government has considered the longer term future of the industry after receipt of the lAC report next year. At the same time care has been taken to minimise additional costs to users and consumers.
In a meeting with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and other senior Cabinet Ministers yesterday afternoon Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd stressed the decline currently appearing in the domestic steel market. The company requested that the Government in reaching its decision make every effort to distribute the burden of any future decline in the market equitably between local industry and importers. The Government carefully considered the company's request but did not consider that the information presented by BHP warranted any change to its earlier decision.
The Government recognised that due to the cyclical downturn, the longer .term industry restructuring and the regional concentration of the industry, some workers leaving the industry may face adjustment difficulties.
The Commonwealth Employment Service has already mounted a special effort in the Port Kembla-Wollongong area using existing manpower programs. Given the special knowledge of the needs of the industry's workers which the companies and unions in the industry have, the Government will be inviting them to bring forward jointly proposals for a program of adjustment measures which might more effectively utilise existing Government manpower programs in the area of retraining, relocation and employment services. Details of the Customs tariff changes arising from the Government's decision will be announced in the Parliament when administrative arrangements to implement them have been completed.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide)-by leave-My speech will be short because the Government Whip has very kindly agreed not only that should I be able to say a few words on this important subject, the future of the Australian steel industry, but also that the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) should be allowed to say a few words. I know that the honourable member for Grey (Mr Wallis), who is in the House at present and whose electorate covers Whyalla, would also like to say a few words. I really have not had time to organise that. Whether he will be able to speak will have to be left to the good grace

Iron and Steel Industry

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1031

of the Government Whip. Although the Australian Labor Party welcomes some temporary assistance for the ailing Australian steel industry I have to say that we regret the many depressing features of the Government's decision which was announced tonight in the statement by the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife).
Giving quotas at last year's level, which is the basis of what the Minister has had to say, at a time when we are suffering such a great depression in this country-mainly because of the monetarist policies that have been followed by this Government-will mean a further drop, a damaging cut, in Australian steel output. The result of that will be a further drop in the number of jobs available in the Australian steel industry. I hardly need to tell this House what that means to hundreds and hundreds of Australian families living in Wollongong, Port Kembla, the Whyalla district and Newcastle. I hardly need to add that that drop in jobs and the effect it will have on the Australian families in those regions will only add to the misery that has already been created by the drop in output. For instance, I refer to Kwinana where 600 jobs have gone.
Much of the Government's statement tonight which we have just heard from the Minister is taken up with giving details of the availability of government employment services. But that availability of service and those details relate to the Government making plans for unemployment: I want to draw a strong contrast between this Government's attitude to making plans for unemployment and a Labor government's attitudethe Labor Opposition's attitude at this time-to making plans for employment. It is not unemployment for which we should be organising; we should be making plans for employment in the steel industry in such a way that we will make Australian steel competitive with imports. Labor supports any adjustment programs for unemployment-miserable though they arethat this Government announces. But what we want more than that is Government leadership in planning the future of this industry. Those plans were singularly absent from the message the Minister had to give this House tonight. We have only to contemplate the indecision in relation to this matter over the last week or two to realise just how lacking in plans this Government is.
Firstly, we know that the Temporary Assistance Authority reported some weeks ago. On top of that we learn that the Government came to a decision yesterday and that that decision was announced in the party room. It had the courtesy to call in the management of BHP. I notice that it did not call in any union representatives, who are

equally involved in this decision. Having listened to the management of BHP, Government members decided that the decision they had come to was not satisfactory so they got out of their beds a little earlier this morning and met at 8.30 in the Cabinet room to reconsider their decision. In fact, they discarded the representations of BHP and came up with the decision which we have learnt of tonight.
What is needed is not just joint participation on the part of unions, companies and government in planning unemployment relief but also collective action involving all three-unions, management and government-to map out a long term future for the Australian steel industry, to build a strong and public commitment to the future of steel production in Australia, to harness the confidence that such a commitment would create and to find a major reinvestment and re-equipment program for Australian steel. We in the Australian Labor Party recognise that this country needs steel to be produced at competitive prices because if it is produced at higher prices there are problems for the downstream industries. We do not resile from that in one way. We want to see government leadership to make sure that there is tripartite organisation, to ensure that steel is produced at a reasonably competitive price and also to achieve productivity in this country. We acknowledge that under such a plan the steel industry would look different from the way it does now but it would be in a much better shape to combat more effectively the current intense competition that comes from overseas. It would deal with such pressures from a position of strength and not-as the lack of positive policies from this Government makes certain-a position of serious and growing weakness. As the Whip is behind me I must conclude. I thank the Government not only for the opportunity for me to say a few words but also for allowing the honourable member for Cunningham to add to what I have had to say.
Mr HYDE (Moore)-by leave-The first. point I wish to make is that this decision was not announced in the Liberal and National Country Parties party room yesterday. We were told that the decision would be forthcoming but not what it was. The decision that the Government has just announced is not, in the light of many recent decisions, very highly protective. I welcome that. To maintain imports at the levels of 1981-82, in view of the fact that they increased during that year, is not in itself highly protective, bearing in mind that there will be a reconsideration of the matter in a little over 12 months time when the Industries Assistance Commission will report. That is good.

1032 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Iron and Steel Industry

The difficulty with this decision is that which always attaches to any quota system. We have new importers with material on the water who will not have a quota unless some allowance is made for them. I trust that these quotas will be freely negotiable, but nothing has been said about that. I urge the Government to ensure that they are freely negotiable. It is not only the importer who might be worried but also the person who will be using the imported steel. Steel is a variable quantity. Some steels do not substitute for other steel. It will be necessary, even within a 12-month period, to cater for new demand. For that reason alone, the quotas must be negotiable. This decision is a watershed in government understanding. I wish it were also a watershed in Opposition understanding. The Government has realised that by imposing high levels of protection it will not preserve jobs but actually destroy them.
Mr WEST (Cunningham)-by leaveUnfortunately, this decision will be cold comfort for the steel industry in Australia. Obviously, the original recommendation from the Temporary Assistance Authority that a temporary duty of 10 per cent be imposed on certain finished steel products was insufficient. It is not surprising that the Government realised that it could not meet the
problem simply by accepting that recommendation. Steel imported into Australia ranges in price up to $400 a tonne. That is up to $100 a tonne cheaper than the local product. Tariffs of up to 25 per cent would have been required to have any effect. It is quite obvious why that option was disregarded.
The decision to peg imports of finished steel products into Australia at 1981-82 levels, with all imports over that quota being subjected to the prohibitive duty of 150 per cent is not good enough either. What the Government has effectively done is to peg steel imports at their highest historical levels. In 1981-82-the year that the Government will use as a bench mark-steel imports to this country in raw steel equivalent amounted to one million tonnes. In 1978-79 the figure was 580,000 tonnes. John Lysaght (Australia) Ltd has a rolling mill which manufactures finished steel plate and galvanised iron products. Imports of 320,000 tonnes per year were directly competing with that company's products in the first six months of 1982. If the request of Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd had been accepted, imports would have been pegged at 175,000 tonnes.
There are a number of problems in the steel industry. We accept that. They relate to the domestic recession for which this Government has to take responsibility, the world downturn in steel,

the level of imports and the rate of technology that is being introduced into the steel industry. The BHP steel division at Port Kembla, for instance, has moved its rail bank to Whyalla. It has closed No. 2 open hearth as it has expanded its basic oxygen steel making process by implementing an extra steel making vessel there. Of course it is introducing that type of technology.
Imports are a very important component of the present crisis and to freeze them at the historically high levels of 1981-1982 is just not good enough. In this situation of rocketing unemployment the company is not just threatening but making direct plans and actually implementing them to run its labour force down by 10,000. BHP has already run down its labour force in Port Kembla by 1,500 this year. It expects that figure to increase to 3,000 by early next year. Lysaghts in Port Kembla will close for one week in several weeks' time during the school holidays. It has told this Government-the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) knows this-that if the import situation cannot be properly controlled, in the three plants, one at Westernport, Victoria and the two at Port Kembla will face a labour run-down of up to 1,400 jobs in the first three months of next year. I am told 1,200 of those threatened jobs are at Port Kembla. I wonder what the Minister for Industry and Commerce thinks since Westernport happens to be in his electorate. This would be quite amusing if it were not so tragic. I refer to a statement at the conclusion of the speech by the Acting Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Fife). He said:
The Commonwealth Employment Service has already mounted a special effort in the Port Kembla-Wollongong area using existing manpower programs.
Those existing manpower programs are quite inadequate to handle the present 13 per cent unemployment rate and the run-down in the steel industry which is increasing. As I have said unemployment in that area, as it is in Fremantle, Whyalla and Newcastle is growing faster than honourable members opposite could ever believe. So to talk about the Government's existing manpower programs, when faced with a run-down of 10,000 to 15,000 jobs in the steel industry, plus the multiplier effect proves that the Government is living in cloud cuckoo land. I conclude by saying that it is the Opposition that has the real plans for the restructuring of the steel industry. They include setting up a steel industry council, a task force to investigate the problems of the industry with representatives of the unions, the companies and government upon it, and making any assistance offered to the steel industry dependent on a guarantee that the steel industry companies avoid

Iron and Steel Industry

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1033

the rapid and disruptive run-down in the labour force that is proving so dislocative in the great steel regions of Australia because of this Government's inactivity.
Mr BOURCHIER (Bendigo)-by leave-I wish to make only two points. The first follows the remarks of the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) in regard to those people who have recently become involved in the business of importing steel and who unfortunately find themselves out on a limb because of the measures introduced by the Government. I appeal to the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife), who is at the table, to ask the responsible Minister, when fixing the quotas, to set aside 10 per cent or 15 per cent of the quotas for those people who have become involved, and employed other people, in the business of importing steel. This will not affect the moves that have been made. I am merely saying that we should give consideration to people who have decided to go into the business and who suddenly, because of this decision, will find themselves bankrupt. That is what will happen, because nobody will buy steel at 150 per cent if they are over the quota.
The only other thing I wish to do is to register some surprise. I am sure that this will not be lost on many honourable members in this place. When it was announced in the newspapers that the Government was to hold an inquiry into whether some form of protection should be given to the steel industry, I found to my amazement that the first out of the starting gate to register opposition to any form of protection was General MotorsHolden's Ltd. One need do no more than register surprise.
Mr WALLIS (Grey)-by leave-Like the two previous speakers from this side of the House, I welcome the small measures announced by the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife) tonight to give assistance to the steel industry. We must admit that the steel industry is not in good condition at present. When one goes amongst the steel workers one senses that there is great concern and not much confidence in what the future holds. These measures may give them some sort of respite so that the steel industry can be restructured and some measures taken to put it back on a firm footing.
Of course, my main concern is for the city of Whyalla, the largest city in South Australia outside Adelaide. It is a one industry city; the only industry is the production of various types of steel. If the steel industry runs into trouble, Whyalla is in trouble. There are no alternative industries. At present it probably has one of the highest percentages of young unemployed in South Australia and

the future looks fairly bleak. The steel industry is a decentralised industry. The people who live in Whyalla are concerned about their future and if things get worse in a company town such as Whyalla where there is no alternative employment for the workers, they could lose their homes. Unless we can put the industry back on its feet their future looks very bleak.
Whyalla has already had to go through the traumatic experience of having its other major industry close down due to lack of assistance from this Government. I refer to the shipyards which closed in 1978 when this Government refused to assist the restructuring of that industry so that it could produce cheaper ships. Whyalla went through that traumatic experience. I certainly hope that the small measure of assistance given tonight will allow a period in which there can be a full examination of the industry. We hope that the Industries Assistance Commission will come up with something which will allow the industry to be restructured and put back on its feet so that those people now employed in the steel industry can be given a future.
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle)-by leave-I join other speakers in this debate this evening in welcoming the short respite that the Government has given to the steel industry. I think we can accept the remark of the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) that the steel industry has problems. He does not get any marks for coming up with that phrase because all of us know that the steel industry is in trouble. It is obvious to those people who have had any interest in the steel industry and in a number of Australian industries for that matter that so many of them set out to rely on being able to fall back on some form of protection from the Government. They have not kept pace with the modernisation that is so necessary to keep them in a competitive position.
One of the questions we have to ask is: Who are they in competition with? Why is the overseas competition so fierce that Australian products are not in a competitive position? I draw the attention of honourable members to the fact that this is a situation which develops from time to time. Over my years in this Parliament I have seen not only the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd but also other Australian industries in the situation of having to seek from the government of the day assistance in the form of protection to tide them over a time of economic crisis and to enable them to outstay it. Boom conditions have then developed throughout the world and the industry, whether it be the steel industry or the motor car industry, has been able to carryon. That situation

I034 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Iron and Steel Industry

is brought about because of the pressures that are associates-the dries-are after. I would love to

applied.

see them working under those conditions.

Some years ago the capital of the world was centred on Japan. Japan was a cheap-labour producer of steel and other commodities. Japanese steel products became serious contenders on the Australian market purely and simply because Japan was a low income country. Now South Korea is the selected site for world capitalism.
The world has concentrated its capital investment in South Korea where the labour conditions are such that people work and live on the smell of an oil rag. I have been to South Korea, admittedly many years ago. It is a socially suppressed country run by a dictatorship which so controls the industries that it determines the conditions under which people live. In that country there are no unions as we know them in this country, in the United States, in the United Kingdom, in France, in Germany, or in any country that one can name.
We have to face the facts of life: This country is a high income country. That is our desire, our decision. The decision of the people of this country is that that is what they want. If those are the conditions they decide on, we have to introduce this form of protection to protect efficient Australian industries. There is no way in which any Australian industry with our level of wages, or any industry in America, Britain, Germany or France, can compete with these low income countries unless it has some form of protection. Let us face the facts of life. That is what we are faced with today. Back in the early 1950s Courtaulds (Australia) Ltd was set up in Newcastle. It closed down roughly five or six years ago. One day I spoke to the Newcastle manager in the passageway outside this chamber. He told me that Indian companies had come to Australia to buy the equipment. He was talking to the Indians about annual leave and long service leave conditions. They said: 'What are you talking about? We don't have long service leave or annual leave; we don't have paid holidays; we don't have a 40-hour week.' This is what members of this Parliament have to face up to. Are they the conditions that the dries want? Is that what the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) wants? Do honourable members opposite want Australia to have the employment conditions of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and such places? Do they want Australia to have the living standards of those places? Do they want a situation in which there are no leave conditions and no 40-hour week? That is really what they are after. They want the Australian workers to be coolie labourers. They are the conditions that the honourable member for Moore and his

I welcome the statement that has been made by the Government. I hope that BHP will use the breathing space that it has been given to modernise its plant and bring it to a standard comparable with standards in the rest of the world.
Mr SpenderWhere will the money be coming from?
Mr CHARLES JONES-From the profits that this company has made. Let us get the facts clear. BHP is making hundreds of millions of dollars out of Australian oil, being fortunate enough to be associated with Esso in Bass Strait. The money it got out of steel allowed it to get into oil. Now let us have some of the money it has made out of oil turned back into modernising the steel industry. The coal industry in which it is involved is a very profitable one. From where did the company get the money to move into coal? The money was made originally in the steel and oil industries. Let us have some of the profits from coal used to modernise the steel plant. The company participates in the iron ore industry from which it has made hundreds of millions of dollars profit. Let us have some of that profit turned back into the steel industry as a whole.
BHP is the largest company and the largest employer in Australia. Let it use its resources to modernise its various plants. It was employing some 12,000 people in its Newcastle operations. Little by little the numbers have been cut back. It has never laid anyone off but it has not put anyone on either, and that is just as damn bad. It closed down the shipyard at Whyalla. Representatives of the company came to me when I was Minister for Transport and said: 'Unless your Government is prepared to do certain things we will close the industry down'. BHP closed it down all right; it finished up when the last two 45,000 tonne ships were constructed. When honourable members opposite came to government they did not succumb to the demands of the company and today BHP's Whyalla shipyard is no longer in existence. The company has scattered it to the four winds. Honourable members opposite are the people who allowed it to be closed down. I am asking them not to do the same with the Australian steel industry.
Dr Edwards-Mr Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to make a brief statement.
Leave not granted.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1035

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1982-83
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (8.34)-Prior to the suspension of the sitting the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made his contribution to this Budget debate. The Prime Minister paraded his normal farrago of falsities and fancies, most of which were directed at attacking the Opposition rather than defending his Government's Budget, which shows just how much conviction he has about the relevance of that Budget to the nation's need at present. Of course, the Prime Minister is in a very difficult situation. He is a man who came to the leadership of this nation proclaiming that he had the answers to Australia's economic needs and that he could produce growth and jobs. Of course, we have seen a very sad situation in the Australian economy over the period in which he has been Prime Minister. On I August 1980 the Prime Minister said:
The justification for our claim to Government is our capacity to secure sustainable economic growth.
I ask the House to take particular note of those words. I will repeat them. He said:
The justification for our claim to Government is the capacity to procure sustainable economic growth.
What has he just done? A week ago he had his Treasurer (Mr Howard) bring into this House a Budget which provides for no economic growth at all. On the basis of that Budget the Prime Minister has forfeited his claim to government. If he claims government on the basis of economic growth and he produces Budgets which provide for no economic growth, he has forfeited his claim to the leadership of this nation and his party's right to be the government of this nation. That is the basis on which the Opposition attacks this Budget. This Budget is totally inappropriate to the present needs of this nation, as have been all previous Fraser Government Budgets.
What has happended to the Australian economy in the period in which the Fraser Government has been in office is a terribly sad story. At present there is no growth in Australia. What is happening in other countries? The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has forecast that growth in the OECD region as a whole-that is, the Western developed countries-in 1982-83 will be 2t per cent. We will have zero growth. So, compared to the rest of the world, Australia is way behind. Let us look at what has happened under the Fraser Government between 1975 and 1980. Over that period the rate of growth of real income per head in Australia

was 1.2 per cent. For the OECD region as a whole the growth rate was 2.7 per cent. In other words, the real incomes of Australians grew in the first five years of office of the Fraser Government at less than half the rate that real incomes grew in the OECD region as a whole. That is a pathetic record. By way of contrast, let us look at what happened when the Labor Government was in control of this nation. In Australia between 1972 and 1975 real income per head of population increased by 1.9 per cent and the increase for the OECD region as a whole was 1.2 per cent. Real incomes in Australia relative to those in the rest of the developed world increased quite substantially in the period of Labor's control of this country; but in the first five years of the Fraser Government's control of this country they ran at less than half the rate of real income growth elsewhere. That is why Australia is becoming a relatively poor nation.
Australia is sliding down the list of living standards in the Western world. Year after year, under this rotten Government, our nation is becoming poorer and poorer. This is something that I am sure the Australian people will be insensed about when they become fully aware of it. It is an alarming fact that we are sliding rapidly down that income scale. In 1950 Australia was the fifth richest country in the world in terms of income per head. In 1979 it was the sixteenth richest of the Western countries, not including the oil rich countries such as Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. I am talking just on comparable Western countries. We slipped from fifth to sixteenth in that 29-year period. During that 29-year period we had a Labor government for a miserable three years, so honourable members opposite cannot blame us. In our three years of government incomes increased faster than they did in the rest of the world. It has been in the period of conservative governments-the 26 years that they have inflicted themselves on the Australian peoplethat we have become a poorer and poorer nation. The slide is going on as indicated by the growth figures that I have given for 1982-83. We will become much poorer relative to the rest of the world in 1982-83. The slide will continue as long as this Government controls the Australian nation and deadens its economy with its contractionary policies.
If we continue on this path, by the year 2000 countries such as Singapore and Hong Kong will be richer than Australia. We will become relatively poor in our own region. That will be a hell of a shock to the Australian people. But that is the

\036 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

path we will be on-markedly so-unless different policies apply, unless we have a new government which can promote economic growth, increase incomes per head and provide jobs. This Government can do none of those things.
The Government claims that this Budget is a family Budget, that it is a fair and workable response to the very difficult problems that Australia faces at present, that it is an anti-inflationary Budget and that it is a Budget to achieve voluntary wage moderation. All of those
claims are false. It is none of those things. Let me go through each of those claims. The first is that it is a family Budget. The Government claims that there are massive benefits for families in this Budget. That is a totally false claim. The fact is that the impact of the Budget makes most families no better off or even slightly worse off than last year and those that are better off are only slightly
so.
The Treasurer claimed in his Budget Speech that a typical family, which he described as being one with a dependent spouse and two children despite the fact that only 20 per cent of taxpayers claim the spouse rebate, nevertheless taking his example, a taxpayer on a $300 income and paying a mortgage of $25,000 at an interest rate of 13t per cent will be $16.84 better off. He got that in
various ways. I will not go through all of the arithmetic. Basically he did it by ignoring the fact that the Government abolished tax indexation. Of course, without tax indexation the proportion of our income that we pay in tax automatically increases. The Government abolished tax indexation which it once proudly trumpeted as being a great reform in this country. It did this so that it could come in with a Budget which gave tax cuts and say, 'There, we are giving you big tax cuts', whereas before it was almost an automatic process. The Government is simply trying to deceive the Australian people into believing that there are l~rge tax cuts when in fact there are no such large tax cuts.
The income tax cuts in this Budget are only slightly more than what would have been there with full income tax indexation. That is the real situation. Tax indexation would have cost about $1,500m, so the proportion of income paid in tax did not increase. The income tax cuts in the Budget are $1,570m, not counting the mortgage interest tax rebate, the dividend rebate or the age pensioner rebate which of course do not go to all taxpayers. If they are included the amount comes to $1,768m-a bit over $1,500m certainly. That difference is swamped by the increases in indirect taxes. The $1,046m worth of increased indirect taxes means that there are no tax cuts. There is

indeed an increase in the proportion of income going in tax as a result of this Budget. So we see that the so-called tax cuts which are going to make families better off are in fact a mirage. Even when one includes the increased family allowances, which are rightly to be taken into account in considering the position of families then, as I mentioned, most families are no better off. At this stage I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard some tables relating to the effect of the Budget on living standards.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

EFFECT OF THE BUDGET ON LIVING STANDARDS

Example One

The 'Howard Family' comprising a sole breadwinner with a dependent spouse and two dependent children, with an income in 1982-83 of $300 per week and a $25,000 mortgage at 13.5 per cent.

$ per week

Tax in 1982-83 with full tax indexation Actual tax in 1982-83

49.20 47.17

Real tax cut

2.03

Plus: Home Interest Rebate

3.38

Family Allowance

2.85

Less: Indirect Taxes

4.40

Net Position

+3.86

This family, if they rent or already own their own home would not qualify for the home loan rebate and thus would be
only $0.48 a week better off this year.

Example Two

A two income family, with total weekly income in 1982-83
of $400, (one spouse earning $240, the other $160), two children and a $25,000 mortgage at 13.5 per cent.

$ per week

Tax in 1982-83 with full tax indexation Actual tax in 1982-83

70.00 70.04

Real tax increase Less: Home Interest Rebate
Family Allowance Plus: Indirect Taxes
Net Position

0.04 3.38 2.85 4.40
+ 1.79

This family, if they rent or already own their own home would be $1.59 a week worse off.

Example Three

Single taxpayer with no children or home loan, and with an income in 1982-83 of $300 per week.

$ per week

Tax in 1982-83 with full tax indexation Actual tax in 1982-83

67.20 65.20

Real tax cut

2.00

Less: Indirect Taxes

2.20

Net Position

-0.20

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTAT1VES 1037

Example Four

The 'Howard Family' comprising a sole breadwinner with a
dependent spouse and two dependent children, with an income in 1982-83 of $300 per week and a $25,000 mortgage at 13.5 per cent-comparison with 1980-81.
$ per week

Tax with full tax indexation Actual tax in 1982-83

44.10 47.17

Real tax increase

3.07

Plus: Home Interest Rebate

3.38

Plus: Family Allowance

2.85

Less: Indirect Taxes~-

1981-82

2.40

1982-83

4.40

Net Position

-3.64

This family, if they rent or already own their own home
would not qualify for the home loan rebate and thus would be $7.02 a week worse off over the last 2 years.
Mr WILLIS-There are four examples in these tables showing the effect of the Budget on different households. Let us take as the first example, the Howard family. this is the family which, as I mentioned, the Treasurer boasted was getting a $16.84 increase. When one takes account of the fact that there is no tax indexation, that the tax cuts apply from I November and that the increase in family allowances does not apply until I November, one sees that a family, such as the Treasurer describes, for the full year 1982-83 as against the previous year, has real tax cuts of only $2.03. That is, the tax cuts that it has in income compared to what it would have had with tax indexation is only $2.03.
When one allows for not only the mortgage interest rebate and the increase in family allowances but also the effect of increased indirect taxes of $4.40 a week one finds on our calculations, which is dividing the increase in income in direct tax revenue by the 4,600,000 Australian households, that that family instead of being $16.84 a week better off, as the Treasurer falsely proclaims, is only $3.86 a week better off. If they did not have a mortgage and rented their home they would be only 48c a week better off because

they would not get the mortgage rebate. That is the real situation for the year 1982-83 as compared to the previous year 1981-82. The figure of $16.84 is a mirage. It is a figure which is arrived at on the bases I have mentioned and by looking at the situation on one day, namely, 1 November 1982 rather than looking at the situation for those families over the whole of this year compared to the whole of last year.
Other family groups have been mentioned by the Treasurer. Example two looks at a two income family with a total weekly income of $400. On our calculations that family is only $1.79 a week better off this year as against last year because of this Budget. If they rented their home or already owned it and were not paying it off they would be $1.59 a week worse off. The third example is for a single taxpayer on an income of $300 a week with no children or home loan. That taxpayer is 20c a week worse off. Example four reflects the Howard family of a taxpayer with a dependent spouse, two children and an income of $300 a week. Let us look at the situation now compared to two years ago. One sees that that family is $3.04 worse off, or if they rented their house, $7.02 a week worse off. So much for this family Budget. This is no family Budget which gives great hand-outs to families. This is a Budget which gives nothing to the majority of families. Let us remember that two-thirds of Australian families are not buying their own home, they either own the home or they are renting the home. So two-thirds of families will not get the mortgage interest rebate. When one takes that fact into account the majority of Australian families will be worse off. I believe that that puts the situation of the so-called family Budget in some perspective. I also seek leave to incorporate in Hansard two tables relating to the position of taxpayers in Australia over the last seven years.
Leave granted.
The tables read as/ollows:

SINGLE TAXPAYER-SUMMARY

1975-76
2,626 4,202
5,252 6,303
7,878 8,403
10,504 13,130

Income ($ p.a.)

1980-81 1981-82

4,355

5,000

6,969

8,000

(tAWE)

8,711

10,000

10,453

12,000

(75%AWE)

13,066

15,000

13,937

16,000

(AWE)

17,422

20,000

21,777

25,000

1982-83
5,600 8,960
11,200 13,440
16,800 17,920
22,400 28,000

Proportion of income paid in tax (%)

1975-76 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83

1.1

2.3

5.2

6.2

10.8

13.4

15.2

15.4

14.4

17.2

18.6

18.5

17.9

19.6

20.8

20.5

21.3

22.1

23.1

22.5

22.1

22.7

23.6

23.0

25.2

24.7

26.8

26.9

29.2

29.0

30.6

30.7

Tax increase due to policies of the Frazer Government ($ p.w.)

1982-83 1975-76
+ 5.49 + 7.93

1982-83 1980-81
+ 4.20 + 3.45

1982-83 1981-82
+ 1.08 + 0.34

+ 8.83 + 6.72

+ 2.20 + 2.33

~ 0.22 ~ 0.78

+ 3.88 + 3.10 + 7.32 + 8.08

+ 1.29 + 1.03 + 9.48 + 9.15

~ 1.94 ~ 2.07
~ 0.43
+ 0.54

1038 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

1975-76 15,756 16,807 25,210 52,521
1975-76

Income ($ p.a.)

1980-81 1981-82

26,132 27,875
41,812
87,108

30,000 32,000
(2xAWE) 48,000
(3xAWE)
100,000

1982-83
33,600 35,840
53,760
112,000

Proportion of income paid in tax (%)

1975-76 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83

32.3

31.8

33.2

33.3

33.7

32.7

34.0

34.1

41.9

39.6

41.5

42.7

53.9

50.2

51.1

51.7

Tax increase due to policies of the Frazer Government ($ p. w.)

1982-83 1975-76

1982-83 1980-81

1982-83 1981-82

+ 6.46 + 2.76

+ 9.69 + 9.65

+ 0.65 + 0.69

+ 8.27

+32.05

+12.41

-47.38

+32.31

+12.92

TAXPAYER WITH DEPENDENT SPOUSE AND TWO CHILDREN-SUMMARY

Income ($ p.a.)

- Proportion of income paid in tax (%)

Tax increase due to policies of the Fraser Government

1980-81

1981-82 1982-83 1975-76 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83 Last I year Last 2 years Last 7 years

2,626 4,202
5,252 6,303
7,878 8,403
10,504 13,130 15,756 16,807
25,210
52,521

4,355

5,000

5,600

6,969

8,000

8,960

0.3

- 0.52

(tAWE)

8,711

10,000 11,200

3.8

6.6

5.3 - 2.80 + 3.23 +11.42

10,453

12,000 13,440

5.2

8.5

10.9

9.5

- 3.62

+ 2.58

+ 11.1 I

(75%AWE)

13,066

15,000 16,800

11.1

13.2

15.1

13.7

- 4.52

+ 1.62

+ 8.40

13,937

16,000 17,920

12.6

14.4.

16.1

14.8

- 4.48

+ 1.38

+ 7.58

(AWE)

17,422

20,000 22.400

17.6

18.0

20.8

20.3

- 2.15

+ 9.91

+11.63

21,777

25,000 28,000

23.1

23.6

25.8

25.4

- 2.15

+ 9.69

+12.38

26,132

30,000 33,600

27.2

27.4

29.2

28.9

- 1.94

+ 9.69

+10.98

27,875

32,000 35,840

28.9

28.5

30.2

30.0

- 1.38

+10.34

+ 7.58

(2xAWE)

41,812

48,000 53,760

38.7

36.8

39.1

40.0

+ 9.30

+33.08

+ 13.44

(3xAWE)

87,108 100,000 112,000

52.4

48.9

49.9

50.4 + 10.76

+32.31

-43.08

-To enable comparisons to be made between 1975-76 and all years, these figures treat the difference in family allowance each year and child endowment in 1975-76 as a negative income item to account for the change from tax deductions for dependent children in 1975-76.

Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. I will not go into the details of these tables because of the lack
of time. They simply show that the single taxpayer or a taxpayer with a dependent spouse and two children this year will be paying a higher level of tax than last year. As compared with 1975-76 all taxpayers are paying a much higher proportion of their incomes in tax except for those on very
high incomes. That table certainly puts into perspective the whole issue of tax cuts. It was also an important claim of this Budget that it was a fair
and workable response to the very difficult problems the Australian nation faces at present. In our view it is a highly inadequate response. In the midst of the worst recession since the 1930s the Government has brought in another contractionary Budget that is designed not to create any jobs. It is a deliberate part of this Budget not to create any jobs at a time when unemployment is at the highest level it has been since the 1930s. As a result the forecast is no employment growth. So we are going to get an increase in unemployment officially from 6t per cent or thereabouts to over 8 per cent as a result of the increase in the work force. The rise in the deficit does not mean that this is an expansionary Budget which in some way

responds to the needs of the nation to have a more expansionary policy.
The increase in the deficit which is in this Budget is a result almost totally of the recession which this Government's policies have forced upon the Australian economy. Last weekend the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said that the Government was looking at about a $1 billion increase in the deficit as a direct consequence of economic conditions. He was saying that because the economy was recessed, we will get a much lower rate of growth of taxes and we will have to payout a lot more on unemployment benefit. Because of those two factors we were automatically having an increase in our deficit, because of the recession that these policies have brought on this country, of $1 billion. By how much did the deficit go up? It went up by $1.1 billion. So almost all of the deficit increase was attributable to the recession and not to any change in government policy. This is only a very slightly less contractionary Budget than the one which we had last year-a Budget which forced us into deeper recession. This Budget, clearly on the face of the Budget forecast itself, will force us even deeper into recession. We have to ask: How long will we go on with these crazy policies which are pushing us

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1039

deeper and deeper into recession and to higher and higher levels of unemployment? There has been no change in policy. As a result of that fact we have no tax cuts. The tax cuts mentioned in the Budget total $1 ,812m. The tax increases in the Budget total $1,916m. Taken overall there are no tax cuts and there is very little increase in real expenditure. The 13.9 per cent increase in expenditure is taken up by maintaining the real level of outlays per head of the population and the automatic increase in payouts and unemployment benefits because of the high level of unemployment benefit recipients.
This is clearly a Budget which does not try to do much about the economy. It still has a domestic surplus. As a result of this we have the most contractionary policy applying in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, in any Western country, at present. That is what this Government is inflicting upon us.
The Government claims that this is an anti-inflationary Budget. It has made such claims many times before. That statement is totally false, as it has been on previous occasions. This is a Budget which increases indirect taxes by over $1,OOOm. On the basis of the Treasurer's own figures given to this House in March last year, a $500m increase in indirect taxes equals a one per cent increase in the consumer price index. So this Budget will add 2 per cent to the consumer price index. It is a hell of a strange way to fight inflation by increasing prices directly by 2 per cent.
The Government also claims that this is a Budget to achieve voluntary wage moderation. The Budget does no such thing. As I have already indicated, there are little or no benefits to families, there is no employment growth and the Budget has no anti-inflation effect. Indeed, it does the opposite; it increases prices through increased indirect taxes which will automatically increase wage claims. For all of those reasons it is not a Budget to bring voluntary wage moderation. It also has none of the supplementary measures that are needed if the government is really serious about getting voluntary wage moderation. Two of those supplementary measures which are crucially important are: Firstly, that restraint is applied to all sections of the community. The Government should not just say to the wage earners in this country: 'You are the ones who have to restrain your income claims when everyone else can go free and do what he likes.' That is no way to get wage restraint or anti-inflationary policies operating because the unions will rightly ask:'Why should we be the bunnies? Why should we be the ones who restrain our activities when everyone else can do what he likes?'. If this

Government is really serious it has to have restraints on other sections of the community.
Secondly, we have to have a centralised wages system. This Government is going the other way. It is trying to destroy the centralised wages system. It has been fairly successful. But without a centralised wages system how can the trade union movement have a co-ordinated response to government initiatives, if it is going to be operating on a totally decentralised basis? Of course this policy really amounts to a policy of making the market work more effectively on wage claims. It is a policy which is designed to reduce wages involuntarily by the bludgeon of unemployment. This Budget is designed to create more unemployment, to reduce income claims of wage and salary earners and, in that ways to try to keep inflation down. Despite all of that, the inflation rate is still forecast at around lOi per cent-a higher rate than we had last year. What a hopeless Budget strategy all that amounts to.
The appropriate kind of strategy is one in which we seek to achieve growth in this economy by a more expansionary budgetary and monetary policy. We do not seek to use that policy simultaneously as a means of restraining inflation. If one tries to do both all that one finishes up with is the contractionary policies which have destroyed this nation in the last seven years and made Australia a relatively poorer nation year by year than previously. Those kinds of policies are simply passe now. They are not working. The policies which will work are policies which seek to employ prices and incomes policies to restrain inflation, married to a more expansionary budgetary and monetary policy to promote growth. That is the kind of strategy which will work. It is the kind of strategy the Australian Labor Party is developing, and will develop more fully, with which to lead Australia in the very near future.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Defence) (8.54)-One admires and respects the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) for his loyalty. I am delighted to see that even the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) is here with him. One feels sorry for the efforts that he has just made. He said that he does not believe that this Budget is a good one and he has identified a series of areas where he says that the Budget has not provided for the people of Australia. Quite to the contrary; he has acknowledged that it has. He stated that there were no tax cuts yet he qualified this by stating that they amounted to $1 ,800m. He

1040 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

stated that there were no benefits for families but he ignored the fact that there is an increase in the family allowance, and interest rate subsidy for those who are paying off their own homes and a special allocation for those who are paying rents. He then spoke about job creation but failed to acknowledge that in the Bicentennial Road Development Program and in the defence budget, about which I wish to talk in a moment, there is a significant contribution.
This Budget ensures that the people of Australia are given a chance, in spite of contracting world trade opportunities and conditions that apply in other parts of the world, without the inflationary impost of those nonsensical policies which the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) tried to suggest were hidden somewhere in the woods, and about which we were going to hear some time in the never never. If the Australian Labor Party were ever to be in government all that it would offer would be a repeat of those diabolic days in the years 1972 to 1975.
The program that was offered tonight by the honourable member for Gellibrand, who after all is the shadow Treasurer, shows as little depth as the program offered by the Leader of the Opposition only a week ago. It was not a program that offered any promise, hope or substance to the people of Australia. Indeed, one can see yet again the consequences of the Australian Labor Party in government or in opposition. It is quite committed to a relationship with the unions. The honourable member for Gellibrand suggested a centralised wages system, which means giving in to the unions and adopting the same sorts of policies that have brought so much distress to the people of New South Wales. No State in Australia today is worse off in employment terms, economic terms or in terms of opportunities than New South Wales, simply because of the policies of Labor. New South Wales has suffered under the hand of Wran. It has suffered under the hands of a Labor Government. It has suffered because there has been what the Labor Party calls a centralised wages system. A centralised wages system is no way in which to cure the inflationary problems of this country. We have provided genuine income tax cuts, benefits for families, for the young, for the old, for the handicapped and for the unemployed. We have provided benefits for the primary industries.
Mr Charles-Oh, rubbish!
Mr SINCLAIR-We have provided a Budget which demonstrably has not in any sense been rebutted by the idiotic comments of the honourable member for Isaacs. However, I want

predominantly to identify to honourable members in this House the contents and the parameters of the $4,622m that has been allocated in this Budget for defence expenditure in 1982-83. This represents an increase of 11.8 per cent on the sum provided in 1981-82. It is expected to be about 2.9 per cent of gross domestic product, in line with the target set by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) of 3 per cent by 1984-85. Except for the $llOm included in the Budget for prospective wage and salary increases, the defence proportion is largely in April prices. It does not include provision for all price increases yet to be met in 1982-83. Provision for these, of course, will be addressed in the context of the 1982-83 Additional Estimates.
Since 1975-76, thanks largely to my predecessor, the honourable member for Moreton, the former Minister for Defence, and the present Leader of the House (Sir James Killen)-he is presiding with some distinction over the deliberations of this place-defence outlays have risen by 148 per cent taking this year's estimates into account, a remarkable increase over those absolutely deplorable figures during the days of the cutback during the Whitlam Labor years. Of course, this is a much higher rate than the rate of infla-
tion. Inflation in the same period, as measured by that glorious economic statistic, the implicit GDP non-farm price deflator, is estimated to rise by about 92 per cent. The defence vote has risen by 148 per cent against 92 per cent.
A further indication of the priority which the Government has given to defence is reflected in its increasing claim on national resources. Defence spending, as a proportion of the GDP, has risen from 2.6 per cent in 1975-76 to an expected 2.9 per cent in 1982-83. Last week I tabled the interim report of the Defence Review Committee. The final report of the Committee is expected later this year. Its interim recommendations have been acted on by the Government to rationalise overall defence organisation and to strengthen defence management. The new porfolio of Defence Support gives added focus to the industry, production, research and purchasing activities associated with defence. My colleague the Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner), who is also Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence, works in close co-operation with me and within my policy guidance is able to give his undivided attention to those important activities.
Given the industrial difficulties that prevailed in that area over recent years I believe it is a very worthwhile development. Indeed that is one of the problems I see facing those involved in trying to maintain an adequate standard of defence in

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1041

this country. The unfortunate activities of unions at Williamstown is particular have prejudiced even the follow-on destroyer program. That, I think, is a very sad indictment on the preparedness of those who claim they are seeking jobs to provide the sort of work output that is absolutely essential if contracts are to be let in that area. Our two departments are working together to coordinate all defence related activities of the Commonwealth in a single defence program.
This year priority will continue to be given to raising the level of defence expenditure devoted to investment in capital equipment and capital facilities. The 1982-83 defence budget increases the proportion of defence expenditure devoted to capital investment from 16.9 per cent last year to 21.1 per cent this year, with an estimated expenditure for these categories of$987m. This includes $773m for capital equipment and some $214m for capital facilities. On the equipment front, the picture is one of substancial expenditures to fulfil commitments and to fund a number of new projects, including two minehunters, eight mortar locating radars and semi-trailer transporters for armoured vehicles.
Honourable members will recall that my predecessor on 29 April this year advised the House that in 198 I-82 the defence budget received significant relief from reductions in planned payments on purchases under the united States Department of Defense foreign military sales arrangements.
Mr Donald Cameron-Who was your predecessor?
Mr SINCLAIR-A very distinguished gentleman, the present and continuing honourable member for Moreton, mind you, at times he was a jackaroo and one is not sure whether he does not recall those days with even greater favour. Some further relief is expected on this account in 1982-83 and this is reflected in the figures I have just cited.
The sum of $183m of the facilities allocation will be devoted to new construction, providing work for large numbers of local building contractors, tradesmen and labourers in locations all over Australia. There will be substantial construction in the north and north-west of the country, the defence needs of which I was able to assess first hand during an extensive tour of those areas in June. This year will see work on airfields at Derby South and Learmonth, Western Australia, on fuel storage at Tindal in the Northern Territory, and the beginning of the program at Darwin airport. In addition to the construction activity generated by defence expenditure on facilities there are

many ways in which the funds appropriated for defence directly support local communities. I would that the honourable member for Gellibrand stayed in the chamber because he complained that this Budget did not provide any contribution to work generation. I can assure him that the extension of the vote in defence is a very important contributor to work activity in our community.
With small business there is the significance of defence contracts with local firms. Importantly there is also the household expenditure by members of the Defence Force and their dependants. There is the expenditure by defence establishments on food, fuel and other consumables in the areas where they are located. There is too the expenditure by units on local services such as the repair and maintenance of buildings and equipment. In total more than $3.5 billion of the funds appropriated for defence purposes this year will be spent on goods and services in Australia. That is in spite of the fact that we have a major forward commitment in re-equipping the Services with capital equipment, much of which is necessarily still purchased overseas.
We are continuing to maintain restraint on manpower and running costs so that capital investment can be given priority. In 1981-82 expenditure on service and civilian pay and allowances and Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits was 54 per cent of the total expenditure on the defence function. This expenditure included $230m for the part year effect of additional costs arising from recommendations of the Committee of Reference for Defence Force Pay, which most of us know as the Coldham Committee. In 1982-83 the full year effect of the Committee recommendations will be $300m but overall manpower costs will reduce to about 51 per cent of total defence expenditure.
The Defence Force will continue to be a major force in the labour market. There will be over 7,700 vacancies to be filled over the next twelve months, in the overwhelming majority of cases by young people. The proportion of expenditure devoted to running costs will also decline, in this case to an estimated 26.8 per cent of total expenditure in 1982-83. This in part reflects economies arising from the retirement of aged equipment, more specialisation in flying training and the better utilisation of fuel reserves. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a paper setting out details of the major projects and activities which collectively determine the distribution of expenditure in the defence program just outlined.
Leave granted.

1042 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The document read as follows-
MAJOR ELEMENTS OF DEFENCE EXPENDITURE 1982-83
Presented to Parliament by
THE RT HaN. IAN SINCLAIR, M.P.
Minister for Defence
The following are the major items of expenditure for 1982-83, and the initiatives which will be taken during the year.
FFG 2. A review of the estimated project cost of acquiring four guided missile frigates from the United States has shown no real cost increase. The estimated project cost at January 1981 prices was $I063m, comprising $879m for the ships and $184m for helicopters. At January 1982 prices the estimated project cost for the four ships is $923m. This difference of $44m in the ship costs reflects changes in exchange rates and inflation only. The proposed expenditure on these ships in 1982-83 is$12Im.
Phalanx 3. Orders have been placed for two additional Phalanx weapon systems for the RAN at a total project cost of about $15m. The weapon provides a fully automatic close-in defence against sea-skimming missiles of the Exocet type. The guided missile frigates HMAS Darwin and HMAS Sydney will come already fitted with Phalanx.
FFG helicopters
4. Acquisition of helicopters for the guided missile frigates is proceeding separately. A short list of contenders was recently announced. The manufacturers of these contenders will be funded to develop options for the design and development of sensor and weapon systems, and to examine the opportunities for Australian industry participation in the project as a whole. The possibility of acquiring a common aircraft to meet the Navy's guided missile frigates and other military roles will be examined.
Light helicopters 5. A contract was recently awarded to the French company Aerospatiale for eighteen light helicopters for the Air Force and the Navy. The estimated total project cost is about $23m and the helicopters will be delivered in 1983 and 1984. Some of the Navy helicopters may be embarked in the guided missile frigates as an interim arrangement.
New tactical fighter 6. $217m has been provided in 1982-83 for progress payments on the new F/ A-18 fighter. This project will continue to demand significant resources in the years ahead.
7. Many contracts involving Australian industry in parts manufacture, assembly and test of the F/ A-18 are already in place. The flow of technical data into factories has started. Construction of facilities needed by industry to participate in the program has commenced. Much of the required machinery and plant has been ordered. Many key technologies will be introduced.
8. Much remains to be accomplished in this enormous undertaking. The task will be difficult and demanding and will test Australian industry. The cost will be high, but the rewards from this investment in self reliance in an area of advanced technology are substantial.
F-lll
9. The enhancement of the capabilities of the F-III force continues. $40m is provided this year for the PAVETACK

target acquisition and tracking system which will enable the F-Ills to use precision guided munitions.
P-3C 10. A contract for ten new P-3C Orion aircraft has now been signed with Lockheed. The project cost was reduced by about $60m to $362m by Lockheed agreeing to buy back the older P-3Bs. The new aircraft will give us much enhanced antisubmarine warfare and surveillance capability through to the turn of the century and, with ships, submarines and other aircraft, add up to a formidable maritime defence capability. $33m has been provided for in 1982-83.
Mirage II. It is planned that $22m will be spent this year on the Mirage aircraft refurbishment program. This includes the acquisition of new and refurbished wings and of advanced short range air-to-air missiles.
Patrol boats 12. Construction of the Fremantle-class patrol boats at Cairns is proceeding on schedule. The sixth vessel of the class was commissioned as HMAS Whyalla in July. It is planned that $19m will be spent in 1982-83 on patrol boat acquisition, with a further three vessels planned for delivery during the year.
Destroyer construction and modernization
13. If productivity develops satisfactorily destroyers of the FFG type will be built at Williamstown Naval Dockyard. Some $18m is to be spent this year on equipment items which have long lead times for delivery. Another $46m has been provided for modernization of Navy's existing ships-the Riverclass escorts and the guided missile destroyers.
AOR-I
14. The underway replenishment ship HMAS SUCCESS, which will replace HMAS SUPPLY, is continuing construction at Vickers Cockatoo Dockyard. $18m is to be spent on her this year.
Minehunting catamarans
15. The development of an Australian-designed minehunter is proceeding. Contract negotiations have started with Carrington Slipways Pty Ltd of Tomago, NSW for the construction of the first two vessels.
16. With these craft, Australia will be able to develop the complex skills needed to counter mines laid in areas of greatest concern, i.e. harbours and their approaches. Provision has been made for expenditure amounting to $12m this financial year.
Minesweepers
17. The Government has decided that minesweepers should be examined that could complement the minehunters. Proposals will be sought in this financial year.
Bridge simulator
18. A contract has been awarded for the supply and installation of a ship's bridge simulator which will be used to train naval officers in ship handling and fleet manoeuvres. Total cost of the simulator and its associated equipment, to be installed at HMAS WATSON in Sydney, will be about $13m.
Army transport 19. Expenditure to re-equip the Army with modern
wheeled vehicles for field use continues. In 1982-83, $32m is to be spent on the medium trucks which are being assembled in Australia, with substantial wider benefits for industry.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1043

Tenders were recently called for an initial order of light vehicles to begin replacement of the existing Land-Rover fleet. Up to 3000 might be ordered.
Communications
20. Tenders have been invited for the first phases of the Defence Integrated Secure Communications Network (DJSCON), which involve the design of the complete system and its installation in the eastern states. Australian industry will become increasingly involved in this project with some 40 per cent of the principal work of this phase being performed here. Through this project there will be a significant transfer of knowledge and skills in modern computer-controlled digital communication technology from overseas. It is expected that some $8m will be spent on DJSCON this year.
21. Recently, the signing of a contract for $7m to provide new High Frequency and Very High Frequency combat radios for the Army was announced. This is the third phase of project RAVEN, which will re-equip Army with modern radio equipment. The quantity of radios to be acquired has yet to be decided, but up to 11,000 could be produced over the next 10 years at an estimated total project cost of some $200m, depending on the final number of radios ordered.
22. Tenders are also to be invited for the next phase of a project to provide the Army with a Tactical Field Trunk Communication System. This phase of project PARAKEET, as it is known, is for the design and development of the system and it is planned that a contract will be awarded later this financial year.
Training Aircraft
23. It was also announced recently that the Government has decided to proceed with the design and development of a new basic training aircraft. A contract has been placed with the Australian Aircraft Consortium Pty Ltd which has been formed conjointly by the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Ltd, Hawker de Havilland Australia Pty Ltd and the Commonwealth Aircraft Factories. Test flying will start in 1985 and production aircraft are expected to enter service in 1988. Expenditure in 1982-83 is $14m of a total estimated project cost of $155m.
Mortar Locating Radars
24. Eight new mortar locating radars will be acquired for entry into service in 1985 so that Army can update its capability in this important field. The estimated project cost for this equipment is $42.7m. $5.5m has been provided for expenditure this year.
Other Acquisitions
25. Other acquisitions to be proceeded with this financial year include semi-trailer transporters for armoured fighting vehicles, engine protection equipment for F-III s, and water purification equipment for the Army.
Definition Studies
26. A number of major definition studies will be fundedfor the new destroyers, for an automated tactical command and control information system, for improved electronic detection systems for the P-3C aircraft, and for airfield radar at the Army Aviation Centre at Oakey, Queensland.
27. Contracts are being let with three Australian companies for funded studies to examine the broad options for Project WALER, which looks for Australian involvement in the development and production of a family of light armoured fighting vehicles to enter service in the mid-I 990s. This is an important project in the context of the Government's policy of increasing self-reliance in Defence.

Manpower
28. Over the 3 years to June 1982, regular military strength has increased by almost 3,000. In the interests of containing rising manpower costs and reducing the proportion of Defence funds allocated to them, this growth will not continue into 1982-83. Indeed, some manpower economies will be possible with the retirement of HMAS MELBOURNE and the RAAF's ageing Canberra aircraft.
29. Navy and Air Force Reserves will increase and the Army Reserve will maintain its strength at 30,000. No growth is provided for in Defence civilian manpower.
Facilities
30. The 1982-83 Budget provides also for continued development of our defence infrastructure, with substantial expenditure on the training and other facilities necessary to support the Defence Force, as well as on those facilities required for direct support of military operations.
31. The support of naval operations will be enhanced by the extensive modernisation of Garden Island Fleet Base and Dockyard, Sydney, where works totalling over $65m have now been authorised and are well under way, and by a large housing program for Navy's new base in the west, HMAS STIRLING, in preparation for the home porting of ships there from 1984.
32. $3.4m will be spent in 1982-83 on replacement of cranes at Cockatoo Island dockyard and continuing development of Williamstown dockyard.
33. Naval operational training will be enhanced by a $1.1 m building at HMAS WATSON, Sydney, for training in bridge duties. At Jervis Bay, work will begin on a $1.9m facility for training in fire fighting and damage control at sea. The importance of such training has been highlighted by the recent Falklands war.
34. Major works to develop the Army's three Task Force bases at Holsworthy, Enoggera and Townsville will continue in 1982-83. Work is also planned to begin on a $17m redevelopment of a base for Army's 16th Air Defence Regiment at Woodside, South Australia, and on a $14m redevelopment of the Armoured Centre at Puckapunyal, Victoria.
35. In March 1983 tenders will be called for a new building to house the Physics Division at the Materials Research Laboratories, Maribyrnong. The building, to cost $2.6m, will provide modern facilities for the Division's laser research.
36. At Bonegilla, near Albury-Wodonga, a new $40m Army Apprentices School will be opened early in 1983. Training facilities for higher Army command will be improved by the development of a new $2.5m complex at the Army Staff College, Queenscliff. Following the Government's initiative to increase the Army Reserve, additional training facilities, costing a total of about $5m, will be provided at Wacol in Queensland, Warradale in South Australia, and Karrakatta in Western Australia.
37. Significant steps towards further improvement of defence infrastructure in north and north-west Australia will be taken with the commencement this year of works on a new $54m airfield at Derby South, Western Australia, which will be capable of handling all types of RAAF aircraft, and with the completion of works to improve the airfield at Learmonth, Exmouth Gulf. Work will also start on a new fuel storage facility which had been planned at the RAAF airfield at Tindal, near Katherine, Northern Territory. The possibility is also being examined of developing Tindal as a base for the new F/ A-18 fighter aircraft, instead of Darwin. A decision on this question should be made in the near future.
38. Expenditure on the structural bonding workshop being constructed at the Government Aircraft Factories will be $9.7m this year.

1044 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Housing
39. Reflecting the Government's concern with the welfare of servicemen, improvements to the standards of new houses for servicemen were announced earlier this year. A large program of new housing is already under way, and this year it is planned to start the construction and acquisition of a further 600 houses. These will cost about $35m, of which $11 m will be spent in 1982-83.
Activities
40. The resources allocated to day-to-day activities will continue to be tightly controlled so as to make more room in an expanding program for capital items, our investment in the future.
41. Some economies have been achieved through specific action such as the phasing out of the Canberras and HMAS MELBOURNE's aircraft and the specialisation of Mirage pilots in either air-to-air or air-to-ground training. These moves have brought about a small reduction in overall flying hours. But within the smaller total it has also enabled the activity levels of some elements, including pilot training, to be increased.
42. The allocation to navy for fuel purchases has been reduced in 1982-83. This does not imply a reduction in activity levels. Rather, some reserves of fuel held in low usage areas will be utilized, making it possible to increase steaming time as well as to introduce new vessels to service.
43. Planning will be put in train this year for exercise KANGAROO 83, the fourth in a series of large scale ANZUS exercises conducted biennially. Exercising in 1982-83 will be maintained at around the same level as last year, KANGAROO 81 apart. A number of multinational exercises, together with a wide range of single service and joint exercises are being planned.
44. Some specific activities for which provision is made in the Budget allocations are the introduction to service of HMAS Sydney, the stationing in Darwin of three Fremantleclass patrol boats by the end of the year, foreign port visits by RAN vessels and the maintenance of a RAN presence in the north west Indian Ocean.
45. Army will complete its restructuring of the Ist Infantry Division and continue with the reforming of the 2nd Infantry Division. There will be further refinement of the capabilities of the Operational Deployment Force.
46. Provision has also been made to maintain P-3 Orion surveillance in the Indian Ocean at the level to which it was raised in 1980. The Orion detachment at Butterworth will also be maintained. The long term demands which these activities will make are also provided for; activity levels in the training organisation will be increased so that a sufficient pool of qualified aircrew will continue to be available.
Defence Co-operation
47. The Government considers that there is great mutual benefit to be had in Defence Co-operation with neighbouring countries. In 1982-83 Defence Co-operation Programs will involve expenditure of $43m, an increase of $3.3m over 1981-82.
48. Highest priority will continue to be given to Australia's nearest neighbours, Papua New Guinea and Indonesia, with estimated expenditure totalling $17.5m and $IO.2m respectively. Other major recipients are Malaysia ($4.4m), Thailand ($1.9m), the Philippines ($l.3m), Singapore ($l.2m) and nations of the South West Pacific ($5.2m).
Mr SINCLAIR~I am sure that the nation will be gratified to learn that, in spite of generally worsening economic conditions, the steady

progress towards the Government's declared defence goals is being maintained. In the light of decisions announced earlier it is appropriate that I report to the House that the British Government has decided not to make HMS Invincible available to Australia. On 1 June last, in light of British military action to recover the Falkland Islands and the losses suffered by the Royal Navy, the Prime Minister wrote to the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Mrs Margaret Thatcher. He volunteered to her that should her Government wish to re-examine the sale, Australia would not hold her Government to the earlier obligation.
The British Government intimated that it wished to discuss the implications of the Prime Minister's letter with us. Accordingly, together with the Secretary to the Department of Defence, the Chief of Naval Staff and the Chief of Naval Materiel, I visited the United Kingdom from 7 July to 15 July. There I met with the Right Honourable John Nott, the Secretary of State for Defence, the Prime Minister, Mrs Margaret Thatcher, and senior officers and officials of the Ministry of Defence. They made it clear to me that as a result of the Falklands conflict there had been a major revision of British defence planning. As a result it had been decided to retain all three Invincible class carriers for the Royal Navy. This would give their fleet a two carrier capability at all times.
It had been our strong belief that when HMS Ark Royal was commissioned, probably in 1986, one of the three Invincible class ships should be available for the Royal Australian Navy. Having in mind the financial constraints which had motivated the earlier British decision to sell HMS Invincible. this seemed a reasonable proposition. However, we were advised quite firmly that only HMS Hermes could presently be offered to us.
The needs that led to the Government's decision to buy HMS Invincible remain. In particular there is the necessity to ensure an adequate anti-submarine capability given the long maritime sea routes between Australia and her principal trading partners. The Government is therefore now re-examining a range of options with a report to be made as soon as possible, and certainly before the end of 1982.
The re-examination will involve a number of ship options, including the possibilities of a new ship of the Invincible class; one of the Iwo Jima class; one of the Garibaldi class, possibly a sea control ship; a conventional carrier of 35,000 to 40,000 tonnes, which of course would be able to carry the FAl8, British and United States proposals to build a simple carrier to merchant ship

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1045

standards, and smaller carriers, including the conversion of existing container and other merchant ships. Honourable members will recall the Atlantic Conveyor. which was sunk in the Falklands conflict, and its conversion by the United Kingdom. The re-examination of the ship options is also taking into account a full appraisal of current and future short take off and vertical landing aircraft developments, and the need and cost of acquiring anti-submarine warfare helicopters. As honourable members would know, particular examination is being made of the performance of the Harriers in the Falklands campaign.
Depending upon the outcome of all these considerations it may be necessary to review the need for interim solutions such as re-commissioning HMAS Melbourne, perhaps even acquiring a foreign carrier such as HMS Hermes, or converting a merchant ship. The commitment of funds to defence and their direction is a product of the analysis of the strategic situation Australia faces. Importantly it is also a product of a continued appraisal of the political and economic circumstances of Australia vis-a-vis the nations in our region.
In this respect the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, the continued support it gives to the Heng Samrin regime and the stationing of at least 250,000 regular Vietnamese troops in Cambodia is a matter of concern to Australia and its neighbours. Allied to this is the influence of the Soviet on Vietnam, the deterioration of Vietnamese agriculture and the increasing economic subordination of that country to the Soviet. All are destabilising influences in South East Asia.
In frequency and capability Soviet aircraft and naval movements through Cam Ranh Bay and Danang in Vietnam are identifiable new factors in that country's military presence in the Pacific. These are not the product of any change in the strategic situation of the area but the direct result of Soviet initiatives. With the Soviet record in Afghanistan, Poland, Angola and so many other countries there rightly needs to be apprehension as to future Soviet intentions in our region.
To appraise the position in South East Asia, the Chief of Defence Force Staff, the Secretary to the Department of Defence and I visited a number of member countries of the Association of South East Asia Nations last month. While in no respect can ASEAN be regarded as a defence association there is no doubt that its increasing status internationally and the respect with which its views and attitudes are regarded by other countries of the region are vital elements in any perception of Australia's future security.

Recent ASEAN initiatives towards Cambodia reflect both a shared concern at the continued Vietnamese presence there as well as a reaction to the earlier Vietnamese invasion. They also in part reflect more concern at increasing Soviet influence on the Vietnamese Government. In the defence area Australia's role in helping individual ASEAN members to enhance their independent defence capability through our Defence Cooperation Program is greatly appreciated. This program with its two way benefits is emerging as an increasingly significant part of our national defence effort, encompassing 12 countries in the ASEAN and South West Pacific area. The knowledge, skills, and resources of the Australian Defence Force and our defence related industries have helped significantly in increasing the capability of each of these nations to resist external aggression.
In Singapore the work by the Royal Australian Navy and Royal Australian Air Force advisors serving with the Singapore Air Force has contributed importantly to lifting the standards of air and ground crew. Since this Government decided in 1980 to increase the Philippines Defence Cooperation Program, there has been a significant lift in the number of Filipinos involved in Australian training programs. The Philippines Air Force has been assisted by Australian technicians in developing helicopter engine repair facilities. There, too, a demonstration was given of the Disappearing, Automatic, Retaliatory TargetDART-which is manufactured in the electorate of the Minister for Aviation (Mr Fife). That equipment has been provided to the Filipino Government under DCP. The equipment, together with spares and training provided in association, has been acknowledged as improving the operational capability of the Philippine soldiers.
In Thailand, the front line ASEAN country, our defence assistance has also been greatly appreciated. There we have provided 20 Australian Nomad aircraft to the Royal Thai Air Force.
In Malaysia, we have announced a program of assistance to a major new military project, the Malaysian Army Combat Training Centre at Gemas. Many honourable members will know Gemas as the site of the first major battle in which Australian troops fought while aiding in the defence of Malaya in 1941-42. The most important element of our assistance in Malaysia is the continued RAAF presence at Butterworth. The training and exercise undertaken in conjunction with Malaysia and Singapore and the contribution made by the RAAF were acknowledged both by

1046 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the Prime Minister of Malaysia and by the Minister for Defence in Singapore.
The redeployment of No. 75 Squadron of the RAAF has already been announced. It will continue on schedule. However, it is possible that there may be some delay in the withdrawal of some units to allow for the build-up of replacement personnel from the Royal Malaysian Air Force. Discussions are to take place with the Government of Malaysia during 1984 with respect to the future of the second Mirage squadron and its possible replacement. I confirmed with the Malaysian Prime Minister that the redeployment of the first squadron is important to enable the RAAF to build up the skills necessary to operate the new FA 18 tactical fighter, the first squadron of which is expected to be in service with the RAAF in 1986.
Announcements with respect to Butterworth and the future operations of RAAF aircraft there will be made after the 1984 discussions with the Government of Malaysia on that country's future requirements. It is also the intention of the Government at least to maintain periodic deployments of RAAF fighter aircraft at Tengah air base in Singapore. P3Cs of Nos 10 and II Squadrons of long range maritime patrol aircraft based in Edinburgh, South Australia, are also periodically deployed in Butterworth on a three month rotation basis.
In any assessment of defence expenditure in the Budget, three matters need to be in mind. First, the Government has not sought to replace equipment affected by cuts announced by my predecessor. To have done so would have reduced future flexibility for decisions to be taken following presentation of the report on the carrier, aircraft and equipment requirements for the RAN to which I have referred earlier. Secondly, in recent years the expenditure has often fallen short of the budgeted defence program. Some account has been taken of this in the level of commitment in planned payments on purchases under the United States Department of Defence Foreign Military Sales arrangement. Thirdly, any appraisal of Defence expenditure must be made against a background consideration of Australia's strategic position and future Force development. A full analysis of this, I have not attempted.
However, later in the session, I will be making a statement covering Australia's strategic position, the future defence program and defence management. I commend the Budget to the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The right honourable member's time has expired.

Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.14)-The Minister for Defence (Mr Sinclair) started his speech by making certain references to how beneficial the Budget will be to Australians. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has indicated that one person out of every 30 who is working in Australia today will be unemployed at the end of this year.
Mr Hunt-Who said that?
Mr SCHOLES-The Treasurer said that. I understand that the Minister for Transport and Construction accepts his authority. The Government has said that inflation will increase this year over last year. That is also in the Treasurer's Budget statement. The Budget Speech indicated also that interest rates will increase. The Minister for Defence has made a persuasive statement on Defence. If honourable members listened to the Minister, and if they had not seen the Budget Papers, or taken the trouble to read them and were not aware of the Government's record in the defence area and its regular capacity for making statements on defence matters which it does not carry through to conclusion, they could be persuaded to the opinion that defence in Australia was in good standing and that the defence forces were, in fact, benefiting from government policy. But if honourable members have read the Budget Papers, done some analysis of them and looked at the effectiveness of earlier Government announcements in the defence area they will have quickly come to the assessment that the major contribution to defence that this Government has made over the period that it has been in office is the amount of paper and verbiage that it has used in defence of its defence policy and in self-praise, and the total lack of improvement in Australia's defence capacities in the last seven years. Since the Minister has been in office-excluding the last week-he has made 57 Press statements on defence.
Sir James Killen-Oh, Lord!
Mr SCHOLES-I am not talking about the honourable member. Tonight the Minister made a lot of vague promises and a lot of vague statements, some of which do not stand up to any sort of examination at all. I will start with job creation, which he talks about in the defence budget. He states:
The follow on destroyer program has been delayed by industrial relations problems at Williamstown.
Mr Sinclair-Prejudiced.
Mr SCHOLES-It has been prejudiced. The former Minister stated that the program was not due to start for another five years. The Advisory Committee on Management and Operation at

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1047

Williamstown Naval Dockyard was commissioned by the former Minister and I have had the privilege of reading the report. Not everyone has read the total report. It lays 60 per cent of the blame for the industrial problems at Williamstown with the management. The report also makes significant recommendations for changes in the structure of Williamstown Naval Dockyard in order to overcome those shortfalls. There are industrial relations problems at Williamstown and only a fool would not acknowledge that they are serious. However, to seek to hide from the realities of the causes and the recommended cures from a person appointed by the Governmentthat is, that the dockyard should be structured so that it operates on a commercial basis-is to recoil from any chance of dealing with the problems in that area.
The Government has decided not to follow the recommendations of Mr Hawke, who headed the inquiry. Rather it seeks a partial solution which is one of a number of similar solutions which have been tried in the past. Negotiations are taking place with the Australian Council of Trade Unions on the future of the dockyard, its management and the co-operation of the trade unions. One hopes that the Minister's attitudes do not jeopardise those negotiations. It seems that union bashing is more important than actual performance. The Government has rejected the findings of the Hawke report because they do not reflect well on the Government. If the follow-on destroyer program is delayed or is in any jeopardy it is because of the Government's lack of guts to make the decisions necessary and its lack of commitment in that area, and for no other reason.
I return to the Budget. The Minister talked about job creation in the defence areas. The authorised strength of the Defence Force is reduced by over 700 personnel. That is stated in Budget Paper No.1. The HMAS Melbourne fixed wing aircraft with the Royal Australian Navy and the Canberra squadrons are deleted from authorised strength. Throughout the Budget there are significant cuts in the amounts of money available, such as $10m for the operation of naval aircraft. In overall terms the Budget reduces the funds available for expenditure in the defence area, other than in the manpower area, by a significant amount. In all areas other than manpower the amount of funds in real terms available in the Budget is lower than that provided in these estimates last year. The Government has engaged in a little book juggling, which is now becoming a regular means of justifying itself. The Government, having significantly reduced or underspent last year in a number of

areas including capital equipment, now claims significant increases by using last year's underspent amounts as the basis for projecting increases this year.
I will run through some of the figures in relation to the Budget. These are the real figures. Last year manpower expenditure was estimated to take up 49.2 per cent of the defence expenditures; it actually took up 55.8 per cent. This year the estimate is 54.2 per cent-an increase of 5 per cent in the share of defence expenditure for the manpower element. That reduces the funds available for expenditure in the defence areas on other than wages to around 45 per cent of the defence budget. This is down from the estimate last year of 48.3 per cent of the defence budget. An 11.8 per cent increase in actual terms over the total Budget is, in fact, a 6.5 per cent increase in the defence vote-less than half the inflation rate. This includes all funds available for training, new equipment, facilities, support stores, maintenance and administration. This represents an actual increase of 6.5 per cent against a projected inflation rate in the general community of in excess of 10 per cent. Taking into account the fact that defence costs increase at a greater rate than those in the general community, the increase in defence funds available for non-wages will be less than half of the increase which will take place this year because of inflation.
The capital equipment appropriation in this Budget is down from 16 per cent to 14.9 per cent. Of the 16 per cent allocated in the Budget for capital equipment last year, only 11.69 per cent was spent. In fact, less than 80 per cent of the capital equipment vote last year was actually spent. That is a luxury for a country which is desperately short of modern equipment in its defence forces. In not one year in the entire period in which this Government has been in office has the capital equipment vote actually been spent. The expenditure has been in the high 90 per cent bracket on a number of occasions; on this occasion it is below 80 per cent. That is hardly the performance of a government which has a commitment to the real defence of Australia. In earlier defence statements we had commitments to such Australian projects as the Mulloka and lindalee projects and mentions of a number of other programs which were urgent to our defence requirements. We hear no mention of them now although the Minister has said that later he will make another statement.
I refer again to the funds available in this Budget. We can add to those manpower costs an understatement which the Minister himself even admits. There are two sets of figures-not one-in

1048 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

the documents provided by the Department of Defence in relation to increased wages during the next financial year. Budget Paper No. I says that $IIOm is being set aside for projected wage rises in the Defence Force in the next 12 months. The Budget Papers themselves say that the increases will be 12 per cent in the general community. Unless the Government is proposing to reduce the standards of Defence Force pay by providing only the amount which is in the Budget, which is less than half of 12 per cent, there will be an additional cost to the defence budget approaching $170m. That will be the situation if the 12 per cent increase in community wage costs is applied to the Defence Force.
I go back to the amount of $11 Om. The Minister says that that is one of the figures in the defence budget that is a little rubbery. It is rubbery because the documents distributed by the Defence Department in relation to its estimates breakdowns show a figure of $130m. No one knows why there are two different figures. Not even the Defence Department can explain that at the moment. In one document there is a figure of $11 Om; in another document there is a figure of $130m. Someone might tell us why this is so. Both figures
are significantly below the 12 per cent increase which is estimated for the general community. If we assume that the Government will act this year as it did last year with respect to unexpected wage costs-it actually forgot the wage case last year and then took the money out of other defence areas-and absorb those wage costs, then in money terms, with no adjustment for inflation, the non-wages section of the defence vote will move up by 2.2 per cent against an inflation rate of 10.7 per cent to 12 per cent. That is not what one would say is an encouraging position for the defence forces or the defence of Australia.
We do have an out. The Minister has already thought of that out because he is talking again about forward defence and all sorts of strange ways of getting around the realities of the need to provide for the defence of Australia by Australians. We are going to put people in Malaysia; we are going to have them all over the place. The problem is that, given the rate of new equipment acquisition in this country and the rundown in training capabilities entrenched in this Budget, we will have some of the most professional and competent servicemen being provided by this Government with the least capability of any comparable country in the world to defend themselves and their country. We are now less well provided for as to the defence of this country than we were in 1941, and for the same reason-because the Government prefers to talk and achieves little. Its

commitment is to talking and to making political gain, not to the realities of its responsibilities to the defence of this country. Before the Government comes into this House and claims that it is increasing defence expenditure and makes other extravagant claims it should read the statements that have been made to this House on defence by the Minister, his predecessor and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) over the last seven years. It should examine its White Paper. It should examine the statement of 1980.
I note that the Government no longer considers that Afghanistan is of strategic importance. It did not rate a mention tonight. I remember when the Prime Minister of this country was not prepared to drop a statement that the situation in Afghanistan would cause war in two years in order to get a unanimous vote of this Parliament condemning the Russian invasion of Afghanistan. He stuck to that point because it was divisive and he thought it would divide the nation as it would divide this Parliament. He did so to score political points. Two years later, coincidentally, it does not rate a mention in the Minister's strategic considerations of possible threats to Australia.
Mr Sinclair-There was actually, but don't you worry.
Mr SCHOLES-It is no longer considered to be significant by the Minister. I heard his speech but did not have the opportunity to see it in advance, which is only reasonable if he is to make another statement in the House on defence. The situation is that we are talking up defence but not doing anything at all to improve our defence capacity in the next 12 months.
The Minister has said that the defence expenditure will increase employment opportunities around Australia and that it is designed to assist in the development of Australian industry. As a matter of policy, retrenchments and the possible closure of the Lithgow Small Arms Factory have been projected. The Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) not three months ago refused to refute that when speaking to persons from that factory who were seeking assurances about their job futures in a provincial area. In Victoria, the Government Aircraft Factories have projected retrenchments in excess of 400 people, mostly in highly skilled areas of employment where long training times and long lead times in development of those skills are involved.
The retrenchments are projected to last for a period of possibly one year before an upturn in employment levels will be necessary for the FA 18 and trainer programs. After those people have been laid off and, if they are able, have got other

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1049

jobs, where will we get people skilled in the high technology areas of aircraft work? Will the Government go to the Commonwealth Employment Service and say: 'We want 50 people for the bonding shop to build FA18s because we laid off all the skilled people 12 months ago when we decided to truncate the Nomad program which was employing them '? Where will we get those people? Does the Government seriously believe that it can go out on the streets and pick up people skilled in aircraft industry work to restore to that industry the personnel the Government is aiming now to retrench, according to announcements made in this Parliament and supported by the Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner) as late as today? Of course it cannot.
Hawker de Havilland (Australia) Pty Ltd and the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Ltd are maybe laying off skilled people with long experience in aircraft construction, design and other related skills. It may be that the Government cannot create a work load for them now but it certainly cannot replace them. As the Government has programs in place which will require these people I ask the Minister and the Government what sort of a defence program is it which in one instance disposes of up to 80 per cent of the skilled trades in particular areas in the military aircraft field at a time when it has on-stream programs which will require those skills? Does the Government really think that those people will sit at the door and wait until the Government asks them to come back? They will not if they can get other jobs, and they are competent, skilled personnel who will most likely get other jobs.
I want to make one or two other remarks which are not defence related. Unemployment and the rundown in manufacturing industry in Australia, which are not unassociated with the types of policies which are being carried out in the defence areas, are serious and tragic problems. The Government in this Budget has done what it has neglected to do over a long period-restored some of the benefits which people were and are entitled to expect. It has not given hope and it does not give hope to the middle-aged whose jobs in Australian industries are threatened. Nor does it give hope to the young who are seeking and need the opportunities of employment. We have a double standard community. We have those who are protected and those who are able to rip-off the taxation system with the full protection of this Government because they fund this Government's campaigns and fund the elections of the Ministers of this Government. That is one part of the system.

We have another section of the community made up of people who are asked to make the sacrifices of living on $90 a week or less. I heard the Prime Minister talking about the magnanimous tax-free areas. I think $90 a week is an irrelevent sum of money for today's conditions and costs. Those people are asked to pay the price and make the sacrifices in order-as the Prime Minister says-to restore Australia to the road to prosperity. Prosperity is already with the Prime Minister. It is already with his friends who finance his party and rip-off the taxation system. It is the great majority of people who have suffered because of the irresponsible and incompetent policies of this Government.
Mr BIRNEY (Phillip) (9.34)-Along with millions of fellow Australians I welcome the magnanimous measures outlined in the Budget brought down in this House last week. This Budget will provide relief, assistance and incentive within a responsible economic policy. Australians from all walks of life must face the stark reality that we are living in a world in which economic activity is still extremely subdued and in which conditions of recession persist in a number of major industrial countries. The international recession is with us and is hitting with an everimpacting force. Now, more than ever, we need to take the community into our confidence about economic conditions in Australia. Whilst the present state of this recession can almost be laid squarely at the door of the world economy, the excessive growth of wages in Australia has made matters worse. Australian industries, instead of becoming more competitive, seem to be hell bent on pricing themselves out of business. There can be no doubt about the serious flow-on of these effects on Australian families and on the unemployment prospects of many.
We are, of course, unable to insulate ourselves completely from adverse economic developments in the rest of the world. The economy of the United States of America remains the powerhouse of the Western industrialised world. The economic reality is that strength or weakness in the United States economy has ramifications in national economies all around the world. For example, if interest rates are high in the United States of America and other countries, as they have been, it is nonsense to believe that they can be kept low in Australia. The fact is that we in Australia have lost the competitive edge which we had a year ago on many world markets. The explosion in wages over recent years has seen to that-sadly, to the detriment of so many Australians.

1050 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

In a conscientious endeavour to slow wage increases, sales tax changes were made in the Budget. The Government bore in mind the proposal of the President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, Mr Dolan, that unions would be prepared to moderate wage claims if income tax cuts were granted. This is precisely what the Budget has done. The tax-free threshold now climbs from $4,195 to $4,595 at a cost to revenue of almost $800m. The Government has hearkened to the cry from all over Australia as a result of a well-orchestrated campaign for reduction in direct tax and, as a consequence, the standard rate of tax of 32c in the dollar was reduced to 30c and the point at which a taxpayer commenced to pay 46c of each additional dollar was increased from $17,894 to $19,500. The full cost of taxation cuts in a full year is a mighty $2,567m. It is a matter of extreme regret that Mr Dolan, together with the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), did not come out openly and state the apparent fact that without increases in sales tax it would have been impossible to adopt the measures of which I speak and which will benefit millions of Australians.
It is patently obvious to even the most casual passer-by that Mr Dolan must have been speaking with tongue in cheek when he described the Budget as horrible. Was this Budget horrible to the men and women who were prepared to lay down their lives for the nation, when the Government brought in so many initiatives which were to help in their financial security and that of their families? Amongst the initiatives of which I speak is the payment of the disability pension at the 100 per cent general rate for veterans who received a pension for pulmonary tuberculosis before 2 November 1978 or who, before that date, lodged a claim which was successful, and which is to be restored from 6 January 1983. From II November 1982 any disability pension received by a veteran will be totally disregarded as income when assessing the level of service pension and eligibility for fringe benefits or increased pensions for amputations, loss of vision and many other benefits too numerous to mention.
Is this Budget horrible to home buyers who will have their mortgage interest rates effectively cut-many by more than 2 per cent-as a result of the announced housing assistance measures which are part of a major $726m housing package, including new interest rate subsidies, first home deposit assistance grants and higher direct housing assistance to those in need? Does Mr Dolan think this Budget is horrible to all home buyers who will be eligible for the new rebate which will cover all taxpayers buying the home they occupy? Do he and the Leader of the Opposition really believe

that this Budget is regarded as horrible by the 440,000 aged pensioners with small incomes who will benefit substantially as a result of pension changes?
The Government, ever mindful of the needs of our senior citizens, has brought down magnificent measures which have been welcomed by pensioner organisations. It has decided to lift by a third the amount of extra weekly income that people can earn without affecting their full rate of pension. The changes to apply from November this year will increase the allowable limit from $20 to $30 a week for single pensioners and from $34.50 to $50 for married couples. Does the Australian Labor Party regard this initiative as horrible? It is incredible that the Labor Party would so regard these initiatives when an estimated 430,700 pensioners will get higher pensions as a result. About 16,000 who are not entitled to a pension will become eligible for small part pensions.
I and many millions of fellow Australians applaud measures in the Budget that recognise, with deep and abiding compassion, the real needs of pensioners. These are reflected in the provision of a tax rebate of up to $250 a year. Allied with the Government's increase in the tax free threshold to $4,595 a year, or about $88 a week, the new rebate permits a pensioner to have a total income, including pension, of $5,429 a year. I am delighted that many of my representations on behalf of my pensioner constituents have proved so successful. Never let it be forgotten that the Fraser Government was the first government since Federation to bring in automatic indexation of age pensions. This initiative will be reflected in substantial pension rises in November. The single age pension will increase by $3 a week to $77.25 and a married couple's pension will increase by $5.20 a week to $128.80. When fringe benefits are threatened a tremendous amount of worry and concern is felt amongst our senior citizens and the Government's intention to make the income test more generous in this area will alleviate that concern. In this regard, the current limits of $40 a week for a single pensioner and $68 for a married couple will rise to $54 and $90.
There are other wonderful benefits to our senior citizens too numerous to mention here. The total package is an outstanding example of the care, concern and compassion that the Government generates towards our senior citizens. I have come to the conclusion, without a great deal of deliberation, that the only ones to whom this Budget is horrible are members of the Labor Party. They have seen that the Government's compassion and economic wisdom, as mirrored in the Budget,

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1051

have made their chances of electoral success fade like a dream. On Budget night, as the Treasurer (Mr Howard) announced his wide-ranging measures, it was interesting to look at the faces of Opposition members. It was quite incredible to see the startled looks on their faces. Almost to a member their mouths dropped open in unbelievable dismay. They were bedazzled by its generosity. They rushed to the conclusion that because this Budget gave so many benefits to such wide-ranging and far flung sections of the electorate this was, to use their own phrase and not that of the Government, an election Budget.
This Budget is deemed by the Labor Party to be an election Budget, whatever that might mean. If it means that because of its framework people are contented, that good will has been exhibited to all and that it is a Budget to which the endorsement of the people is given in approval then so be it; it is an election Budget. The Opposition calls it an election Budget because its ramifications reach out and benefit many millions of Australians. In short, if it is an election Budget it is thus because it reflects the wishes of the people. It will remain an election Budget with their continued endorsement this time next year, or whenever. It is a matter of common sense that the great benefits to all Australians contained in the Budget, irrespective of what is said here tonight, have the obvious endorsement and imprimatur of Labor Opposition members for the simple reason that they regard it as an election Budget. Whilst a few months ago they were eager and itching for an early election this Budget has frozen any such desires. They know that if an election were fought on the merits or demerits of this Budget they would be annihilated. The Labor Party members are playing every piece of legislation with a straight bat, frightened to leave their creases in case they get stumped. It is an incredible about face but such is the case. The Budget has wrought havoc in their ranks. Whereas before they were ecstatic, now they are crestfallen and running scared of an early election. Such has been the impact of the Budget.
I believe in giving credit where it is due and one of the truly great initiatives of the Fraser Government was the introduction of family allowances, indicative of its awareness of the additional costs that all parents undertake in bringing up children. No less than two million Australian families will receive a long overdue further recognition. The rates of family allowances for the first and second child will be increased by 50 per cent effective from November 1982. The rate for the"first child will be increased from $15 a month to $22.80 a month and the rate for the second child from $21.70 a month to $32.55 a month. A family with

two or more children will therefore gain by $18.45 a month. The cost to revenue will be $375m in a full year. The increase in family allowances as I said, has been long overdue and it will be warmly welcomed.
No one should ever again call into question the sincerity and compassion of this Government towards the people of Australia. The Government, in its deliberations, has indeed heeded the needs of the sick, the aged and the infirm. This is reflected in the fact that total expenditure on social welfare is estimated to increase by $1,774m or 15.4 per cent to a colossal, staggering $13,272m in 1982-83. This amount includes assistance to the families of which I have just spoken and families on low incomes. The Government has decided to introduce from May 1983 a tax free family income supplement of $10 a week for each dependent child of a low income family not in receipt of a social security type pension or benefit.
Over the years this Government has been the subject of severe criticism from individuals and organisations who have called into question its commitment to the provision of day care services for children. This Government cares for the welfare of Australian families and, as part of its commitment, the Government has allocated $70m for expenditure on child care services for 1982-83, an increase of $22.7m or, put simply, almost 50 per cent on last year's expenditure of $47.36m. What is most gratifying is that, in addition, the States and the Northern Territory will receive $33.09m as a contribution to pre-school education under the Children's Services Program. The Government will continue to support existing services and, where necessary, increase grants to maintain their viability. It is of importance to note that an amount of $6.86m has been specifically earmarked for this purpose. In this area alone many other financial initiatives have been announced but are too numerous to mention in the short time available to me.
At the expense of reiteration, can this Government ever be accused of being blinkered and oblivious to the needs of so many of the undeprivileged in the community? The answer is a resounding no, and this answer is already reverberating throughout the nation. Its assistance to the handicapped and the provision of accommodation for the aged and the disabled stand out like beacons that negate any such unfounded propositions. It has stamped itself indelibly as a humane government that does care. In the latter area alone additional capital funds ar~ to be made available for aged or disabled persons' accommodation and indeed over the next two years $170m will be provided for the program, with $83m being

I052 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Adjournment

allocated in 1982-83. In addition, $37m and $14m will be spent over the next two years on capital facilities under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Program and on senior citizens centres.
A particular interest to many of the students in my electorate of Phillip will be the substantial increases announced in the Budget to all student assistance schemes. They have been made quite plain in the Budget and will benefit all those students, some 12,000 or more, who otherwise would not have received such financial help. This will kill off the many false and malicious representations floated in my electorate by the Labor Party over a lengthy period to the effect that this Government had chartered a course whereby, amongst other things, fees would be reintroduced in universities and the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowances would be decimated.
This is a Budget that has something for all. I am not one who will join with Labor's prophets of gloom, doom and despair who would have us take ourselves over the brink and into the self-fulfilling forecasts of economic stagnation. Ours is a Liberal government, a party which believes strongly in private enterprise and initiative and in the ability of individuals to meet challenges and to seize opportunities and then turn them to advantage. That is what this Budget is all about.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.
ADJOURNMENT
Nomad Aircraft-Members of Parliament: Postage Allowance-Procedures of the
House-CommonweaIth Games-Aboriginal Land Rights-Release ofCommonweaIth
Prisoners on Licence-Drought in New South Wales
Motion (by Mr McVeigh) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (9.54)~1 wish to raise on the adjournment a matter which I think touches very seriously on the future of the defence of this nation. Today the House had before it a very important report from the all-party Jomt Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence which dealt with the issues which were considered by that Committee in relation to a request for the purchase of an aircraft carrier. I do not propose to take the time of the House going over the recommendations of that report except to say that the House ought to note that the recommendations were unanimous. At the same as that report was being presented representations were also being put to ~he Minister for Defence Support (Mr Viner) by a widely-based delegation representing all the union, white collar and blue

collar, in the aircraft industry. The delegation raised questions on the future of the aerospace in-
dustry and its role in the future defence organisation of this nation. That arises as a result of what I believe was yet again one of those short-sighted decisions taken by the razor gang~the decision to cut back in the production of Nomad aircraft.
The importance of that decision, taken and announced virtually overnight, to the industry as a
whole is such that 43 workers will be retrenched from the Government Aircraft Factories at Fishermens Bend in Victoria on October 1982, with a total of 370 jobs to go by mid-1984 if the Government adheres to its present policy. Australia's other two main aircraft manufacturing plants, Hawker de Havilland Australia Pty Ltd and the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Ltd, also manufacture major components of the Nomad and will be adversely affected by present policy with about 100 smaller companies involved in parts manufacture and supply. The problem with these retrenchments is that we are retrenching skilled tradesmen, skilled white collar workers, upon whose technical capacity the future of Australia's role in the aerospace industry must depend.
Of course, one of the points that has been made by Government and Opposition spokesmen was that Australia, in terms of defence policy, must be self-reliant. It is perfectly true that one can buy modern and sophisticated fighter and bomber aircraft, but as was shown by events in Iran one can have the most up-to-date and modern aircraft in the world but if one finds oneself short of the capacity to maintain and keep them flying then they have a very short life indeed. The cessation of the Nomad production will threaten Australia's capability to manufacture a whole aircraft. The Nomad, whatever its deficiencies and strengths, is an aircraft totally designed and manufactured in Australia, and is a total line production. Simply to cease that without making any adequate arrangements for the continuance of the art, for the continuance of the capacity to maintain a skilled work force, and to retrench men and say 'Well now, you go off and find jobs elsewhere and we will hope that at a later point, perhaps two years from now when the FI8 comes on line, we will have the capacity', is to be extremely optimistic. It is important that we maintain these skills in this area. To abandon those skills and to abandon a work force that has taken years of training to produce, carries very serious defence implications. The delegation was strengthened by one of the recommendations contained in the report of the Katter committee which said that the Government should proceed forthwith with the purchase

Adjournment

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1053

of helicopters for Australian frigates to enhance their anti-submarine warfare capacity.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (9.59)-1 have been a member of this House for nearly five years and I am pleased to say that in that time. I have not had cause to criticise personally any of my colleagues-their views certainly, but not them personally or their actions. Tonight, however, I feel compelled to be critical of one of our number, and I do so on account of his actions. I wi1l recount the story. The other day my electorate secretary found amongst the morning mail a return to sender envelope. That is not an unusual occurrence if, like myself, and many other members of this House, one has a large volume of correspondence to constituents. However, on opening the envelope my secretary discovered that the contents were not from me at all. I have the contents of that letter. It contained three items: First, an Australian Labor Party membership card and receipt; secondly, a July notice of the Wi1lettonRiverton branch of the ALP which happens to be in my electorate; thirdly, an appeal letter supposedly to an ALP member for donations to the ALP Tangney election fund. All of this material is on the letterhead of th~ central office of the Australian Labor Party in Perth. I can only assume that the well-meaning individual in Australia Post who returned this envelope to me did so in good faith but mistakenly because the word 'Tangney' is featured prominently on the contents of which I have spoken. This is ALP membership and campaign material and there is nothing on it to identify it as being from any member of this place or any member of the other place. Now the following point is important. The envelope which we retrieved out of the round file bears a Senate embossment. In checking with the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman), I found that the franking machine with which it was stamped belongs to none other than that paragon of virtue, Senator Walsh. This action by Senator Walsh represents a most blatant misuse of public funds and privilege. Stamp allowances and envelopes--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! I remind the honourable member for Tangney that he is proceeding now to make a serious reflection on another member of this Parliament.
Mr SHACK-Absolutely.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-He is not at liberty to do so unless by substantive motion.

Mr SHACK-It is supported by facts.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-He either desists in his remarks--
(Quorum formed).
Mr SHACK-Mr Deputy Speaker--
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I seek your indulgence. It has gone \0 o'clock. I ask whether any motion can be moved after 10 o'clock?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The House is debating the adjournment motion. Certain forms of the House could facilitate the introduction of business in circumstances of which the House would approve. I suggest that the honourable member for Reid address his research to another quarter. The time of the honourable member for Tangney has expired.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (l0.4)-This morning I tried to take a point of order with the Speaker of the House and he ruled that it was not a point of order. I accept his ruling. However, in this adjournment debate, I wish to expand on why I felt it necessary to take a point of order during Question Time. I believe that it hits at the very heart of the Westminster system-the very system that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) purports to support-when the Speaker of the House is not treated with respect. It also hits at the rights of every member of the House when the independence of the Speaker is threatened. I am pursuing the matter tonight because I believe that the position of Speaker is one which must be upheld if the House of Representatives is to maintain any semblance of independence or impartiality.
The spectacle of the Prime Minister refusing to sit down when requested to do so by the Speaker is not new to honourable members of this House but it should be noted and condemned by those on both sides of this House. The Prime Minister of the Government has no more rights in this House in respect of his treatment of the Speaker than has any other honourable member of the House. The Prime Minister's practice of attempting to intimidate the Speaker must cease. His practice of attempting to pre-empt the decisions of the Speaker must also cease. These practices bring the House into disrepute. They make the workings of the House and the job of the Speaker difficult in the extreme. It is time that the Prime Minister's philosophy of confrontation-a philosophy with which we on this side of the House are well acquainted-is discontinued within the House. The Speaker of this House must be above confrontation, intimidation and downright bullying. Honourable members of the House must respect

1054 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Adjournment

the role of the Speaker. I commend the Speaker for his resistance and request that the Prime Minister abide by the same rules followed by every other honourable member of the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for Brisbane.
Mr Bourchier-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. Should there not be a call from this side of the House?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The action of the Chair is consistent with the Standing Orders. I call the honourable member for Brisbane.
Mr CROSS (Brisbane) (10.7)-1 do not often speak on the adjournment in this place and people might say that that is a good thing. When I first came here some time ago I was advised by the former right honourable member for Melbourne not to spend too much time in the bar and not to speak on the adjournment. But now we live in other days. I wish to raise tonight the important question of the Commonwealth Games to be held in Brisbane in just over one month's time. The program of this Parliament has been arranged in order to facilitate the attendance of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and other Ministers and members of this House and of the other place at the Commonwealth Games. I hope that honourable members of the House will take the advantage of the opportunity to spend at least some time in Brisbane during the Twelfth Commonwealth Games, which have been described as the 'friendly games'. People from overseas who have come to Australia on behalf of the Commonwealth Games Foundation have praised the preparation of all of the sites for the Commonwealth Games. It is an excellent example of co-operation between all three levels of government. This goes back to the time of the Whitlam Government when the Brisbane City Council asked us to stack up, as it were, some of the funding that was available for sports facilities in order that a Tartan running track might be provided and in order to provide a commitment to hold the Commonwealth Games if Brisbane were successful in its application to the Games. Happily that application was a success. I pay a tribute to the Brisbane City Council under the leadership of the former Lord Mayor, Alderman Clem Jones; his successor, Alderman Brian Walsh, his further successor, Alderman Frank Sleeman; and, of course, the present leader, Alderman Roy Harvey. In all matters relating to the Games, they have received the excellent co-operation of the Commonwealth Government and the State Government of Queensland.

I wish however, to sound one note of warning for the Government. The Aboriginals of Queensland have indicated that, during this period, they feel obliged to show publicly their concern about the failure of the Queensland Government to move towards land rights for Aborigines in that State, in contrast to what has happened in the Northern Territory, South Australia and elsewhere. We have in Queensland a confrontationist Premier. A piece of legislation called the Commonwealth Games Bill was introduced into the Queensland Parliament. It provides for unprecedented powers to be given to the police. In the event of some terrorism at the Brisbane Games, of course those powers would be justified. I have been unable to buy a copy of the Commonwealth Games Act from the Government Printing Office in Brisbane-it is a couple of weeks since I last tried-and to the best of my knowledge the regulations under that Act have never been published.
It will be an indictment of the Queensland Government and this Government if some confrontation takes place. This Government has had the power since the referendum to influence the Queensland Government and determine land rights for Aborigines in that State. The Aboriginal people in Queensland do not want a confrontation. I have attended some of the meetings of the black protest committee in Brisbane. Time and time again those Aboriginal people, many of whom I have known for over 20 years, have emphasised that they wish to take the opportunity to pursue in an international and national forum their right to proper land rights in Queensland but they do not wish to do it without violence. So if there is any violence at the Commonwealth Games in Brisbane-it would be a tragedy for all Australians and all the Aboriginal people of Australia if that were so-a good deal of the fault must be laid at the feet of this Government for not facing up to its responsibilities.
Mr BUNGEY (Canning) (10.12)-1 wish to follow up the matter raised by the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack); that is, the way in which stamp allowances are used. The entitlement is quite clearly set out in the Remuneration Tribunal's Report. Paragraph 8.3 states:
A senator or member shall, for parliamentary or electorate business but not for party business, be entitled to be provided quarterly on request with postage stamps or stamped envelopes --
The value is then set out. It is quite clear that certain honourable members and senators from Western Australia are misusing this entitlement. It has been clearly pointed out by the honourable

Adjournment

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1055

member for Tangney how this has been done. He has pointed out quite clearly that the contents of a particular letter put through a franking machine by an honourable member or senator from Western Australia in no way meets the requirements of the Remuneration Tribunal.
I point out quite clearly that my colleague the honourable member for Tangney intends to move a substantive motion at the next sitting of this House to put this matter on record and enable it to be a matter for public debate here. The actions that have been taken are quite despicable, cheating--
Mr Holding-I raise a point of order. I ask the question: Having used the terms that were used by the honourable member to describe the actions of a member of another place and having indicated that, at the appropriate time or at the first available opportunity, a censure motion will be moved in respect of this matter, is it not an infringement of the Standing Orders and anticipating the debate to canvass the issues now in this way?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- There is no point of order.
Mr BUNGEYThe honourable member for Melbourne Ports is deliberately trying to waste time. He knows very well that there has been no notice of motion in any way, even though he has come from a tinpot Parliament, as it is now. I point out quite clearly that this matter is one of grave importance and reflects on the integrity of all honourable members. What has happened in effect is that Senator Walsh has handed his franking machine to the Australian Labor Party.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. I will not hear him further.
Mr FREE (Macquarie) (10.15)-1 wish to raise tonight a matter which has been drawn to my attention by prisoner trainees serving sentences at Her Majesty's training centre at Emu Plains in the electorate which I represent. It is a rather interesting situation. It is interesting because it involves persons serving sentences under Commonwealth law, as indeed may some of the officials of the Western Australian branch of the Liberal Party in the near future for tax avoidance. Therefore this may interest previous speakers. As I understand it, since early this year a program has operated in New South Wales prisons called the Work Release 2 Program, which has allowed people imprisoned under State law who have established a good record in prison to obtain a release before the parole period. They have been able to go out of prison and be assimilated into society under State law. It applies only to those

people who have been imprisoned for State offences. People in the same institution who have been imprisoned for Commonwealth offences are not eligible for early release under this system. That has created a great many problems because, as I understand it, there are State and Commonwealth prisoners in this institution who have been imprisoned for broadly the same offences but a trainee who is there for a Commonwealth offence is not eligible for this early licence whereas one who is there for a State offence is. This has created a great many problems with morale. In fact, I had a letter from one of these trainees. I would like to read part of it so that it is in Hansard. I will not identify the man. He states:
I am currently a Commonwealth prisoner at Emu Plains Training Centre, serving a sentence of three and a half years with a non parole period of eighteen months. During the ten months of my imprisonment, I spent two and a half months at Long Bay Gaol, where I worked in the hospital, after which I moved to Emu Plains. Since my arrival here, I worked in the kitchen, beginning as the butcher, which is my trade, and progressing on to head cook-my current work situation.
He has had a good record so far in prison. The letter continues:
Recently I lodged an application to be considered for inclusion in the works release II programme, which is designed for low risk prisoners with a stable family life. A parole report was prepared by means of a parole officer doing a report on my home life, and work reports were submitted by the overseer of my work location. Both reports were satisfactory, my work and conduct reports being excellent. Consequently, the Board decided, on the 16th day of June 1982, that I was to be accepted to this scheme. I contacted my wife and children, and told them. I would be coming home. Now, two weeks after my acceptance the State Government has decided to annul this scheme and release those on the programme on licence.
He is not quite correct there. What happened was that they discovered he was a Commonwealth prisoner. He continued:
This has been a very traumatic experience for my family. My wife is undergoing extreme financial difficulty, and now a terrible disappoint for my children who were expecting me home. Because I am a Commonwealth prisoner, I am not eligible for a special licence, so I must remain in prison.
Myself, along with seven other Commonwealth prisoners in this institution, feel that there is a large amount of discrimination against us in respect of licences. The eight Commonwealth prisoners in this camp, all hold responsible positions. It is very frustrating for us to see our state counterparts, whether drug or multiple offenders being released after serving three months only, with lesser work and conduct and work reports, and also without very good prospects upon their being released.
I would very much appreciate it if you could present my case to the Attorney-General, and make him aware of our predicament in N.S.W. gaols.
I presented that case to the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) on 7 July. All I have had back is an acknowledgment. I know the Attorney General has had his problems in recent days. I

1056 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982

Adjournment

know he has probably been far too busy to answer my correspondence as he has his friends in the Liberal Party in Western Australia to look after. But I do think that after six weeks of a very serious situation he could have done more than send me an acknowledgment.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (10.19)-The worst drought for 40 years has caused great problems in New South Wales. Tomorrow a total of 51 pastures protection board districts out of 58 will be declared drought areas. This must be a record. It has been reassuring today to hear the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) mention in this House that arrangements are being made for the various State Ministers of agriculture to meet with the Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Nixon, to work out and ascertain ways and means of alleviating the situation for those people who are affected by this very severe condition. Small businesses in the country areas are in great distress. Business in these towns, particularly in the wheat belt, is at a standstill. Farmers are unable to meet their accounts. This situation is being felt very much by business concerns. The numbers of stock, both sheep and cattle, coming forward to the saleyards are very high indeed. Farmers and graziers cannot hold their stock on their properties owing to the severe drought conditions and have to market it. This is a very serious situation.
Not only are pastures bare but also water is scarce. Our dams are at an all-time low. Domestic water on properties is scarce and if this drought continues this will present a real crisis. Indeed drinking water and house water on many country properties has now been exhausted. The owners of these properties are using water from their shearing shed tanks. How long will this water last? Water for stock is scarce. Farm dams are drying up. In many instances stock is dying, particularly cattle. Sheep are able to live longer than cattle because they will nibble the short grass whereas cattle require long grass. Numbers of both sheep and cattle are down. While travelling around the countryside I have observed that thousands of lambs are being born at the present time. Nature has a great way of replenishing stock. Unfortunately many of these lambs, twins and triplets, which are arriving all over the countryside are being lost because the mothers do not have sufficient milk to feed them. The ewes are just walking away and leaving these lovely little lambs in the paddock. What a loss to this country; what a loss to the agricultural industry.

Wheaten hay and oaten hay is practically non-existent at present. Lucerne hay has become very pricey and is available only in certain areas of New South Wales. It will cost primary producers millions of dollars to buy fodder to keep stock alive in the hope that the drought will soon end. There is no sign of this taking place. Warm days and blue skies are the order of the day.
Very little wheat has been sown in the north-west and this is the hard wheat growing area of this country. About 20 per cent of the normal wheat crop has been sown. Some of the wheat has come through but it is wilting under these dry conditions. Some wheat has been sown dry and, of course, the grain is still in the ground. Other wheat has been sown in moist conditions and the grain will rot as it does not hav sufficient moisture on the top to bring it through. It is a desperate situation. In addition, summer crops such as sunflower and sorghum will not be sown unless we get rains. Generally these crops supplement the farmers who are unable to sow wheat. At the present time conditions are such that the summer crops will not be sown.
Massive assistance is required from governments and the banks. We,hope that the banks will come to the party and help the primary producers in this situation. There will be a very serious effect on the export income of this nation if we do not get wheat, meat, wool or livestock for export. I hope that the powers that be will do all that they possibly can to help the farmers, those who are on the land, and those small businesses in the country towns that are feeling the effects of these drastic conditions.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (10.24)-1 wish to respond to the remarks made earlier by the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack). In other countries when a nation faces a crisis the leader of that country has the courage and the quality of leadership to try to draw the country together to face the problems that confront the people of that nation. In this country we have a leader who climbs up into the gutter and sends his little errand boys out to indulge in a dastardly attack on a member in another place. What is it all about-twenty-seven cent postage. That is the priority of those honourable members who sit opposite. It is not the people who sleep in the streets or the millions of dollars being squandered by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) with his communist bedfellows in China. I draw the attention of the House to another little letter that I happen to have in my files. This little letter is also set out on a parliamentary letterhead. It did not come from this side of the House.

Adjournment

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1057

Mr Leo McLeayWho sent it?
Mr MORRIS-The Deputy Prime Minister, the then Leader of the National Country Party (Mr Anthony). It was written in 1974 but the point is valid and the procedure is the same. He did not send out one letter but 600.
Mr Leo McLeay-How many?
Mr MORRIS-He sent out 600. He sent them to the mining companies asking for money. He said: 'Give us money to get re-elected and then we will look after your interests'. He stated in the letter:
You may be interested to know donations so far from the Mining Industry vary from amounts of $500 to $5,000.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member for Shortland will resume his seat. The honourable member for Shortland is well aware that there was a challenge to the Standing Orders recently in the House. The Chair ruled that no reflection could be made on an honourable member and that the honourable member so doing was required to resume his seat. I have heard the honourable member for Shortland thus far because whilst he has suggested that there is a commonality between the two letters referred to he has not yet positively identified the letter other than by his broad description. I
sinugtgheestinsteerrioesutsslyoftothheimstatnhdatin, ghaovfinthgisgoHnoeussoe,fahr~
not innocently or intentionally proceed into an area which would bring the displeasure of the Chair.
Mr MORRISFar be it for me to want to do that. I seek leave of the House to incorporate the letter in Hansard.
Mr HodgmanLeave is not granted.
Mr MORRIS-I seek leave to table the letter.
Leave granted.
Mr MORRIS-I table the letter.
Mr Leo McLeayWhy not incorporate it?

Mr MORRIS-He is afraid. Far more importantly--
Mr Hodgman-Mr Deputy Speaker, I now take a substantial point of order. Earlier in this debate you correctly ruled that the honourable member for Canning could not continue with certain remarks when he had named a certain person. The honourable member for Shortland has already named that person and is now clearly endeavouring to persist in a course of action directly in contravention to your ruling. In my submission if the honourable member for Canning was correctly put down for mentioning a name the honourable member for Shortland should be put down right here and now.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The essential difference in the two situations is that the honourable member for Canning, following the remarks of the honourable member for Tangney, very accurately described the nature of the communication. In this situation the honourable member for Shortland, on his own assessment, has described the letter but he has not quoted from it or positively identified the nature of the letter. On the premise that the House expects a reasonable level of intelligence from its Presiding Officers I can only come to the conclusion that the honourable member for Shortland must inevitably proceed to compound any mischief that has occurred to this point of time. On that basis the Chair is not prepared to hear him further on that matter.
Mr MORRIS-Mr Deputy Speaker, on the point of order--(Quorum formed). Mr Deputy Speaker--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. It being 10.30 p.m. the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 7 September 1982, at 1.45 p.m., in accordance with the resolution agreed to this day.
House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.

1058 REPRESENTATIVES 26 August 1982 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Postal Rates
(Question No. 4304)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 20 April 1982:
(I) On what date, recently, did Australia Post raise certain of its postal rates.
(2) What rates were increased, and what was the (a) monetaryand (b) percentage increase in each case.
(3) On what date did Australia Post provide post offices with details of the postal rate increases for public distribution.
(4) Was there any delay between the increase in postal rates and the availability of details to the public; if so, why.
Mr N. A. BrownThe answer to the honourable member's question, based on advice from the Australian Postal Commission, is as follows:
(I) 22 March 1982.
(2) Charges for ten services increased. Details follow:

Service

(a)

(b)

Monetary Percentage

increase increase

Cash-on-delivery-
1-9 articles 10 or more articles Certified mail
Householder delivery (per 100 articles)-
Standard articles-
local delivery city area elsewhere
Non-standard articleslocal delivery city area
elsewhere Messenger delivery Priority paid
Registered post1-9 articles 10 or more articles

$ percent

0.30

10.0

0.15

6.3

0.15

25.0

0.50

9.1

0.80

10.4

1.20

13.6

0.70

10.0

1.20

12.9

1.00

9.1

0.25

12.5

0.25

50.0

0.50

20.0

0.35

18.4

Charges for the following services were restructured and only some of the charges can be compared with those which applied previously. Examples follow:

Bulk pre-sorted mail-

2500 standard articles pre-sorted

into direct bundles

10.00

2.0

Domestic parcels--

2kg parcel Melbourne-Sydney

surface mail

0.85

30.9

5kg parcel Canberra-Perth sur-

face mail

1.00

20.0

Express-

interstate one-rate envelope

0.60

10.0

Postal Money Order-$50 value

(ordinary)

0.10

13.3

(3) Limited supplies of leaflets for public distribution, setting out details of the more important increases, were provided progressively to post offices from 15 March 1982.

(4) Although the leaflets were forwarded progressively over the period 10 to 18 March to State administrations for distribution to all post offices, because of administrative delays, some post offices did not receive them until after the increases took effect. Post office staff were provided with details of the increases, however, to enable them to provide customers with appropriate information.
Operation of Visual Display Units: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 4428)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 21 April 1982:
In respect of the Minister's Department and statutory authorities within his jurisdiction, (a) what steps have been taken to make operators of visual display units and screen based equipment aware of the need for a sufficient break from operating this equipment, having regard to the nature of the task and the need for involvement in substantially different activities during the break, as per Public Service Board memorandum 81/418 entitled 'Operation of Visual Display Units and other Screen Based Equipment'; (b) what percentage of their working day (i) are operators expected to spend on operating duties and (ii) do operators spend on other duties and (c) how many keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day (i) are operators expected to complete and (ii) do operators actually complete.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) All supervisors are aware of the need for operators of visual display units and screen based equipment to take rest breaks to prevent excessive fatigue and ensure that all operators are aware of this requirement.
(b) (i) Because of the large number of applications of visual display units and screen based equipment and the different duties of the operators there is a wide variation in the time spent on operating duties. Across the whole range of operators it varies from 20 per cent, where the operators perform other duties up to lOOper cent for word processor operators.
(ii) see (i) above.
(c) (i) Because of the wide variation of tasks involved within my Department and each statutory authority expected workload is generally determined in terms of output rather than keystrokes per 7 hour 21 minute day.
(iii) In most instances no record is maintained. Where records have been maintained the wide variation in the results suggests that keystrokes per day may not be a reliable indication of workload.
Service Pensioners
(Question No. 4449)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 22 April 1982:
What is the estimated cost of extending the entitlement for a service pension to all Australian ex-servicemen and women by extending eligibility to (a) all who volunteered for overseas service and (b) all who served overseas, but not in designated war zones.

Answers to Questions

26 August 1982 REPRESENTATIVES 1059

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) There is no precise information available about the numbers of veterans who volunteered for overseas service.

On the limited information available it is estimated that the additional cost of service pension would be in the order of $8Imayear.
(b) Reliable information about the numbers of such veterans is not available. An estimate has been made that the increased expenditure would be in the order of $1 Om a year. These estimates do not include medical treatment costs.


